“We Can Torture, Kill, or Keep You for Years”: Enforced Disappearances by Pakistan Security Forces in Balochistan | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the reportJuly 28, 2011“We Can Torture, Kill, or Keep You for Years”Enforced Disappearances by Pakistan Security Forces in Balochistan“We Can Torture, Kill, or Keep You for Years”Enforced Disappearances by Pakistan Security Forces in BalochistanMap of BalochistanSummaryKey RecommendationsMethodologyBackground: Conflict and Abuses in BalochistanEnforced Disappearances in PakistanII. EnforcedDisappearances under International  and Domestic LawInternational LawPakistani LawIII. EnforcedDisappearances and Related AbusesPerpetratorsVictimsModus OperandiSecret DetentionFacilitiesFate of the“Disappeared”Torture andIll-TreatmentExtrajudicialExecutionsProsecutions of the“Disappeared”Abuses against Relatives, Witnesses,and Released DetaineesV. Pakistan’sResponse to Enforced  Disappearances in BalochistanDuty to Investigateand the Right to RedressDuty to InvestigateEnforced DisappearancesRedress for VictimsResponse of National AuthoritiesFailure of Police toInvestigate “Disappearances”Weak Judicial Response to“Disappearances”Supreme Court of PakistanCommission of Inquiry for MissingPersonsVI. RecommendationsTo the Government of Pakistan and theProvincial Government of BalochistanRegarding Accountability for EnforcedDisappearancesRegarding Steps to Prevent EnforcedDisappearancesRegarding Legal ReformRegarding Working with the UnitedNations to Address DisappearancesTo the Commission of Inquiry forMissing Persons (CIMP)To Pakistan’s InternationalPartners, in Particular the United States, United Kingdom, and OtherCountries Working with Pakistan’s Securityand IntelligenceAgenciesAcknowledgementsAppendix I: Cases of Alleged EnforcedDisappearances from Balochistan Documented by Human Rights WatchAppendix II: Letter to Chief Minister BalochistanAppendix III: Letter to Prime Minister Yousuf Raza GilaniMap of BalochistanClick to expand ImageSummary“Even if the president or chief justice tells us torelease you, we won’t. We can torture you, or kill you, or keep you foryears at our will. It is only the Army chief and the [intelligence] chief thatwe obey.”– Pakistani official to Bashir Azeem, the76-year-old secretary-general of the Baloch Republican Party, during hisunacknowledged detention, April 2010“Disappearances of people of Balochistan are the mostburning issue in the country. Due to this issue, the situation in Balochistanis at its worst.”– Supreme Court Justice Javed Iqbal, commenting onthe establishment of the Commission of Inquiry for Missing Persons on May 4,2010.“One of them pointed his gun at Abdul Nasir andshouted, ‘Get up!’ As soon as Abdul Nasir got off the ground theman walked him to their car. Since that time I have not seen Abdul.”– Witness to enforced disappearance of AbdulNasir, June 2010On December 11, 2009, a 39-year-old Baloch nationalistactivist, Abdul Ghaffar Lango, and his wife were leaving a hospital inPakistan’s southern city of Karachi after her discharge from surgery whentwo white Toyota pickup trucks suddenly stopped at the main gate. Lango’swife said that about 10 men in plain clothes approached the couple and onestarted beating Lango with the butt of an AK-47 assault rifle until he lostconsciousness. The men then dragged him into one of the pickups and drove away.When the family went to register the abduction with the police, the police informedthem that Lango had been detained because of his political activities, yetrefused to provide further information on his whereabouts or specific chargesagainst him.On July 1, 2011, Lango’s corpse was found in anabandoned hotel near Lakbado area of Gadani town in the Lasbela district ofBalochistan. The local police represented by the Station House Officer (SHO) ofGadani Police Station told the local media that “the body bore multiplemarks of brutal torture.”Lango’s case illustrates a disturbingly regularfeature of the ongoing conflict in Pakistan’s western province ofBalochistan: the practice of enforced disappearances, in which the authoritiesor their agents take people into custody and then deny all responsibility orknowledge of their fate or whereabouts. Enforced disappearances inflictunbearable cruelty not just on the victims, but on family members, who oftenwait years or decades to learn of their fate. Many cases result in theextrajudicial killing of the victims. Under international law,“disappearances” are considered a continuingoffense, one that is ongoing so long as the state conceals the fate or thewhereabouts of the victim.The problem of disappearances in Pakistanis widespread and is not limited to Balochistan province. This report, however,focuses specifically on “disappearances” in Balochistan, as theyare a distinctive feature of the conflict there between government securityforces and armed militants that has devastated the province over many years. Thesedisappearances take place in a province in which armed militants, particularlyBaloch nationalist armed groups, have attacked security forces and militarybases throughout the province. These groups have been responsible for manytargeted killings, including the killing of numerous teachersand other educators. In recent years they have increasingly attackednon-Baloch civilians and their businesses, as well as major gas installationsand infrastructure. Human Rights Watch documented abuses by militants in its2010 report, “Their Future Is at Stake”: Attacks on Teachers andSchools in Pakistan’s Balochistan Province.For this report, Human Rights Watchinterviewed over 100 individuals in Pakistan, including family members ofdisappeared individuals, persons who had been held in unacknowledged detentionand then released, local human rights activists, lawyers, and witnesses.The first appendix to this report containsdetailed descriptions of 45 cases of alleged enforced disappearances, themajority of which were reported in 2009-2010. These cases show thatPakistan’s security forces, particularly its intelligence agencies,targeted for enforced disappearance ethnic Baloch suspected of involvement inthe Baloch nationalist movement. Evidence of a broadercampaign by the authorities includes detailed accounts of the releaseddetainees and their relatives, witness accounts describing the circumstances ofabductions and the identity of the perpetrators, and admissions by governmentofficials. In a few cases representatives of the intelligence agencies admittedresponsibility to the families, or during court hearings. None of thevictims, their relatives or eyewitnesses to the alleged disappearancesinterviewed by Human Rights Watch blamed armed Baloch groups. Most blamed Pakistan’sintelligence agencies or the paramilitary Frontier Corps.Abductions were carried out in broaddaylight, often in busy public areas, and in the presence of multiplewitnesses. Victims were taken away from shops and hotels, public buses,university campuses, homes, and places of work.The victims of enforced disappearances in the casesdocumented were predominantly men in their mid-20s to mid-40s. Three of thedisappeared were children, the youngest of whom was 12 years old at the time ofthe abduction. In three cases, the victims were over 60 years old. Most victimsappear to have been targeted because of alleged participation in Balochnationalist parties and movements, including the Baloch Republican Party (BRP),Baloch National Front (BNF), Baloch National Movement (BNM) and BalochistanNational Party (BNP), as well as the Baloch Student Organization (Azad)(BSO-Azad). In several cases, people appeared to have been targeted because oftheir tribal affiliation, especially when a particular tribe, such as the Bugtior Mengal, was involved in fighting with Pakistan’s armed forces.Witnesses frequently described the perpetrators as armed menin civilian clothes, usually arriving in one or more four-door pickup trucks.The witnesses typically referred to these assailants as representatives of the“agencies,” a term commonly used to describe the intelligenceagencies, including the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI),Military Intelligence (MI), and the Intelligence Bureau (IB). Other informationobtained by Human Rights Watch in many cases corroboratesthese claims.In 16 cases documented by Human Rights Watch, the abductionswere carried out by, in the presence of, or with the assistance of uniformedpersonnel of the Frontier Corps (FC), an Interior Ministry paramilitary force.In a number of cases, police assisted by being present at the scene or securingan area while plainclothes intelligence officers abducted individuals who later“disappeared.”In all the cases Human Rights Watchdocumented, even evident members of the security forces did not identifythemselves, explain the basis for arrest or where they were taking thoseapprehended. Often instead they beat the victims and dragged them handcuffedand blindfolded into their vehicles. For example, on July 1, 2010, ShamsBaloch, the 49-year-old former mayor of Khuzdar town in Balochistan, wasabducted from an ambulance while accompanying his sick mother to a hospital inQuetta, Balochistan’s capital. About an hour after they left Khuzdar, menin Frontier Corps uniforms stopped the ambulance at a checkpoint and orderedBaloch to get out. They proceeded to beat him, while holding others atgunpoint. Four armed men in plain clothes arrived a short time afterwards andtook Baloch with them. The police refused to investigate.Another feature of enforced disappearancesin Balochistan is that many of the victims, especially senior politicalactivists, have been “disappeared” more than once. They have beenabducted, held in unacknowledged detention for weeks or even months, released,and then abducted again. And sometimes “disappearances” occur afterthe security forces have made several unsuccessful attempts at abducting aperson before finally apprehending and disappearing the victim.Information on the fate of personssubjected to enforced disappearances in Pakistan is scarce. Some of the allegeddisappeared are being held in unacknowledged detention in facilities run by theFrontier Corps and the intelligence agencies, such as at the Kuli armycantonment, a military base in Quetta.Those whom the security forces eventuallyrelease are frequently reluctant to talk about their experiences for fear ofbeing disappeared again or facing other repercussions. Many have beenthreatened with retaliation if they discuss who abducted them or reveal thatthey were tortured in custody. Without exception in the cases HumanRights Watch investigated, released detainees and relatives who were able toobtain information about the disappeared person's treatment in custody reportedtorture and ill-treatment. Methods of torture included prolonged beatings,often with sticks or leather belts, hanging detainees upside down, and food andsleep deprivation.In seven cases documented by Human RightsWatch, Pakistani authorities attempted to legitimize disappearances by bringingcriminal charges against the missing persons. In some cases, the detainees werethen transferred into police custody and brought to trial. In other cases, suchas that of Dr. Din Mohammad Baloch, the families found out about the chargesfrom the media, yet were still unable to locate or meet with their missingrelative.There is increasing evidence to substantiate the fears ofmany families that disappeared relatives who have been missing for months oryears have been killed in custody. According to media reports, more than 70 bodies of previously disappeared persons have been discoveredbetween July 2010 and February 2011.While the problem is widespread, the exactnumber of enforced disappearances perpetrated in recent years byPakistan’s security forces remains unknown. Anti-government Balochnationalists claim thousands of cases. Official numbers of disappeared personsare wildly contradictory. In 2008, Pakistan’s interior minister, RehmanMalik, admitted at least 1,100 victims. In January 2011Balochistan’s home minister, Mir Zafrullah Zehri, told provinciallegislators that only 55 persons were considered missing. The minister providedno explanation for these figures, which are inconsistent with those of crediblesources.Some of the disappeared have been traced byvarious institutions. The Balochistan home minister claimed in January 2011that 32 people had been traced. According to separate investigations bythe federal Interior Ministry and provincial Home Ministry, 23 victims ofdisappearances have been traced. The Commission ofInquiry for Missing Persons, established by the Supreme Court of Pakistan, hastraced a total of 134 persons throughout Pakistan, of which 23 have so far beenreleased. However, this list is not publicly available and it is not known ifdisappeared persons from Balochistan are on this list.Since President Asif Ali Zadari took office in 2008, hisgovernment has taken significant steps to address Baloch grievances. It offereda public apology to the people of Balochistan for human rights violationsperpetrated by the state under military rule, including large-scaledisappearances. In December 2009 the government, seeking politicalreconciliation in Balochistan, passed the Aghaz-e-Haqooq-e-Balochistan(“Beginning of Rights in Balochistan”) package of constitutional,political, administrative, and economic reforms. It noted the province’s“sense of deprivation in the political and economic structures of thefederation” and past failure to implement provisions of the 1973 PakistanConstitution that sought to empower the provinces.Yet the government has not kept its promises to address thecrisis of enforced disappearances in Balochistan. Thoseresponsible for enforced disappearances in the cases documented in this reporthave not been held accountable. The security forces have continued tobehave with the same impunity they enjoyed under the military government ofPresident Gen. Pervez Musharraf. This impunity seems topenetrate the system at all levels: police who refuse to register andinvestigate disappearance cases, courts that appear unwilling or unable tofully enforce the law against the security forces, intelligence agencies thatcontinue to blatantly ignore court orders, and high-level government officialswho talk of the need for accountability yet are unwilling or unable to rein inthe security forces. The reality is that security forces controlled by themilitary, including intelligence agencies and the Frontier Corps, continue toact outside all formal mechanisms of civilian oversight.In the vast majority of cases wedocumented, relatives of the disappeared reported the cases to the localpolice. In most cases the police eventually, often after an order from theSupreme Court, registered the cases. Yet that is where official activityusually ended, as no investigations followed. Policeoften explicitly told the families that they had no powers to investigatedisappearances allegedly committed by the intelligence agencies or FrontierCorps personnel.The right to habeas corpus continues to be largelyundermined both by the failure of the courts to meaningfully uphold it and bysecurity agency defiance. In 27 disappearance cases documented in this report,the families of the victims or lawyers acting on their behalf filed petitionswith the Balochistan High Court. In none of those cases did the court establishthe whereabouts of the disappeared.The Supreme Court has been more active. In 2009, it reopenedthe inquiry into disappearance cases across Pakistan that it began during theMusharraf period and that had led to a confrontation resulting inMusharraf’s dismissal of the chief justice. In May 2010 the Supreme Courtformed the Commission of Inquiry for Missing Persons, with a mandate toinvestigate enforced disappearances and provide recommendations for eliminatingthis practice. A new Commission of Inquiry for Missing Persons was establishedby the federal Ministry of Interior on March 1, 2011. While some of thedisappeared were traced by the first commission, no perpetrators were broughtto account, possibly because of fears within the courts about confrontingPakistan’s powerful intelligence and security agencies.The inability of law enforcement agencies and the criminaljustice system to tackle the problem of disappearances is exacerbated by thecontinuing failure of Pakistani authorities at the national and provinciallevel to exert the political will to address the issue of disappearances inBalochistan. The authorities have failed so far to send a strong message to thesecurity forces and intelligence agencies and to implement a set of concretemeasures that would put an end to the practice of enforced disappearances.This failure remains one of the key factors contributing tothe persistent cycle of abuse and impunity in the region, which takes a heavytoll on the Baloch community. It not only affects the victims whose lives arebrutalized and lost, but also their families who live in the anguish that they maynever learn the fate of their loved ones. It also deeply undermines the effortsof the Pakistani government to win the trust of the Baloch people and achievereconciliation in the province.Key RecommendationsTo the Government of Pakistan and the Provincial Government of Balochistan:Investigate all allegations of enforced disappearances, includingthose documented in this report, until the fate of each victim is clearly andpublicly established. Investigate all related allegations of torture,extrajudicial killings, or other abuses.Account for every person detained by all authorities inBalochistan, and in particular those accused of involvement in attacks byBaloch armed groups or arrested in military operations in Balochistan.Instruct the police to register all cases of abductionsand unlawful arrests, even if the alleged perpetrators include thepersonnel of the intelligence agencies, the Frontier Corps, or othersecurity forces.Ensure that the police and Commission of Inquiry forMissing Persons (CIMP) have the necessary authority and resources tovigorously investigate cases of disappearance, including those perpetratedby the intelligence agencies and paramilitary forces.Authorize the police and the CIMP to obtain informationfrom any state agencies, including the military and intelligence agencies,about the whereabouts and status of the disappeared. Provide the policeand the CIMP with investigative powers to make unannounced andunaccompanied searches of security force facilities and records.Dismiss from service and prosecute as appropriate allofficials, regardless of rank, found responsible for committing orordering disappearances or related abuses. Hold superior officers, whethercivilian or military, criminally accountable if they knew, or should haveknown, that forces under their command had committed or were about tocommit criminal acts, and they did not take reasonable steps to preventsuch acts or punish those responsible.Require arresting officers to identify themselves andpresent official identification.Inform detainees immediately of the reasons for arrest andany charges against them. Inform the family promptly of the arrest andlocation of the detainee. Allow direct contact with family and unhinderedaccess to legal counsel as soon as possible, but in all cases within 24hours.Bring detainees promptly before a judge and inform them ofthe reasons for arrest and any charges.Ensure that all persons detained by security forces areheld at recognized places of detention.Order the military, intelligence agencies, the FrontierCorps, the police, and all other security and intelligence agencies topromptly respond to inquiries and comply with all habeas corpus ordersissued by the courts.Release accurate information on all those formallyarrested or otherwise taken into custody, detained, and released inBalochistan and elsewhere in Pakistan.Introduce legislation making enforced disappearances acriminal offense punishable by sanctions commensurate with the gravity ofthe crime.Sign and ratify the International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and enact nationallegislation that gives force to its provisions.Repeal or revise all laws that allow arrest and detentionon vaguely defined charges and grant sweeping immunity to the securityforces. These laws include Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance (1960),the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, the “Sedition Law” Section 124-Aof the Pakistan Penal Code, and the Security of Pakistan Act, 1952.To Pakistan’s International Partners, in particular those such as theUnited States and United Kingdom that have relationships with Pakistan’ssecurity and intelligence agencies:Demand the government of Pakistan make it a priority toend the practice of disappearances and arbitrary detentions and that ithold all persons who order or carry out disappearances accountable.Communicate directly to the agencies responsible fordisappearances, including the army, ISI, IB, Frontier Corps, police andother law enforcement and intelligence agencies they have relationshipswith, and demand an end to disappearances. Make it clear that continueddisappearances will result in conditions on or an end to relationshipswith those agencies.Suspend police and military assistance and cooperationprograms with Frontier Corps , police and Pakistan Army units based inBalochistan until military and civilian authorities fully investigate andtake appropriate action regarding allegations of disappearance and otherabuses by their forcesEnsure that adequate mechanisms are in place to ensurethat no security unit funded and trained by external forces is responsiblefor human rights violations and that adequate vetting and oversightmechanisms are in place to help deter abuse in the future.The US should fully implement the Leahy Law whichprohibits the provision of military assistance to any unit of the securityforces or a foreign country where there is credible evidence that suchunit has committed gross violations of human rights.MethodologyThis report is based on informationcollected by Human Rights Watch researchers in Pakistan in 2010 and 2011.During our research on enforced disappearances in Balochistan, Human RightsWatch interviewed more than 100 individuals, including family members of“disappeared” individuals, persons who were in unacknowledgeddetention and later released, local human rights activists, lawyers, andwitnesses. The interviews were conducted in English and in Urdu, and, wherenecessary, with the help of Baloch interpreters.Human Rights Watch encountered seriousdifficulties in meeting Baloch witnesses, as many were reluctant to travel andmeet with Human Rights Watch researchers out of fear for their safety fromgovernment security forces. Many witnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watchwere visibly scared and expressed serious concerns about repercussions they mayface for speaking about disappearances in the province. We have used pseudonymsfor several witnesses and victims, as expressly indicated at relevant points inthe text and footnotes, to protect them from possible retaliation.The cases documented in this report includethose where there is still no information about the fate and whereabouts of thedisappeared individuals; cases where the victims’ bodies were recoveredfollowing the disappearance, suggesting that the person had been subjected toan extrajudicial execution; and cases where individuals were subjected toweeks- or months-long disappearance before being either released or transferredinto acknowledged detention and then usually charged with criminal offenses.Appendix 1 to this report contains detaileddescriptions of 45 alleged cases of enforced disappearances, the majority ofwhich occurred in 2009-2010. Human Rights Watch has transmitted all these casesto the United Nations Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances.While all efforts were made to ensure that information inAppendix 1 is up to date, given the challenge of obtaining information from Balochistan,especially in the northern part of the province, new developments may haveoccurred in some of the cases before the report went to print.I. Background: Conflict and Abuses inBalochistanBalochistan, Pakistan’s western-most province, borderseastern Iran and southern Afghanistan. It is the largest of the country’sfour provinces in terms of area (44 percent of the country’s land area),but the smallest in terms of population (5 percent of the country’stotal). According to the last national census, in 1998, over two-thirds of itspopulation of nearly eight million people live in rural areas.[1]The population comprises those whose first language—animportant marker of ethnic distinction in Pakistan—is Balochi (55percent), Pashto (30 percent), Sindhi (5.6 percent), Seraki (2.6 percent),Punjabi (2.5 percent), and Urdu (1 percent).[2]There are three distinct geographic regions of Balochistan.The belt comprising Hub, Lasbella, and Khizdar in the east isheavily influenced by the city of Karachi, Pakistan’s sprawling economiccenter in Sindh province. The coastal belt comprising Makran is dominated byGwadar port. Eastern Balochistan is the most remote part of the province. Thissparsely populated region is home to the richest, though largely untapped,deposits of natural resources in Pakistan, including oil, gas, copper, andgold. Significantly, it is the area where the struggle for power between thePakistani state and local tribal elites has been most apparent.[3]Balochistan is both economically and strategically important.The province borders Iran and Afghanistan, hosts a diverse ethnic mix ofresidents, has the second largest supply route for international forces inAfghanistan, and is allegedly home to the so-called Quetta Shura of the Talibanin the provincial capital, Quetta.[4] The situation is furthercomplicated by the large number of foreign states with an economic or politicalstake in the mineral-rich province, including the United States, China, Iran,India, and the United Arab Emirates.[5]Balochistan has historically had a tense relationship withPakistan’s national government, in large part due to issues of provincialautonomy, control of mineral resources and exploration, and a consequent senseof deprivation. Under President Gen. Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan’smilitary ruler from 1999 until 2008, the situation deteriorated markedly.[6]Two assassination attempts on Musharraf in 2005 and 2006 during visits toBalochistan resulted in a crackdown on Baloch nationalists by the armed forcesand Military Intelligence (MI), its lead intelligence agency in the province.These operations ultimately led to the killing in August 2006 of influentialtribal chieftain Nawab Akbar Bugti and 35 of his close followers.Since 2005, Pakistani human rights organizations haverecorded numerous serious human rights violations by security forces, includingextrajudicial executions, torture, enforced disappearances, forceddisplacement, and excessive use of force.[7]Armed militant groups in Balochistan are responsible formany targeted killings and destroying private property. In the past severalyears, they have increasingly targeted non-Baloch civilians and theirbusinesses, as well as major gas installations and infrastructure.[8]Baloch armed groups have also claimed responsibility for a series of attacks ongas pipelines and other infrastructure in the first three months of 2011. Theseattacks have created an acute shortage of fuel for cooking and heating duringone of the coldest periods of the year.[9] They have also struckpolice and security forces and military bases throughout the province.[10]Militancy in Balochistan has been fuelled by ethnic Balochanger over the Pakistani government’s efforts to harness local mineraland fossil fuel resources, maintain large numbers of troops in the province,and construct the Gwadar deep-sea port at the mouth of the Persian Gulf withnon-Baloch workers. The Pakistani military claims that Baloch militants receivearms and financial support from India.[11]In December 2009 Pakistan’s newly elected civiliangovernment, in an effort to bring about political reconciliation in theprovince, passed the Aghaz-e-Haqooq-e-Balochistan (“Beginning of Rightsin Balochistan”) package of constitutional, political, administrative,and economic reforms. It noted the province’s “sense of deprivationin the political and economic structures of the federation” and pastfailure to implement provisions of the 1973 Pakistan Constitution that soughtto empower the provinces.[12]The package aims, among other things, to delegate a range ofpowers to the Balochistan government, and requires federal authorities toobtain provincial government consent with respect to major projects. It seeksto redress the province’s poor socio-economic indicators, the worst inthe country, by increasing Baloch employment in the civil service, givingprovincial and local government authorities a greater share of resourceindustry revenues, and compensating communities displaced by violence. It alsocalls for military cantonments under construction in the resource-rich Sui andKohlu regions to be temporarily halted and for the military to be replacedthere by the Frontier Corps, a paramilitary force that answers to the civilianFederal Ministry of the Interior. Under the package, the Balochistan chief ministeris to have control over the Frontier Corps’ law and order operations. Thepackage also calls for an investigation of targeted killings and other murders,missing persons, and for all persons detained without charge to be released.[13]As a result of the package, the Pakistan federal government in2010 released Rs 12 billion (US$140 million) to the Balochistan government inoutstanding debts owed to it with respect to natural gas revenues and announceda Rs 152 billion (US$1.77 billion) budget for the province, double that of 2009.[14]The package also establishes a judicial inquiry into the killing ofNawab Akbar Bugti and other Baloch political leaders.[15]These reforms notwithstanding, doubts persist within Baloch societyabout the Pakistan government’s intentions. Significant Balochnationalist parties and leaders have rejected the package, claiming it does notadequately address core grievances or genuinely enable greater provincialautonomy.[16] Many have continued tocall for complete separation from Pakistan.[17] However, Balochnationalists are highly splintered and it is unclear how much influence Balochpolitical leaders now exert over militant groups.[18]Divisions among Baloch nationalists have exacerbated lawlessnessand violence in the province. In 2010, militants escalated sectarian andethnically motivated targeted killings, especially in Quetta.[19]In addition, they have continued to target gas pipelines, railway lines,electricity networks, and government buildings, including schools.[20]Three distinct groups are responsible for violence againstcivilians in the province: militant Baloch nationalist groups seekingseparation or autonomy for Balochistan that target Punjabis and otherminorities; militant Sunni Muslim groups that attack members of the Shiacommunity; and armed Islamist groups that have most recently attacked those whoact contrary to their interpretation of Islam.[21]Militant nationalist groups such as the Baloch LiberationArmy (BLA) and the Baloch Liberation United Front (BLUF) have claimedresponsibility for most killings of non-Baloch civilians, including teachersand other education personnel.[22] They attempt to justifythese attacks as a nationalist Baloch response to grievances against the state,and retaliation against abuses that state security forces have committedagainst Baloch community members.Amidst the violence, longstanding failures of governance andthe stand-off between the Pakistani military and Baloch militants have deepeneda general perception in the province of neglect, discrimination, and denial ofrights. These are exacerbated by the continuing tribal system and its archaicsocial structures, the influence of the tribal chief on the justice system andpolice, and the consequent denial of citizens’ fundamental rights.The poor and marginalized, particularly women, are adverselyaffected by traditional forms of dispute resolution and lack of access to otherredress mechanisms. They lack assets and opportunities, have no social safetynet, and are bound by practices that affect their welfare.[23]There are frequent reports of both state law enforcement agenciesand local power-brokers committing abuses against marginalized populations.Labor conditions are abysmal, and there is no single system of justice despitea uniform civil and criminal code. The widespread use of tribal jirgas(councils) and other informal forums of justice increase the difficulty ofseeking redress and obtaining justice, devaluing its quality.Finally, the violence has further stretched what was alreadythin police coverage in the province. Organized police services cover only afraction of the province’s territory (about 4 percent of the land area),while the rest is covered by tribal recruits in quasi-police forces known aslevies.[24]As the violence in Balochistan has intensified, atrocitieshave mounted. While the Pakistani military and Baloch militants readily exploitthe misery of civilians for their own political purposes, they have failed toaddress these grievances or to accept responsibility for them.Enforced Disappearancesin PakistanWhile Pakistan’s civilian law enforcement authoritiesand the military intelligence agencies have long perpetrated human rightsviolations against individuals, the proliferation of enforced disappearances bythe security forces has been a relatively recent development.Pakistan supported the US-led invasion of Afghanistanfollowing the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States. Pakistaniauthorities implemented a policy of rounding up suspected members of al Qaedaand the Taliban. During the administration of US President George W. Bush, severalhundred Pakistanis and foreign nationals living in Pakistan were simply takeninto custody and handed over to the US without any due process. Many were then heldat Bagram Airbase in Afghanistan or transferred to the US military detentioncenter at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.Pakistan’s former military ruler Gen. Pervez Musharrafexplained in his 2006 autobiography, In the Line of Fire: “We havecaptured 689 and handed over 369 to the United States. We have earned bountiestotaling millions of dollars. Those who habitually accuse the U.S. of not doingenough in the war on terror should simply ask the CIA how much prize money ithas paid to the Government of Pakistan.”[25]Since 2001, thousands ofterrorism suspects, including Pakistanis and foreign nationals, have beenarbitrarily detained, held in secret detention without due legal process, anddenied access to lawyers and their families. International and Pakistani humanrights groups, such as the highly regarded nongovernmental Human RightsCommission of Pakistan, have reported extensively on these arbitrary detentionsand enforced disappearances.[26]Most of these abuses have beenperpetrated by Pakistan’s military and its intelligence agencies. However,civilian government agencies, including the police, Frontier Corps, andInterior Ministry-run Intelligence Bureau have taken part, assisted, or inother ways been complicit in such abuses. Along with the many instances of“disappearances” in this report involving the police and theFrontier Corps in Balochistan, these authorities as well as the IntelligenceBureau have been implicated in “disappearances” throughout Pakistansince 2001.[27]Allegations of extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearance, torture, andcollective punishment have also been leveled against the Frontier Corps inrelation to operations against the Taliban in the northwest of the country.[28]Pakistan’s international counterterrorism partners,principally the United States and the United Kingdom, urged, ignored, or werecomplicit in serious abuses against terrorist suspects. Research by HumanRights Watch and others documenting the experience of those who have emergedfrom enforced disappearance in Pakistan and were released from custody suggeststhat many of these were visited and interrogated by intelligence agents ofother countries, who cannot reasonably claim not to have known that these personswere arbitrarily detained, in secret places of detention and without access tolawyers or family and that most were subjected to torture or otherill-treatment.[29]Far from using their influence to demand an end to suchpractices, US and UK complicity in such abuses provided Pakistan’ssecurity forces what they viewed as carte blanche to expand the scope and ambitof such abuses far beyond what was sought by their Western allies to coverpolitical opponents of the military, including ethnic minority groups,particularly in Balochistan. Many of the individuals targeted, deprived oflegal protections, have been or remain victims of enforced disappearance.Attempts by Pakistan’s judiciary to address the issueof enforced disappearances have had mixed results. Pakistan’sConstitution gives the Supreme Court significant powers, including the power toact on its own initiative (suo moto action) and to pass enforceableorders on “a question of public importance with reference to theenforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights.”[30] The Supreme Court has used this power to order the police and theprovincial courts to launch investigations into disappearance cases.Beginning in December 2005, the Supreme Court began to seekexplanations from the Musharraf government about the fate and whereabouts of“disappeared” persons. Over the course of 2006 and 2007,Pakistan’s judiciary made a concerted attempted to address serious humanrights abuses including enforced disappearances. Government officials, particularlyrepresentatives of the military and intelligence agencies, summoned by thecourts sought to deny allegations of disappearances. Often, they simply deniedany knowledge of the whereabouts of disappeared persons or revealing who thedetaining authority was. The Musharraf government also retaliated by seeking topressure the judiciary to drop such investigations through sundry illegal meansincluding attempted blackmail of judges.[31]Pakistani law recognizes the right to habeascorpus, which is the right to be brought before a court and challengethe legality of one’s detention. This is a crucial procedural guaranteeagainst enforced disappearances and unacknowledged detention. In cases ofalleged abductions or unlawful detention by the security forces, a provincialHigh Court has the power to compel the detaining authority to produce thedetainee before the court in order to verify the legality of arrest, no matterwho detained the person.[32]In practice, however, the right to habeas corpus has beenlargely undermined both by the unwillingness of lower courts to meaningfullyuphold it and by the defiance of the security agencies. For years,Pakistan’s intelligence agencies and government bodies that are supposedto exercise institutional control over them have been blatantly defying andmisleading the courts in habeas corpus hearings. In 2006, the Defense Ministrystated that it had only administrative, but not operational, control over theintelligence agencies, and thus could not enforce their compliance with courtorders. Yet at Supreme Court hearings in 2007, Defense Ministry representativesfirst stated that the ISI and MI were answerable to the Interior and DefenseMinistries, “apart from the operational command channel,” and laterreiterated that they were under the administrative control of the DefenseMinistry.[33] Efforts by the courts torequire the government and Supreme Court to clarify under what authority andwhat legislation the intelligence agencies take custody of people have so farproved futile.[34] The courts have not requiredsworn affidavits from the agencies or held the agencies who refuse to obey the habeascorpus writs in contempt of court. Yet on other subjects, the Supreme Court hasnot hesitated to use its contempt powers.[35]One reason for judicial caution was the reaction ofPakistan’s military. In March 2007, Musharraf effectively ousted SupremeCourt Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, in part over his efforts to addressdisappearances. Musharraf’s move triggered a country-wide crisis and hascome to be seen as the moment when the military ruler started losing his gripon power.[36] In July 2007, Chaudhrywas reinstated by the Supreme Court and hearings into enforced disappearancesresumed.While some of the missing were traced as a consequence ofthe Supreme Court’s actions, the effort received a major setback onNovember 3, 2007, when Musharraf suspended the constitution and illegallydeposed much of Pakistan’s judiciary, including Chief Justice Chaudhry.The courts’ attempts to summon intelligence agencies’ officialscertainly played a role in the ouster of the judiciary.[37]Since general elections in February 2008, Pakistan’scivilian government has promised to address the crisis of disappeared personsacross the country, including in Balochistan. However, none of its initiatives,including the Aghaz-e-Haqooq-e-Balochistan reform package, have had ademonstrable impact in the province. Allegations of disappearances havecontinued to be made in other parts of Pakistan, particularly in the northwest,where military operations against the Taliban are ongoing.[38]II. Enforced Disappearances underInternationaland Domestic LawInternational LawEnforced disappearances are defined underinternational law as “the arrest, detention or abduction of an individualby state authorities or their agents followed by a refusal to acknowledge thedeprivation of liberty or by concealing the fate or whereabouts of the person,which places the person outside the protection of the law.”[39]Enforced disappearances are not theviolation of merely one right, but constitute “a multiple human rightsviolation.”[40] Among the rights an enforced disappearance violates are theright to liberty and security of the person, including protection from tortureand other ill-treatment; the right to recognition as a person before the law;and the right to a prompt, fair, and public trial. Enforced disappearances alsooften constitute a grave threat to the right to life. These rights areprotected by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment (“Convention against Torture”). Pakistanratified both treaties in 2010, one of the notable human rights achievements ofthe current Pakistan government.[41]The United Nations Declaration on EnforcedDisappearances contains numerous specific injunctions on preventing“disappearances,” including that a state must detain individuals inofficially recognized places of detention, of which their families must bepromptly informed; that they must have access to a lawyer; and that eachdetention facility must maintain an official up-to-date register of all personsdeprived of their liberty.[42]The practice of enforced disappearances isoften directly linked to the practice of arbitrary arrests. In this respect, theICCPR requires that a state specify the legal basis on which individuals may bedeprived of their liberty and the procedures to be used for arrests anddetentions.[43] Only arrests and detentions conducted in accordance with suchrules are considered lawful, thus restricting the discretion of individualarresting officers. The prohibition against arbitrary arrest or detention alsomeans that deprivation of liberty, even if provided for by law, must benecessary and reasonable, predictable, and proportional to the reasons forarrest.The ICCPR also requires an arrestingauthority to promptly communicate to detainees any charges against them. Those detainedon suspicion of a crime must be charged within a reasonable time. In addition,international law grants a detainee the right to challenge the lawfulness of theirdetention (the writ of habeas corpus) by petitioning a judicial authority to determinewhether the detention is lawful, reasonable, and necessary.An enforced disappearance committed as part of a widespreador systematic attack on a population constitutes a crime against humanity.Crimes against humanity are acts which, by their scale or nature, outrage theconscience of humankind.[44]The Convention on the Rights of the Child,to which Pakistan is a party, contains further safeguards with respect to thedeprivation of liberty of anyone under the age of 18, including the right toprompt access to legal and other appropriate assistance as well as theobligation of the authorities to provide family members with essentialinformation on the child’s whereabouts and well-being.[45]Pakistani LawIn addition to Pakistan’s obligations underinternational human rights law, the practice of enforced disappearancesdirectly violates Pakistani domestic law.The Pakistan Constitution protects the liberty of personsand prohibits arbitrary detention.[46] The Constitution allowspreventive detention as a preemptive law enforcement measure, but provides thatsuch detention must comply with specific legislation required for the purpose.[47]Various pieces of legislation on preventive detention have been enacted at thefederal and provincial levels in Pakistan, and all set forth detailedprocedural safeguards.[48] These safeguards includerequirements that the detaining authority inform the detainee the grounds onwhich the detention order was made, explain their right to contest the order,and provide them the earliest opportunity to do so.The rights of criminal defendants and suspects and thecorresponding obligations of law enforcement agencies, as well as theresponsibilities of law enforcement agencies and courts to investigate theviolations, are further specified in the Criminal Procedure Code.[49]In enforced disappearance cases documented in this report, none of theseprocedures for arrest or preventive detention had been followed.Although Pakistani law does not contain a definition orexplicit prohibition of enforced disappearance as such, it does criminalizeabductions,[50] kidnappings,[51]wrongful restraint and confinement,[52] and unlawful detention.[53]The right to habeas corpus is guaranteed by theConstitution.[54] Yet constitutionalprotections against unlawful detention continue to be largely undermined by theAnti-Terrorism Act (ATA) of 1997, which allows long-term detention withouttrial. The ATA is frequently used to authorize the detention of alleged membersof Baloch armed groups and political organizations. On September 8, 2010,Federal Interior Minister Rehman Malik announced that five Baloch politicalgroups would be banned and their assets frozen under the ATA. The fivepolitical groups are the Baloch Republican Army, Baloch Liberation Army, theBaloch Liberation Front, Lashkar-i-Balochistan, and the Baloch Musallah DifaOrganisation.[55]A person can also be criminally charged with terrorist offensesunder the ATA.[56] Higher courts on severaloccasions have identified specific criteria that need to be met for thedetention under ATA to be considered lawful.[57]In July 2010 the Pakistani government tabled new amendmentsto the ATA in the Senate. If adopted, they would further undermine proceduralsafeguards and the constitutionally guaranteed rights of detainees. On expiry of the constitutionally mandated period of 90 days foradoption, the proposed bill has now lapsed and will have to be re-tabled inparliament.[58]The Pakistan Constitution prohibits torture for the purposeof extracting evidence. The Criminal Procedure Code of Pakistan prohibits theuse of statements obtained through torture or ill-treatment in any proceedings.The Penal Code criminalizes causing “hurt for the purpose ofextorting… any confession or any information which may lead to thedetection of any offence or misconduct.” However, torture is not definedin Pakistan law and there is no specific crime of torture. These legal gapscontribute to the impunity enjoyed by the military and intelligence agencies.III. Enforced Disappearances andRelated AbusesThe practice of enforced disappearances bystate security forces has become a distinctive feature of the conflict inBalochistan. It continues unabated to the present.The exact number of new“disappearances” perpetrated in recent years by Pakistan’ssecurity forces in the province remains unknown. Baloch nationalists claim “thousands”of cases. Balochistan provincial authorities on several occasions havecited the figure of about 1,000 enforced disappearances.[59]Pakistan’s Interior Ministry has said that 1,102 Baloch were forciblydisappeared during General Musharraf’s rule, which ended in August 2008.[60]Many cases remain unreported as families and witnesses often prefer not to reportcases to the authorities or human rights organizations because of fear ofretaliation by the authorities. The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, a nongovernmental organization,has verified 169 disappearance cases in Balochistan from 2005 to January 2011.Of these, 33 people have been released or traced.[61]During its research since 2010, HumanRights Watch documented 49 cases of enforced disappearances in Balochistan, 36of which originated in 2009-2010. These are described in detail in Appendix 1of this report.The disappearances documented in thisreport predominantly occurred in Balochistan’s capital, Quetta, and theregions of Tump, Mastung, and Thali. According to local human rights groups, alarge number of disappearances have also been perpetrated in regions such as DeraBugti, where the extremely hazardous security situation made it impossible forHuman Rights Watch to travel.While cases documented by Human RightsWatch constitute only a portion of the overall number of cases reported fromBalochistan, they show a persistent pattern of enforced disappearancesperpetrated by Pakistan’s security forces against ethnic Baloch suspectedof involvement in the Baloch nationalist movement.PerpetratorsHuman Rights Watch has collectedinformation on “disappearances” that repeatedly implicatesPakistan’s intelligence agencies and Frontier Corps, often acting inconjunction with local police. The Human Rights Commission of Pakistanreached the same conclusion in its 2009 report on the situation in Balochistan:“HRCP has ample evidence to support the allegations of victims' familiesthat the perpetrators of enforced disappearances are intelligence agencies andsecurity forces.”[62]Human Rights Watch research includesdetailed accounts from released detainees and their relatives, and witnessdescriptions of abductions that indicate the identity of the perpetrators. Insome cases government officials have admitted state responsibility; in a fewcases, representatives of the intelligence agencies have admittedresponsibility to families or during court hearings.The government agencies that Human RightsWatch found to be most involved in enforced disappearances in Balochistan are MilitaryIntelligence (MI),[63] the Frontier Corps (FC)[64]and, to a lesser extent, the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI)[65]and the Intelligence Bureau (IB).[66]TheFrontierCorps is mandated to assist local law enforcement in the maintenance of law andorder and to carry out border patrol and anti-smuggling operations. Pakistan’sintelligence agencies have long operated without any basis in law supportingtheir creation or functioning; the country’s highest legal officer,Attorney General Maulvi Anwarul Haq, informed the Supreme Court in November2010 that no such legal instrument exists.[67] The ISI enjoys no formalpowers of arrest. Yet the agencies invoke laws such as the Security of PakistanAct 1952, Pakistan Army Act 1952, Defence of Pakistan Act and Prevention ofAnti-National Activities Act 1972 to justify their actions. However, these lawsdo not give the intelligence agencies any powers.In 31 of the cases documented by Human Rights Watch,witnesses described the perpetrators as armed men in civilian clothes,typically arriving in one or more four-door pickup trucks. The witnessesusually referred to these perpetrators as members of the “agencies”because of the circumstances of the abductions—often perpetrated openlyin broad daylight, with the assistance of the police or FC personnel, in areasonly readily accessible by security personnel. These suspicions of stateresponsibility were often then corroborated by information about theirrelatives’ whereabouts they managed to obtain after the disappearance.In one case, on November 8, 2009, five men in plain clothesand armed with military assault rifles entered the courtyard of the Agha SyedMohammad Hotel in Quetta. In front of multiple witnesses, they took away twomen, Mir Sohrab Marri and Shah Mohammad Zarkoon, and threatened to shoot anyonewho tried to intervene. The men’s families concluded that perpetratorswere from the intelligence agencies because the incident took place in an areawith multiple FC checkpoints and the Frontiers Corps would have otherwisestopped armed men transporting abduction victims. After making inquiries, thefamilies a month later received confirmation from MI that the two men were intheir custody.[68]On December 11, 2009, Abdul Ghaffar Lango, a 39-year-oldQuetta-based Baloch nationalist activist was abducted by men in civilianclothes. Ten armed men approached Lango and his wife as they were leaving ahospital in Karachi. The assailants beat Lango unconscious with an AK-47assault rifle, dragged him into one of two pickup trucks and drove away. Whenthe family went to register the abduction with the police, the police informedthem that Lango had been detained because of his activities as BNP leader, yetrefused to provide further information on his whereabouts or specific chargesagainst him.[69] On July 1, 2011 AbdulGhaffar Lango’s corpse was found in an abandoned hotel near Lakbado areaof Gadani town in the Lasbela district of Balochistan. The local policerepresented by the Station House Officer (SHO) of Gadani Police Station toldthe local media that “the body bore multiple marks of brutal torture.Cause of death is stated to be a severe wound in the head, caused by a hard rodor some other hard or sharp object.”[70]In six cases documented by Human Rights Watch, theabductions were carried out either by, in the presence of, or with theassistance of uniformed FC personnel. For example, on July 1, 2010, uniformedFC personnel at a checkpoint in Mian Ghundi stopped the ambulance in whichShams Baloch, the 49-year-old former mayor of Khuzdar town, was accompanyinghis sick mother to a hospital in Quetta. A witness told Human Rights Watch thatshortly after the ambulance was stopped, four armed men in plain clothesarrived at the checkpoint and took Baloch with them.[71]The police refused to file a report or investigate the case, and hiswhereabouts remain unknown.In another case, a family member reported that on October22, 2009, a group of about 20 uniformed FC personnel accompanied by threeplainclothes officers raided the house of Najeebullah Qambrani, 27, in Quettaand took him away.[72] The government hasrefused to provide information on his case. Qambrani’s whereabouts remainunknown.In some cases, FC personnel carried out an arrest and thenappear to have handed over the detainee to the intelligence agencies. Forexample, on September 1, 2009, FC personnel arrested Abdul Mujeeb, 24, at theBalochistan University campus in Quetta. The police refused to file a report.The family had no information on his whereabouts following the arrest, yet 25days later Mujeeb called his brother on his mobile phone. The brother toldHuman Rights Watch that they only managed to speak for several minutes, yet Mujeebtold him that he was in custody of the MI.[73] Mujeeb’swhereabouts remain unknown.In another case, uniformed FC personnel together withplainclothes intelligence agents arrested Jallil Akham Riki as he was leavingthe mosque in Chulam Jhan village in Quetta on February 13, 2009. Riki has beenunaccounted for ever since, but, according to Riki’s family, when localhuman rights activists raised his case with the chief minister of Balochistan,he said Riki had been in ISI detention on suspicion of involvement in variousanti-government activities.[74] Human Rights Watch wroteto Chief Minister Raisani asking him to clarify his position on Riki’scase but has not received any response.[75]In at least 10 cases documented by Human Rights Watch, FCpersonnel were directly involved in the arrests that resulted in enforceddisappearances without the evident participation of intelligence agencies. OnMay 17, 2009, an FC vehicle stopped a truck that was carrying passengers from Tumpdistrict to the city of Turbat. According to a witness, uniformed FC soldierstold all passengers to get out of the truck and lined them up, asking for theirnames. As soon as they heard the name of Mohammad Tariq, a 25-year-old universitystudent, they put him into their car, ordered the rest of the passengers toreboard the truck, and drove Tariq away.[76] The FC commander deniedthat Tariq was in their custody and his whereabouts remain unknown.On January 31, 2009, FC personnel at a major checkpoint inSultankot, stopped the bus that Abdul Ghani, 18, was travelling on from Sibidistrict to his home district of Thali. A relative of Ghani told Human RightsWatch that according to a passenger on the bus, FC soldiers stopped the bus andordered all the men out. The men, about 30 to 35 in total, were told to standin two separate lines with their backs to each other. They threatened to shootanyone who looked up, and when two men lifted their heads when AbdulGhani’s name was mentioned, the soldiers hit them in the face. The twoidentified Abdul Ghani, and the soldiers then grabbed and hooded him and tookhim away.[77] The police refused toregister a case, saying they “do not take FC cases.” Abdul Ghaniremains unaccounted for.Human Rights Watch documented several cases in which localpolice assisted intelligence agencies in carrying out arrests that resulted inenforced disappearances. For example, on April 2, 2010, two police cars and twoToyota Hilux cars stopped a public bus in which Mehboob Wadela, 32, wastravelling to Karachi from Gwadar. According to a relative, a group of men incivilian clothes took Wadela from the bus and drove him away in one of theToyotas while the police waited outside in their vehicles.[78]The police refused to file a report, and his family has learned nothing abouthis fate or whereabouts.In one of the cases documented by Human Rights Watch, theperpetrators were known soldiers in the Pakistan army. On April 24, 2010,uniformed soldiers were seen picking up two men, one of whom was detained forover a month and another who is still missing, during a large military sweepoperation in a village in Thali district. Although the released man saw theother in detention, the authorities have provided no information.[79]VictimsIn most of the cases we documented, the victims of enforceddisappearances were men in their mid-20s to mid-40s. Three of the disappearedwere children, the youngest of whom was 12 years old at the time of theabduction. In three cases, the victims were over 60 years old. The oldestvictim was 76 at the time of his arrest.All of the victims were ethnic Baloch, from Quetta and otherdistricts of Balochistan.Most victims appeared to be targeted because of theiraffiliation with Baloch nationalist political parties and movements, includingthe Baloch Republican Party (BRP),[80] Baloch National Front(BNF),[81] Baloch National Movement(BNM),[82] and Balochistan NationalParty (BNP).[83] Among the disappearedwere senior leaders of Baloch nationalist parties, such as members of the BRPcentral committee Sangat-Sana Baloch and Mir Abdul Waheed Resani Baloch, andBRP secretary general, Bashir Azeem.The security forces have also targeted students involved inpolitical activities, particularly members of the Baloch StudentOrganisation-Azad (BSO-Azad).[84] Many of the studentleaders and their supporters have been arrested at university campuses andsubsequently disappeared. For example, on September 3, 2009, FC personneldetained Chakkar Khan Marri, 24, and six other students at BalochistanUniversity in Quetta. The students had just finished meeting with theuniversity’s vice chancellor to lobby for the reopening of theuniversity, which had been closed for three months due to violence in Quetta.Other students were subsequently released, but Marri’s fate andwhereabouts remain unknown.[85]Mir Abdul Mujeeb (mentioned above) was taken into custody bythe Frontier Corps on September 1, 2009, outside the Arts Faculty of BalochistanUniversity in Quetta. He seems to have been targeted because of his role as a UnitSecretary of the BSO-Azad and convener of the Tulwar Advisory Council, a bodythat resolves disputes between different student organizations.[86]The police refused to file a complaint. Mujeeb remains missing.Another student leader, BSO-Azad vice-chair Zakir Majeed Baloch,and two friends were abducted on June 8, 2009 while driving in Nushki districtby a group of armed men in plain clothes. The captors put his friends into aseparate car and later released them. Baloch’s family tried several timesto have his case registered by the police and the court, and he remains missingat this writing.[87]From information provided by released detainees to HumanRights Watch, individuals seem to have been targeted because authoritiesbelieved them to be involved in the Baloch nationalist movement (though oftenwithout basis). For example, on May 25, 2010, a group of FC personnel andplainclothes agents arrested “Rahim,” (not his real name) 25, Dr.Naseem Baloch, 32, and Ilyas Karim, 31. Rahim said he was subjected to intensequestioning about his activities and the purpose of his visit to Quetta, buthis interrogators were not satisfied with his answers. He told Human RightsWatch:I explained that I was a farmer in Awaran [district ofBalochistan], and they also asked about my family, and about Dr. Naseem andIlyas. When I told them that they were my friends, they screamed, “Youare lying to us! Dr. Naseem is a separatist. Tell us what Naseem is doing. Whyis he involved in separatism?”[88]The interrogators tortured Rahim trying to force him into aconfession, but then released him. The fate and whereabouts of the other twomen remain unknown at this writing.In several cases, security forces appeared to have targetedindividuals because of their tribal affiliation, especially when a particulartribe was involved in armed hostilities with Pakistan’s military forces.For example, in 2007 a large group of security forces, some of whom were incivilian clothes and some in uniform, abducted a senior member of the Marritribe, 64-year-old Tawakal Khan. Khan’s family, who feared going to theauthorities until 2009, said that he was not involved in politics and believehe was targeted because the Pakistan army was then engaged in militaryoperations against the Marri tribe.[89] Tawakal Khan’s whereaboutsremain unknown.Relatives of Mohammad Iqbal, 30, told Human Rights Watchthat FC personnel arrested him and three of his friends, Nawaz Ahmed, Jasum Ali,and Zahid Ali, on March 14, 2007, because all four men belonged to the Rindttribe, which at that time was involved in armed clashes with Pakistan securityforces in the Ziarat Kalig region. Iqbal’s family received contradictoryinformation from the authorities, but no clear information on his whereabouts.Nawaz Ahmed, Jasum Ali, and Zhaid Ali were released after 11-months’forcible disappearance, while Iqbal remains missing.[90]ModusOperandiIn most of the enforced disappearance caseswe documented, the perpetrators acted openly and did not seem worried by thepresence of witnesses, highlighting the impunity with which Pakistani securityforces and intelligence agencies operate in Balochistan.In the majority of cases, the perpetratorscarried out the abductions in broad daylight, often in busy public areas, andin the presence of multiple witnesses. For example, the above-mentioned NaseemBaloch, Ilyas Karim, and Rahim were abducted by a large group of uniformed FCsoldiers and agents in plainclothes at 1:30 p.m. in a busy downtown district ofQuetta in the presence of multiple witnesses.[91]In another case, motorcycle trader Abdul Nasir, 27, wasrepairing a motorcycle in his friend’s roadside shop in a busy part ofQuetta on October 14, 2009. At around 11:30 a.m., a double-door pickup truckstopped outside the entrance. Four men in plainclothes stepped out of the truckand entered the shop, which had several customers in it. A witness to theincident told Human Rights Watch:The first one to enter the shop shouted, “Don’tlook at us, look at the ground!” All four of them were carrying pistols.One of them pointed his gun at Abdul Nasir and shouted, “Get up!”As soon as Abdul Nasir got off the ground the man walked him to their car.Since that time I have not seen Abdul.[92]The police would not register a complaint. Nasir’swhereabouts remain unknown.There were multiple witnesses to theabduction of two children, 14-year-old Nasibullah Langao and 12-year-old AbdulWaheed. A group of uniformed FC personnel apprehended them in the street oftheir village of Ismail in Hudda, Quetta, in March 2010. A friend of theboys’ families told Human Rights Watch that he believes the securityforces targeted the two children because they were trying to obtain informationabout the killing five days earlier of Langao’s uncle by FC personnel.The families have not been able to obtain any information about the boys’fate or whereabouts from the authorities.[93]On February 13, 2009, Jallil Akham Riki, a BRP activist fromChulam Jhan village in Quetta was leaving a local mosque after prayers when fourcars surrounded him. Uniformed FC soldiers together with men in civilianclothes ordered him into one of the cars, blindfolded him and drove him away infront of many other men who were leaving the mosque at the same time.[94]The security forces did not respond to a habeas corpus petition filed by thefamily. Riki was last reported to be held at the Kuli Camp in Quetta by fellowdetainees but his current whereabouts are unknown.In a number of the cases documented here,the security forces took students away from university campuses.In 13 cases, the individuals were takeninto custody while travelling in public buses, trucks, or private vehicles. Insome cases, the cars were stopped at official checkpoints by police or FCpersonnel. In other cases, security forces followed and overtook vehicles orcreated ad hoc road blocks to stop them. For example, on March 15, 2010,Abdul Wahab Baloch, a 14-year-old school boy from Tump district, was on his wayto meet a friend. He was travelling in a car with another youth, “Mahmoud”(not his real name). At around 10 p.m., three FC trucks and two unmarked jeepsstopped Mahmoud’s car. According to a witness, uniformed FC personnel openedthe doors of Mahmoud’s car and immediately pulled Baloch out of hispassenger seat. The soldiers put Baloch, handcuffed, into one of the armytrucks and told Mahmoud to leave right away, which he did.[95]The police denied nothing anything about the arrest. Abdul Wahab Baloch’swhereabouts remain unknown.On December 7, 2009, one police car and two civilianvehicles stopped a truck carrying BRP central committee member Sangat-SanaBaloch and two other passengers at a roadblock located at Bolan Pass on theQuetta-Sindh highway. One of the passengers, who was later released, toldBaloch’s family that several men in civilian clothes opened the doors ofthe truck, immediately started beating all three, and forced them into one oftheir vehicles. The passenger said the men, who he believed were members of theintelligence agencies, then brought all three men into a building where theyagain beat them. Once the assailants realized that one passenger was notinvolved in any political activity, they handed him over to the police, whoreleased him the same day. The man does not know what happened to Baloch andthe other man, whose fate and whereabouts remain unknown.[96]In other cases, security forces, usually ajoint group of FC personnel and intelligence agents in plain clothes, abductedindividuals from their homes or places of work where other family members or employeescould witness what occurred. In one case, at around midnight on October 22,2009, security forces came to the house of Najeebullah Qambrani, 27, on Kamraniroad in Quetta. His brother described the incident to Human Rights Watch:I was woken up by what sounded like people jumping over thewalls of our house. Then I heard a loud “bang” and I realizedsomeone was trying to smash down our [metal] front gate. Then someone frombehind the gate shouted, “Open the door!” I immediately opened thegate and stepped well behind for fear of being hit. Approximately 20 men incamouflage uniforms with FC badges accompanied by three men in plainclothesentered the house. I was told to wait outside while the soldiers searched thehouse.As I stepped outside the broken front gate to see what washappening, I noticed about six cars. All of them were black four-door ToyotaVigo pickups. Then I saw Najeebullah being dragged away by some of thesoldiers. He was not resisting. I tried to approach him, but one of the FCsoldiers made a threatening gesture with his fist and I turned back andreturned to the house.[97]On June 29, 2009, Din Mohammad Baloch, a40-year-old doctor, was on a night shift in his small clinic in the Ornach areaof Khuzdar district. At around 2:30 a.m. seven men entered the clinic, tied uphis assistant, and burst into his office. His assistant later toldBaloch’s family that he could hear the sounds of a scuffle. He then sawthe men dragging Baloch out of the clinic. Baloch has not been heard from since.According to a relative of Baloch, in August 2009, Chief Minister Raisani ofBalochistan told Baloch’s family that he was in custody of theintelligence agencies, but did not provide them with further details.[98]HumanRights Watch wrote to Chief Minister Raisani asking him to clarify his positionon this case but has not received any response.[99]In none of those cases did the perpetratorsidentify themselves. Nor did they explain why the persons were being detainedor where they were taking them. In the majority of cases, including thoseinvolving unknown perpetrators in plain clothes, victims, eyewitnesses, andrelatives blamed Pakistan’s intelligence agencies for the disappearances.This was on account of the similarities in abduction methods and the fact thatso many of the victims were taken in front of or in the vicinity of police orthe Frontier Corps, or in public places where only members of the securityforces would be able to move freely. The decades-old history of intelligenceagency involvement in disappearances in Balochistan also likely contributed tothe perception that intelligence agencies were involved.[100]In at least 10 cases documented by HumanRights Watch, the security forces beat the victims during the arrest andforcibly dragged them into their vehicles, often handcuffed and blindfolded. Aneyewitness to the abduction of Mazar Khan, 21, and Abdul Rasool, 26,told Human Rights Watch that on December 19, 2009, at around 10 p.m., seven menin civilian clothes, their faces covered with scarves, broke down the gate toKhan’s house where both men were staying. They burst in, firing theirpistols in the air. The eyewitness said Rasool resisted and one of the men hithim on the temple with his pistol butt. Khan did not resist. The assailantstied the two men’s wrists and ankles and blindfolded them. Then theydragged them outside, put them into one of their three pickup trucks, and droveaway.[101]“Sheraz” (not his real name), ayoung man who was abducted on June 8, 2009, togetherwith Zakir Majeed Baloch and a third man, said the captors did not evenattempt to give their actions a veneer of legality. Sheraz told Human RightsWatch:Five or six men, all in plainclothes, came out of thepickups and pointed their guns at us. We thought straight away that they werefrom the [intelligence] agencies. When I saw they had guns I knew we had tolisten to them. As soon as we got out of our van they started beating us withtheir fists and gun butts. It felt like an eternity but they hit us forprobably no longer than five to ten minutes. Then they blindfolded us andchained our wrists behind our backs. They put Zakir in one of the cars and thetwo of us in the other one.Inside the car, as it was driving away, the men kepthitting us, asking where we were going, where we were coming from, and what wewere doing in the region. We told them we were students from Nushki. Some 40minutes later the car stopped, and they took the chains off our wrists andpushed us out, still blindfolded. After the car left, we managed to get a rideback to Mastung. But we still don’t know what happened to Zakir.[102]At least five victims in cases documentedby Human Rights Watch were forcibly disappeared after being in police custodyor court premises and, in one case, shortly after being released from custody. Ina highly publicized case of enforced disappearance and extrajudicial killing,three Baloch activists—Sher Mohammed Baloch, Ghulam MohammedBaloch, and Lala Munir—were in their lawyer’s office in a localcourthouse in Turbat on April 3, 2009 when a group of about five or six peoplein civilian clothes burst in and started smashing things. Sher managed to diala friend from his mobile phone, saying they were being taken away by the “agencies,”but did not manage to say anything else. Witnesses at the courthouse toldrelatives that because of numerous witnesses and the FC personnel who weresecuring the court grounds, they believe it was intelligence agents who handcuffedand hooded the three men and put them in their cars.[103]On April 9, 2009, three bodies were found in Pedarak town,near Turbat city. The families identified the victims as Sher Mohammed Baloch,Ghulam Mohammed Baloch, and Lala Munir. The relatives said that there weremultiple bullet holes on the bodies. The victims’ hands were tied andthey were still hooded. The relatives said they saw what they believed to besigns of torture on the bodies, including burn marks and bruises on chests andbacks.In another case, a senior member of the BRP central committee,Mir Abdul Waheed Resani Baloch, was forcibly disappeared after being detainedat the Mastung police station on January 2, 2010. On that day, a court inKhozdar released Baloch after his 10-month detention in Khozdar central jail.However, within minutes of his release, the police picked him again in thestreet, in front of multiple witnesses. The police took him to Mastung policestation. Because he was a prominent politician in the Baloch community, thepolice allowed him to hold a brief press conference. One of Baloch’srelatives told Human Rights Watch that a senior police officer interrupted thepress conference and said he would like to “talk to Baloch inprivate,” and took him to another room:We waited for about 10 minutes and then asked about him.The officer came back and said, “Sorry, we had to transfer him somewhereand we cannot tell you where, so you should all leave.” We waited forabout six hours, and then left.[104]Since then, the family has had no information aboutBaloch’s fate or whereabouts despite their efforts to locate him.Another characteristic feature of enforceddisappearances in Balochistan is that many of the victims, especially seniorpolitical activists, have been disappeared more than once—abducted, heldin unacknowledged detention for weeks or even months, released, and thenabducted again. In some cases documented here, the security forces also madeseveral unsuccessful attempts at abduction before finally apprehending anddisappearing the victim. For example, Bashir Azeem, the 76-year-oldsecretary-general of the BRP, has been subjected to an enforced disappearancethree times, in 2005, 2006, and 2009, in which the authorities provided noinformation on his whereabouts in custody.[105]The third arrest took place on February 6, 2009. On that day,Azeem was in a car on his way to a press club in Quetta when his vehicle wasblocked by three cars, and a group of fully armed men in civilian clothes tookboth Azeem and Qumbrani out of their car, blindfolded them, and put them into ajeep. Azeem was held in detention and severely tortured for the first week ofhis detention. The torture included beatings, whipping, being hung upside down,and the insertion of pins under his fingernails. Azeem was released afternearly two months, on March 31, 2009.Abdul Ghaffar Lango, a Baloch nationalistactivist, was first abducted in Mastung on June 27, 2007. He was held untilFebruary 13, 2008, after which he was released to police. He remained in policecustody until May 2009 when he was released. However, security forces abductedhim again on December 11, 2009. A police officer admitted that Lango had beendetained but the police refused to file a complaint or provide moreinformation. On July 1, 2011 Abdul Ghaffar Lango’s corpse was found in anabandoned hotel near Lakbado area of Gadani town in the Lasbela district ofBalochistan. The local police represented by the Station House Officer (SHO) ofGadani Police Station told the local media that “the body bore multiplemarks of brutal torture. Cause of death is stated to be a severe wound in thehead, caused by a hard rod or some other hard or sharp object.”[106]A leading member of the BSO-Azad, Naseem Baloch was firstforcibly disappeared in 2005 along with two other men. He was kept for three monthsby the authorities in unacknowledged detention in Karachi and Quetta. He wasthen released. No charges were brought against him. Yet on May 25, 2010,security forces abducted him again. He remains missing to date.[107]In another case, security forces made two attempts atabducting BRP central committee member Sangat-Sana Baloch before they finallycaptured and “disappeared” him in 2009. Two years before thedisappearance, security forces tried to abduct Sangat-Sana’s brotherObaid, having mistaken him for Sangat-Sana, on the national highway betweenQuetta and Mastung. But resistance from residents of a nearby village helped toprevent the abduction. In another incident, about a month-and-a-half before thedisappearance, Sangat-Sana Baloch noticed two cars following as he wasreturning from Mastung. Baloch managed to elude them by leaving his car andhiding in the nearby village.[108] On December 7, 2009,authorities finally apprehended him but have not acknowledged his whereaboutsor fate.Secret Detention FacilitiesThe Pakistani military and its intelligenceagencies have long maintained secret detention facilities across Pakistan.Because they exist outside Pakistani law they violate international lawprotections against arbitrary detention.[109]The ISI—which by all accounts runs the greatest number of secretprisons—and other state agencies are not deterred by anindividual’s high social standing or public profile from holding them insecret detention if they deem it in the interest of “nationalsecurity.” The relative anonymity of a victim only simplifies matters forthe responsible authorities. Detention in secret facilities has long been used toobtain confessions or information against political and ideological opponents.The scope and duration of such secret detentions appears to have undergone amarked increase since the al Qaeda attacks on the United States on September11, 2001. As documented by Human Rights Watch, US, and British complicity inthe abduction, enforced disappearance, and torture and ill-treatment of Talibanand al Qaeda suspects in secret detention centers in Pakistan has provided thePakistani military an opportunity to extend its illegal detentioninfrastructure without fear of censure and often with the covert support of itsWestern allies.[110]As the scope of counterterrorism operations has expanded toinclude Balochistan, the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, and the SwatValley, so have secret detention centers maintained in these regions and majorPakistani urban centers, the Swat Valley, and the tribal areas. Detainees aresubject to serious abuses including torture and upon release are warned that ifthey speak, a further abduction and abuse will follow.As detailed below, we found significantevidence that Pakistan’s intelligence agencies and the Frontier Corps runa number of secret detention facilities in Balochistan.Most former detainees we spoke with did notknow the exact location of the detention facilities where they were held: theywere blindfolded when brought in and when released and in some cases wereblindfolded for nearly the entire time they were detained. A few were told thename or location of the facility from other detainees, however, and some foundout from relatives who managed to locate them, usually through personalcontacts in the security forces.The most commonly mentioned facility wasthe Kuli camp within the large army cantonment (base) in Quetta, a detentionfacility run by the army.[111] Allegations of torture by secret intelligence agencies at Kuli camphave been made by the Baloch community for several decades.[112] Like the armycantonment generally, Kuli camp is off limits to civilian authorities and, asfar as Human Rights Watch is aware, no army personnel have ever beeninvestigated for alleged involvement in torture there.Twenty-two-year-old Asad (not his realname) was subjected to a three-month enforced disappearance in 2006 and thenreleased. He told Human Rights Watch that he spent six weeks in Kuli camp. Hesaid that for the first four days he was in solitary confinement and did notknow where he was. He then was transferred to another cell where hecould communicate with other detainees, who told him that they were detained inKuli camp. He was then transferred to another facility which he believed wasalso in Quetta, about a one hour’s drive from the Kuli camp. His captorslater handed him over to the police.[113]After the disappearance of Abdul Mujeeb onSeptember 1, 2009, five people released from the Kuli camp at different timestold his family that they had seen Mujeeb in detention there. All five toldthe family that they were kept in solitary confinement most of the time,although they occasionally shared a cell with others, including Mujeeb.Although the detainees were hooded, at night they would remove the hoods afterthe guards had left and were able to see Mujeeb.[114]Police initially refused to file a complaint and Mujeeb remains missing.In another case, five months after theabduction of Chakkar Khan Marri, 24, his family met with a youth who told themthat he had been in detention in Kuli camp and had spoken to Marri there.[115] The police tookthree months to register a claim, which mentioned “Pakistan’ssecurity agencies.” Marri remains unaccounted for.The family of Jallil Akham Riki, who had disappeared onFebruary 13, 2009, also found out from one of the released detainees that Rikihad been held in Kuli camp in Quetta for at least eight months. The detainee,who was released in November 2009, told the family that he and Riki had beencellmates since Riki’s arrest in February 2009.[116]As of the time of writing, Riki’s whereabouts remain unknown.The Kuli camp detention facility apparently has been used byintelligence agencies as a secret detention place for many years. In one of theearlier disappearance cases documented by Human Rights Watch, two detaineeswere held there in unacknowledged detention in late 2001. Ali Ashgar Bangulzai,then 38, was first detained on June 1, 2001. For two weeks his family had noinformation on his whereabouts. After his release, Bangulzai told his familythat he had been in detention in the Kuli camp in custody of MI. Four monthslater, intelligence agents again detained Bangulzai, this time together withhis friend, Mohammad Iqbal. Iqbal, who was released after 22 days in detention,told Bangulzai’s family that both men were held in the basement in theKuli camp. They were in separate cells, yet Iqbal could hear Bangulzai.Bangulzai’s whereabouts and fate remain unknown.[117]Another facility mentioned by former detainees was the FCcamp in Turbat city. Mohammad Iqbal and three of his friends detained by FCpersonnel in March 2007 were initially held in the FC camp in Turbat. They werethen transferred to a detention facility in the army cantonment in Quetta,possibly at the Kuli camp. Iqbal’s brother told Human Rights Watch thatwhen he went to the Frontier Corps’ Turbat camp on the day of the arrest,the camp commander told him that Iqbal and the other three men had been“detained for questioning and would be released in a matter of hours.”When Iqbal’s brother next inquired about his whereabouts on April 25,2007, another FC officer from the same camp at Turbat, Maj. Abdul Rehman, toldhim that all four men had been transferred to Quetta. Ahmed, Jasum Ali, andZahid Ali confirmed this information to the family. They said that togetherwith Iqbal they were first held in Turbat in an open-air FC prison and thentransferred to a jail in Quetta’s army cantonment.[118]Another former detainee, Bashir Azeem, who has been forciblydisappeared three times in the past six years, told Human Rights Watch thatduring his first arrest in 2005 the security forces held him for a week inunacknowledged detention in the cantonment area in Hanna Utak Valley in Quetta.In the second case, in 2006, he was held in what he believed to be an FCfacility as he could see many men in FC uniforms. When the security forcesarrested him in 2009, they held him in what he described as an“underground” cell located inside a big compound. He did not knowwhat the facility was but said there were many other detainees there, held insix separate cells. Azeem also said that from there his captors took him to adifferent location which he described as a “three-story building with atorture cellar.”[119]Fateof the “Disappeared”While enforced disappearances themselves constitute aserious and continuing violation of human rights, they also greatly increasethe risk of extrajudicial killings, torture, and ill-treatment of persons incustody. The practice of holding people incommunicado in unacknowledgeddetention in unofficial facilities, maintaining no public records of arrest anddetention, and refusing to grant relatives and lawyers access to detainees,creates ample opportunity for further abuses.Information on the fate of personssubjected to enforced disappearances in Pakistan is scarce. Those whom thesecurity forces eventually release are frequently reluctant to talk about theirexperiences for fear of being disappeared again or facing other repercussions.Torture and Ill-TreatmentTorture and ill-treatment are rampant in Pakistan, inviolation of the Pakistani Constitution and Pakistan’s obligations under internationallaw. Without exception in the cases investigated by Human Rights Watch,released detainees and relatives who were able to obtain information about thedisappeared person's treatment in custody reported that they were subjected totorture and ill-treatment by interrogators.The methods of torture included prolonged beatings, oftenwith sticks or leather belts, hanging the detainees upside down, and food andsleep deprivation.Asad, whom the intelligence agents brought to Kuli camp inDecember 2006, described being tortured during the first days of his detention.He told Human Rights Watch:I was naked, chained by the ankles to the ceiling, my handstied behind my back. I still had a hood on my head and couldn’t seeanyone, but soon five or six men (judging by the voices) came in, and startedbeating me with sticks—all over my body. They spoke Urdu with a Punjabiaccent and kept asking the same questions about why I wanted independence andwhether I knew some Baloch leaders. They accused me of killing soldiers andagencies’ people. It lasted for about three hours, with constantbeatings. I fainted twice. When they finally released the chains, I crashed onthe ground, blood streaming all over my body.[120]Bashir Azeem (see above on page 35) said that intelligenceagents subjected him to severe torture, particularly during his lastunacknowledged detention in 2009. He said that an intelligence officerinterrogated him in a room. Three times during these interrogations he was sentto a cellar where other officers beat him with a leather strap, saying thiswould continue until he started cooperating. Then, he was transferred toanother facility:There was no floor in the cell, just the dirt ground, and aplastic bottle for urinating. They soon brought me for another interrogation.They hung me upside down by the feet, and kept asking who was financing us, andwhere the militants were. The following days they continued torturing me invarious ways. They pushed pins under my nails, put a chair on my back and saton top of it, and put me for 48 hours into a room where I could only stand butnot move. When they took me out, my legs were so swollen that I collapsed onthe floor and fainted. They had to take me to a hospital, but three days laterthey returned me to my cell.[121]Rahim, who was detained together with Naseem Baloch andIlyas Kareem, both of whom subsequently were forcibly disappeared, said thatduring his two days in detention interrogators subjected him to constantbeatings during questioning. He told Human Rights Watch:First, they bound my arms behind my back, and then theythrew me on the ground face down and someone sat on my back. Whenever theyasked me a question, the interrogators pulled my head back by grabbing my hairand kept asking, “Who are you? Why have you come here to Quetta?”They beat me all over my body with their fists and feet and on the soles of myfeet. They hit me for around one to two hours continuous in the morning, thenagain in the evening. At night they would not let me sleep or lie down, I wasforced to stand. If I started to fall asleep they would hit me on the back andshoulders to keep me awake.[122]A number of families interviewed by Human Rights Watch alsoreceived information about mistreatment of their disappeared relatives from thereleased detainees. For example, Bohir Khan, 26, was taken into custody onMarch 31, 2010. A member of his family spoke to a detainee released from asecret detention facility in Quetta who said that he had seen Khan there inJune 2010. The released man said he regularly communicated with Khan,particularly at night when the guards would leave, because their cells wereclose to each other. He said Khan was subjected to food and sleep deprivationand was frequently beaten. The former prisoner said he could often hear himscreaming. At the time of the former detainee’s release, Khan was still imprisoned.[123]A relative of Jallil Akham Riki, who was reportedly held inKuli camp in 2009 , told Human Rights Watch that a former detainee who was indetention with Riki could hear Riki being tortured and said he had serious healthproblems. He said Riki was so weak that he had to help him wash his clothes andlook after himself.[124]Rahim said that although he did not see in detention the twomen who were abducted together with him, Naseem Baloch and Ilyas Kareem, hecould sporadically hear whom he believed was Baloch screaming “day andnight” from an adjoining “torture cell.”[125]Other families found out about the torture their disappearedrelatives had been subjected to after the victims reappeared in policedetention or in court.Abdul Qayuum Baloch was disappeared for four months in 2001and then transferred to Karachi central jail. His mother said that when she mether son in jail, his entire body was swollen from beatings. He showed herbruises on his arms and legs and said that he had blood in his urine as aresult of beatings. He said that before being brought to jail, he and anotherdetainee, Abdul Waheed, had been held in an unknown location for severalmonths, and that was where the beatings took place.[126]Waheed’s whereabouts remain unknown.ExtrajudicialExecutionsMany families fear that their forcibly disappeared relativeshave been killed in custody. There is strong evidence to substantiate thesefears, as increasing numbers of bodies bearing evidence of torture and extrajudicialkilling are being discovered.The most highly publicized case of“disappearance” and extrajudicial execution involved threepolitical activists: Ghulam Mohammad Baloch, president of the Baloch NationalMovement (BNM); Lala Munir, also of the BNM; and Sher Mohammad Baloch of the BalochistanRepublican Party (BRP). On April 3, 2009, men alleged to be intelligence agentsabducted the three men from their lawyer’s office in a courthouse in Turbatwhere they were discussing the cases pending against them.For six days following the abduction, their families madeinquiries with the police but the police did not provide any information ontheir fate and whereabouts. On April 9, police told the families that they hadreceived a phone call, in which the caller said that he had found three bodiesin a mountainous area of Pedarak, near Turbat. The families later identifiedthe victims as their disappeared relatives. The families said that there weremultiple bullet wounds on the bodies and that the police forensics team foundmany spent cartridges at the scene, which they handed over to theirinvestigating counterparts. When found at the site, the victims’ handswere tied and they were still hooded. The relatives said they saw what theybelieved to be signs of torture on the bodies, such as burn marks and bruiseson the chests and backs. At the time of the interview in April 2010, thefamilies said that they were not aware of any results of the investigation intothe disappearance and killings.[127]On November 18, 2010, the mutilated body of journalist AbdulHameed Hayatan, known as Lala Hameed, and another body, identified as HamidIsmail, were found in Turbat. Lala Hameed had been reportedly abducted from thesouthwestern port city of Gawadar on October 25.[128]On November 20, 2010, the Daily Times newspaper reported the discoveryof four additional bodies: Bashir Ahmed Lehri and Inayathullah who had been missingfor more than two months, and Nasurrallah Baloch. The fourth body belonged toBSO-Azad activist Samiullah Mengal (not to be confused with Samiullah Mengalwhose “disappearance” on November 16, 2009 was investigated byHuman Rights Watch).[129]Of the 45 cases documented in this report, one of thevictims has later been found dead.Since mid-2010, more than 70 bodies of people who arealleged to have been forcibly disappeared were discovered in Balochistan,according to reports by media and human rights organizations. These include:On July 26, 2010, the bullet-riddled bodies of twocousins, student Ashfaq Ahmed Mullahzai and Muhmmad Farooq Mengal, wererecovered in Quetta, in the Kili Qambrani area. Their relatives claim theyhad been abducted in May 2010.[130]On September 5, 2010, the mutilated and bullet-riddledbody of lawyer Zaman Marri's was found in Mastung city. Marri wasreportedly abducted on August 19, 2010 near his law office on Jinnah Roadin Quetta.[131]On September 11, 2010, the mutilated body of Marri’s cousin, AliAhmed Marri, known as Alliya Marri, was found in the same area. AlliyaMarri was reportedly detained by plainclothes agents on April 7, 2010,along with three friends, Kamal Khan Marri, Lala Marri, and Lal MohammdMarri. His cousin, Zaman Marri, was working as a lawyer on hisdisappearance case.[132]The body of lawyer Ali Sher Kurd, who was abducted fromhis relatives’ house in Quetta on September 20, 2010, was foundthree days later in Khuzdar district. According to media reports, the bodyhad marks of torture, and his neck was broken.[133]The bullet-riddled body of 14-year-old BSO-Azad activistMohammad Khan Zohaib was also found in Khuzdar, on October 20, 2010.According to Baloch human rights activists, Zohaib’s relatives saidthat FC soldiers had abducted him in July 2010.[134]On October 21, 2010, the bodiesof Faqir Mohammad Baloch and Zahoor Baloch were discovered in Mastungdistrict. Faqir Mohammad Baloch, a poet and member of the Voice of BalochMissing Persons, was reportedly abducted on September 23, 2010. ZahoorBaloch, a member of the BSO-Azad, was abducted on August 23, 2010. Mediareports claimed that both bodies had a single bullet wound to the head,apparently shot at close range, and showed signs of torture.[135]On October 24, 2010, the body of 14-year-old Haji MohammadRamzan Zehri was found in the Koshak River in Khuzdar district. The bodyhad bullet wounds in the head and chest. Zehri, who was a BSO-Azadactivist, had been abducted on October 18, 2010, by alleged FC personnel.[136]On December 19, 2010, Pakistani media reported on therecovery of five other bodies in Balochistan. Two bodies bearing the marksof torture and extrajudicial execution were found in Turbat. They wereidentified as Yousuf Raza from Tump and Razzaq Baloch from Mand. Accordingto a news reports, both men had been abducted by unknown perpetratorsseveral days earlier. The third body, of Abdul Rahim Bangulzai, wasrecovered in Mastung. The news report said the family blamed“government agents” for Bangulzai’s abduction andexecution. The remaining two bodies, recovered in Khuzdar, were of IbrahimMuhammad Hassani and Noor Ahmed Zehri; the report did not say whether thetwo had been previously reported abducted.[137]On February 10, 2011, the bullet-ridden bodies of AbdulQayum of the BSO-Azad and Jameel Yaqub of the BNP were found in the Hernokarea, 40 kilometers from the town of Turbat. Qayum’s family told theDaily Times that he had been taken from his home on December 11, 2010, byFC personnel. The family reported the abduction to the police.[138] TheSwedish-based International Voice for Baloch Missing Persons reportedYaqub’s abduction from his residence on August 29, 2010, to the UNWorking Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances.[139]On February 15, 2011, the Daily Times reported thediscovery of another two bodies. One, found in Khuzdar, was identified asSaeed Ahmed, a BNP activist who had reportedly been abducted three monthsearlier from Pangur district. The second, Harzi Khan, was found next to ahighway near the city of Uthal in the south of Balochistan. Harzi Khan andhis brother, Sohbat Khan Marri, were reportedly abducted in September 2010from Hub. Marri’s body was found in Hub on December 26, 2010.[140]In the month between December 26, 2010 and January 25, 2011,reports suggest that at least 22 bodies of previously abducted ethnic Balochwere discovered in various parts of Balochistan.[141]Human Rights Watch is not aware of any progress made by theauthorities in the investigation of any of the killings mentioned above.Armed militants have also been implicated in some of therecently reported extrajudicial killings. Human Rights Watch has previouslydocumented the targeted killing of at least 22 teachers and other educationpersonnel by Baloch nationalist armed groups and other militants betweenJanuary 2008 and October 2010.[142]Responsibility for other killings is unclear. Newslinemagazine reported that an organization called Sipah-i-Shuda-i-Balochistan (SSB)claimed responsibility for 13 killings discovered in July-August 2010. Themagazine reported that SSB was formed by “associates of the victims oftargeted killings in Balochistan” and, according to its spokesperson, wastargeting the Baloch nationalist activists.[143] Human Rights Watch wasunable to confirm the existence of this group or its alleged involvement inthese killings.Prosecutions of the “Disappeared”In seven of the cases documented by HumanRights Watch, Pakistani authorities eventually brought criminal charges againstthe forcibly disappeared persons but without addressing the circumstances inthey were arbitrarily arrested and detained. In some cases, the detainees weretransferred to police custody after being charged and then brought to trial. Inother cases, families found out about the charges from the media, yet werestill unable to locate their missing relatives or meet with them. Human RightsWatch is concerned that in at least some of these cases, criminal charges werebrought only to legitimize otherwise unlawful detentions. The cases aresummarized below.Intelligence agencies held Asad (not hisreal name) in unacknowledged detention for three months in 2006 before bringinghim before a magistrate and then the Anti-Terrorism court in Turbat.Two brothers, Aziz Khan Bugti, 30, and Megla Khan Bugti, 35,went missing in April 2005 as they travelled from Hyderabad in Sindh provinceto Karachi. The family had no information about their fate for the next fivemonths until in September 2005 the authorities announced their arrest. Theywere charged with a bombing and other acts of terrorism. In 2008 theanti-terrorism court sentenced them to death. At the time of Human RightsWatch’s interview with the family, the men’s appeal was stillpending before the Supreme Court.Abdul Qayyum Baloch and Abdul Waheed from Quettahad been abducted in Karachi in January 2001. For four months their familieshad no information of their fate or whereabouts. Baloch’s mother thenreceived information that her son was in Karachi central jail, where shefinally managed to meet with him. Both men were tried and sentenced to death in2001, but their appeal is still pending in the Supreme Court.[144]Haji Murrad Khan Marri, a 65-year-old farmer, was abductedin the town of Hub by armed men in plain clothes in front of several witnessesin June 2008. His family’s efforts to locate him proved futile. Yet halfa year after the abduction, Balochistan Home and Tribal Affairs Minister ZafarZehri announced a Rs 3,000,000 (approximately US $3,400) reward for the captureof Marri and others whom Zehri claimed were wanted Baloch“separatists.” In June 2009 his family was informed that criminalcharges had been filed against him. On March 27, 2010, a member of the FrontierCorps contacted Marri’s family and said that he was in their custody. TheFC official said Marri had been charged with murder and possession of Indiancurrency and explosives. FC Col. Asad Shahzad Kattak held a press conferencethe same day saying Marri had been arrested in Chaman, close to the Balochistanborder with Afghanistan, while crossing into Pakistan from Afghanistan.According to Colonel Khattak, Marri had been placed in police custody in Saddarpolice station in Chaman. However, neither Marri’s lawyer nor his familyhave been allowed to see him. The case against Marri is pending before theBalochistan High Court. His disappearance case has been added to a combinedpetition originally filed by the Human Rights Commission ofPakistan with the Supreme Court of Pakistan in January 2010.[145]Several months after the disappearance of Din MohammadBaloch (see above on page 33), local newspapers reported that the FrontierCorps had arrested him and two others in connection with an armed attack on FCtroops on August 14, 2009, nearly two months after he had been abducted.Baloch’s brother spoke to the author of the article, who told him thatthe information came from the Special Branch of the police, which is theintelligence arm of the Balochistan Police Service. However, governmentauthorities have not officially confirmed that Baloch is or was in FC custodyor specified the charges against him.[146]In the case Najubullah Qambrani, the authorities appeared togo to great lengths to avoid responsibility for wrongdoing.Three months after the enforced disappearance of NajeebullahQambrani, the Balochistan authorities ministry of Home and Tribal Affairs announceda Rs 500,000 (approximately US $5,800) reward for information leading to hisarrest, claiming he was a wanted terrorist. Following the announcement, the BalochistanHigh Court ordered the Balochistan Home Ministry to submit a First Information Report(FIR), a police report, which detailed the allegations against him. However, atsuccessive hearings the ministry failed to provide an FIR. Finally, on April 3,2010, the home secretary removed the reward for Qambrani’s capture andissued a statement that the earlier claim that he was a terrorist had been aclerical error. To date, Qambrani’s whereabouts remain unknown.[147]Abuses againstRelatives, Witnesses, and Released DetaineesThe climate of fear instilled by the practice of enforceddisappearances in Balochistan is especially felt by the families of thevictims. Most families interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that followingthe disappearances they made inquiries with the police and in courts, yet didnot dare to approach the intelligence agencies or the Frontier Corps directly.In a few cases, the victims’ families were so fearful of retaliation thatthey did not dare to register the disappearances of their relatives even withthe police. For example, the family of Tawakal Khan, who disappeared in March2007, did not attempt to report his abduction to the police because theyworried they “could also be disappeared’’ if they made suchinquiries.[148]Nonetheless, many family members of victims of enforceddisappearances have courageously sought to locate their relatives and raisetheir cases in public. They told Human Rights Watch of their fears of beingpersecuted by the authorities for speaking out, particularly about the role ofthe intelligence agencies.In the case of Zakir Majeed Baloch, the victim’sfamily believed that he was forcibly disappeared specifically because hispolitical activism focused on protesting against disappearances in theprovince. The recent extrajudicial executions of members of the Baloch Voicefor Missing Persons and lawyers representing the families of the“disappeared” highlight the dangers faced by activists who raisethe issue.A number of released detainees, witnesses to abductions andarrests that resulted in disappearances, and family members of victims saidthey had been threatened by the authorities. “Asad” told HumanRights Watch that following his release on bail by the anti-terrorism court,intelligence agents came looking for him in his home town of Tump. He said theyalso called his phone, saying they “would catch me again and this timewould kill me.”[149]Bashir Azeem told Human Rights Watch that following hisrelease from detention he continued to receive threatening phone calls on hismobile phone. He said intelligence agents had been openly following him.[150]After the abduction of Mir Sohrab Marri and Shah MohammadZarkoon in November 2009, Marri’s family tried everything to locate thetwo men, including by submitting inquiries to the chief minister of Balochistanand the secretary of home and tribal affairs. On June 2, 2010, after Marri’sbrother gave evidence before the Commission of Inquiry for Missing Persons, hereceived an anonymous phone call in which the caller asked him why he hadtestified. “If you are so keen to meet your brother, we can help you meethim,” the caller said. Marri’s brother believed that this was awarning that he could also be forcibly disappeared unless he dropped efforts tolocate his brother. [151]Relatives of Zakir Majeed Baloch, who was abducted in June2009, received threats after they went on a public hunger strike in June 2010 outsidethe Quetta Press Club to demand information about Baloch’s whereabouts. Becauseof threats, the family soon ended their hunger strike. “We would get[anonymous] phone calls from unknown numbers with people telling us in Urdu tostop our hunger strike or they would take us away,” said one ofBaloch’s relatives.[152]In another case, almost a year after the abduction of AbdulGhani, 18, in January 2009, his family managed to register his case with thelocal police. In February 2010 a lawyer acting on behalf of Ghani’sfamily filed a petition with the Balochistan High Court. Ghani’s relativesand friends told Human Rights Watch that after the lawyer filed the petition, FCpersonnel threatened three people who witnessed Ghani’s abduction toprevent them from testifying in court. “They said, ‘We willdisappear you if you go to court,’” one of the witnesses told HumanRights Watch. Despite the threat, all three gave evidence in court in April2010.[153]V. Pakistan’s Response to EnforcedDisappearances in BalochistanThe fate of Pakistan’s“disappeared,” including those from Balochistan, has became closelyintertwined with broader political developments in the country over the lastfive years. For a short time in 2007, hopes were raised that Pakistan’sSupreme Court and higher courts would secure an accounting of the forciblydisappeared, bring redress to victims, and hold perpetrators accountable. A2007 hearing on 198 cases of enforced disappearances submitted to the SupremeCourt by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan led to the release ofinformation on the whereabouts of 99 individuals. It also shined a spotlight onthe role of the army and intelligence agencies in the disappearances. In partto forestall judicial activity on such cases, then President Pervez Musharrafdismissed the chief justice and other judges.[154] No progress on the problem of disappearances was made until a new,elected government took office in 2008 and the judiciary was subsequentlyreinstalled.Duty to Investigate and the Rightto RedressDuty to Investigate EnforcedDisappearancesUnder international law, the Pakistanigovernment has a duty to investigate serious violations of human rights and topunish the perpetrators.[155] Many human rights violations that enforced disappearance entail areserious and demand investigation and prosecution.[156]The Declaration against EnforcedDisappearances provides that those having knowledge of an enforceddisappearance have the right “to complain to a competent and independentState authority and to have that complaint promptly, thoroughly and impartiallyinvestigated by that authority.” Even in the absence of a formalcomplaint, the state should promptly investigate whenever there are reasonablegrounds to believe that an enforced disappearance has been committed. Thosefound responsible for committing an enforced disappearance should be fairlyprosecuted.[157]In cases where “complaints by relatives or otherreliable reports” suggest that a disappearance has resulted in theunnatural death of an individual in custody, Pakistani authorities shouldlaunch a thorough, prompt, and impartial investigation to “determine thecause, manner and time of death, the person responsible, and any pattern or practicewhich may have brought about that death.” The investigation should resultin a publicly available written report.[158]Redress for VictimsInternational human rights law obliges states to providereparations to victims of serious human rights violations.[159]For instance, the ICCPR requires states to provide an “effectiveremedy” for violations of rights and freedoms and to enforce suchremedies.[160]The Declaration and the Convention against EnforcedDisappearances specifically reaffirm the right of victims—which includesthe family members of those “disappeared”—to obtainreparation and compensation in the form of material and moral damages as wellas restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction, including restoration of dignityand reputation, and guarantees of non-repetition.[161]The Convention against Enforced Disappearance alsoestablishes the responsibility of the state to “take all appropriatemeasures to search for, locate and release disappeared persons and, in theevent of death, to locate, respect and return their remains.” It recognizesthe right of victims “to know the truth” regarding thecircumstances of the enforced disappearance, the progress and results of theinvestigation, and the fate of the disappeared person.[162]The right to reparation as a way of establishing truth andresponsibility is of particular importance in cases of enforced disappearances,which are “continuing human rights violations committed with the veryintention of evading responsibility, truth and legal remedies.”[163]Response of National AuthoritiesThe Zardari government upon taking officein 2008 made various promises on Baloch issues, including a pledge to addressthe problem of enforced disappearances. To date, however, this pledge remainsunfulfilled. Few of the disappeared have been traced and perpetrators continueto enjoy complete impunity.The problem of disappearances inBalochistan and the rest of the country will only be resolved when thePakistani government at the highest level demonstrates the political will toimplement serious measures against undoubted opposition from the army and othersecurity forces. Unlike Musharraf’s government, which blatantly deniedany responsibility or knowledge of the enforced disappearances, the Zadarigovernment has acknowledged the problem and made certain commitments to addressit. Officials of the interior and law ministries claimed in April 2008 thatinformation on disappearance cases was being collected and action would betaken to address the problem. The Interior Ministry set up a committee to investigatethe fate of the disappeared in May 2008, though with somewhat unclear terms ofreference.[164] However, primaryresponsibility for investigating missing persons was effectively handed over tothe Committee to Investigate Missing Persons (CIMP) established by the SupremeCourt in May 2010.In November 2009, Interior Minister Rehman Malik said at apress conference that 1,100 missing persons had been registered in Balochistanand asserted that the “Federal government and provincial governments areengaged in recovery and identification of those people.”[165]A month later, the Aghaz-e-Haqooq-e-Balochistan(“Beginning of Rights in Balochistan”) package of constitutional,political, administrative, and economic reforms in the province specifically calledfor an investigation into the cases of missing persons, and the release ofunlawfully detained individuals.[166] Balochistan provincialauthorities, including Chief Minister of Balochistan Nawab Aslam Raisani and provincialHome Secretary Akbar Durrani, repeatedly stated that tracing of disappearedindividuals would be a priority for the Balochistan government.However, these statements have not translated into aconcerted effort to curb abuses and bring the security forces under control.Despite very slow progress on the recovery of missing persons, neither theprovincial nor the federal government has come up with concrete proposals toaddress the problem.The government also failed to send a strong message to thesecurity forces and the intelligence agencies that the abuses would not betolerated. Even in cases where the CIMP has managed to establish thewhereabouts of disappeared persons, there has been no action by the governmentto bring the perpetrators to justice. Human Rights Watch is not aware of asingle case where the security forces or intelligence agencies have facedprosecution or even an inquiry for abductions, illegal arrests, or unlawfulconfinement in Balochistan.On the contrary, addressing the situation in Balochistan in August2010, Interior Minister Malik reiterated his support for the security agencies,saying that “secret agencies were working for Pakistan's interests andanybody who harms or attempted to harm these agencies would be dealt with ironhands.” He also added that “several among these missing persons hadbeen kidnapped by secret agencies because of suspected links withmilitants.” This was a startling admission from a senior governmentofficial and suggested complicity by civilian officials in enforced disappearances.On another occasion, Malik also dismissed the reports of“thousands” of disappearances, claiming that most of the missing“have gone to foreign countries such as Dubai.” In November 2010,Balochistan Chief Minister Sardar Aslam Raisani casually admitted theinvolvement of the security forces in abductions and extrajudicial killings,yet did not offer any comment regarding his government’s plans to addressthe issue.[167]Responseof Provincial AuthoritiesInformation shared with Human Rights Watch by the familiesof disappearance victims shows the inability or unwillingness of provincialauthorities to address the problem. In seven cases documented in this report,relatives managed to raise disappearance cases with high-level provincialauthorities, yet none of those personal appeals led to establishment of thevictim’s whereabouts or prosecution of the perpetrators, though in somecases authorities confirmed to the families that the victims had been taken bythe intelligence agencies.On February 22, 2010, relatives of disappearance victimsMazhar Khan and Abdul Rasool met representatives of the Balochistan Home andTribal Affairs Ministry who said they would record Khan’s disappearance (Rasoolhad already been released at the time of the meeting and so was no longermissing). At the same time, they said they could do nothing to investigate thearbitrary arrest and detention of either Khan or Rasool.[168]In another illustrative case, immediately after the abductionof Mir Sohrab Marri and Shah Mohammad Zarkoon on November 8, 2009,Marri’s father met with Balochistan Chief Minister Raisani and handed hima letter detailing the incident. According to Marri’s father, Raisanisaid he would look into the matter. Marri’s family also submitted aletter regarding his disappearance to Secretary of Home and Tribal AffairsAkbar Hussain Durrani. According to one of Marri’s relatives, Durranihand wrote a note on the letter requesting police to investigate Marri’s disappearance.Yet to date, there have been no developments in the case and the whereabouts ofthe two men remain unknown.[169]The family of Din Mohammad Baloch also met the ChiefMinister Raisani twice following Baloch’s abduction. The meetings tookplace in July and in August 2009. According to the family, on the latteroccasion Raisani told them that Baloch was in the custody of the intelligenceagencies, but did not specify which one. To date Baloch’s fate andwhereabouts remain unknown to the family and Chief Minister Raisani has failedto respond to queries by Human Rights Watch on the matter.[170]Failure of Police to Investigate“Disappearances”Under Pakistani law, upon receiving areport of a crime the police are required to immediately register aFirst Information Report (FIR) detailing the nature of the crime.[171]The police then have broad discretionwhether to investigate the alleged offense.[172]Beyond Pakistani law, international human rights law places a burden on theauthorities to investigate gross violations of human rights.[173]In the many cases covered in this report inwhich the victims’ relatives went to the local police, the police eitherrefused to register an FIR or did so only after receiving an order from theSupreme Court of Pakistan, sometimes months or years after the initial reportof the abduction. In a number of cases, even after police agreed to register anFIR, the report did not mention the alleged perpetrators, including in cases wherethe witnesses identified the responsible agencies and provided police with evidenceof their involvement. Instead, the reports typically list a victim as a“missing person” and attribute the abduction to “unknownperpetrators.”In our research, we did not learn of any cases in which thepolice took even the most basic investigative steps to locate allegedlydisappeared individuals or establish the identity of the perpetrators.For example, following the abduction of Sangat-Sana Baloch,his family unsuccessfully tried to register the case at the Kalpur policestation. One of his relatives told Human Rights Watch:We spoke to the deputy superintendent [of the police], andhe said the security agencies took Sangat. But they refused to take the FIR,saying there was nothing they could do. They also said it was not the firsttime people got abducted in that place, on that road, and that families werecoming to the police to complain but police couldn’t do anything aboutit.[174]In the case of the “disappearance” of ChakkarKhan Marri and “Salman S.,” Marri’s brother first submittedan application for an FIR with the police at Balochistan University in Quettaon February 22, 2010. The police rejected the application because, according toMarri’s brother, it charged senior officials of the Frontier Corps, MI, andISI, and the vice chancellor of Balochistan University (whom the familybelieved had informed the Frontier Corps about the student gathering from whichthe victims were abducted) with responsibility for the “disappearances.”According to Marri’s brother, police said they would accept theapplication for an FIR only if the applicants removed all references to thehigh-level authorities. The applicants refused and tried eight more times tolodge the original FIR application, but each time the police rejected it.[175]In another case, two days after the abduction of NajeebullahQambrani’s in October 2009, his family applied for an FIR at Sarai policestation in Quetta, claiming Qambrani had been abducted by the Frontier Corpsand “agencies.” But Qambrani’s brother said that the policerefused to lodge the FIR because, according to the police, “they couldnot register an FIR against security forces.” Following an order from theSupreme Court, the police in Quetta finally registered an FIR regardingQambrani’s disappearance on January 5, 2010.[176]Similarly, in the case of the disappearance of Zakir MajeedBaloch, the police initially refused to lodge an FIR into the case, explainingto the family that they “could not register disappearances alleging theinvolvement of Pakistan’s intelligence agencies.”[177]In many cases documented by Human RightsWatch, the police also explicitly told the families that they had no powers toinvestigate disappearances allegedly committed by the intelligence agencies orFC personnel. For example, after the abduction of Noor Khan on December 8,2008, his family immediately tried to register the case with the police.According to the family, the police refused. One of Khan’srelatives told Human Rights Watch that an officer at the police station toldthem, “We don’t have authority over this, nor can we do anythingabout it. You know what happens here in Balochistan.” On the orders ofthe Supreme Court, the police finally lodged an FIR into the case in February 2010,more than two years after Khan’s abduction.[178]The family of Abdul Nasir reported his alleged arbitraryarrest to the Quetta City police station on April 9, 2009.The police did notlodge an FIR but instead sent a letter to the Secretary of Home and TribalAffairs for Balochistan, saying they could not investigate or arrest members ofthe Army, the Frontier Corps, or “secret agencies” as per section549 of the Criminal Procedure Code, which requires the police to deliver tomilitary authorities any person liable to be tried by military authorities. Thepolice gave the family a copy of the letter. The police eventually lodged anFIR on October 14, 2009, but it did not mention the army, the Frontier Corps,intelligence agencies, or any other government authority. It merely said thatNasir had gone missing.The police position in this case is not backed by Pakistanilaw. While section 549 of the Criminal Procedure Code requires the police toassist military authorities in relevant cases, it does not prevent the policefrom investigating illegal detentions by the military.[179]On February 21, 2010, after a lawyer acting on behalf of Nasir’s familyfiled a missing person petition with the Balochistan High Court, the policeissued another statement, submitted to the court by lawyers on behalf ofNasir’s family, stating that the police were not allowed to enter theArmy cantonment in Quetta to investigate whether Nasir was detained there,though there is no legal prohibition on this.[180]Weak Judicial Responseto “Disappearances”Pakistani law recognizes theinternationally protected right to habeas corpus, which is the right to bebrought before a court and challenge the legality of one’s detention.[181]This is a crucial procedural guarantee against enforced disappearances andunacknowledged detention.In cases of alleged abductions or unlawful detention by thesecurity forces, a provincial high court has the power to compel the detainingauthority to produce the detainee before the court in order to verify thelegality of arrest, no matter who detained the person.[182]In practice, in Balochistan, as well as in Pakistan morebroadly, the right to habeas corpus has been largely undermined both by theunwillingness of the courts to meaningfully uphold it and by the defiance ofthe security agencies. The weakness of the courts’ response to enforceddisappearance cases has been repeatedly criticized by national andinternational human rights organizations.[183]For years, Pakistan’s intelligence agencies and thegovernment bodies that are empowered to exercise institutional control overthem have openly defied and misled the courts in habeas corpus hearings. In2006, the Defense Ministry stated that it had only administrative, but notoperational, control over the intelligence agencies, and thus could not enforcetheir compliance with court orders. Yet at Supreme Court hearings in 2007,Defense Ministry representatives first stated that the ISI and MI wereanswerable to the Interior and Defense Ministries, “apart from theoperational command channel,” and later reiterated that they were underthe administrative control of the Defense Ministry.[184]Efforts to get the government and Supreme Court to clarify under what authorityand what legislation the intelligence agencies take custody of people have sofar proved futile.[185]At the same time, the courts have largely indulged thedefiance of the intelligence agencies by failing to use more compelling methodsto ensure compliance with court orders, such as requiring sworn affidavits fromthe agencies and holding agency personnel who refuse to obey habeas corpuswrits in contempt of court. On other subjects, the Supreme Court has nothesitated to use its contempt powers.[186]This pattern of denials and deflection of responsibilitycontinues unabated. In 30 disappearance cases documented by Human Rights Watch,the families of the victims or lawyers acting on their behalf have filedpetitions with the Balochistan High Court or other provincial courts. Yet innone of the cases did this help to establish the whereabouts of the victims,let alone bring the perpetrators to justice.In some cases, despite allegations made by thevictims’ relatives and witness statements suggesting the involvement ofthe intelligence agencies or the Frontier Corps in enforced disappearances, theBalochistan High Court did not summon their representatives or requestinformation from them. This was true even in cases where the families hadpreviously received confirmations from the police, the Frontier Corps, or othergovernment agencies that the detainees were in the custody of the intelligenceagencies. For example, in June 2010 Balochistan Chief Minister Raisanireportedly informed the families of Naseem Baloch and Ilyas Karim that the twomen were in the custody of the MI. Yet at several hearings the Balochistan HighCourt failed to summon the MI representatives or to request any informationfrom them or the chief minister.[187]In cases where the court did request information from theagencies mentioned in the petition as alleged perpetrators, as far as we coulddetermine, representatives of the intelligence agencies and the Frontier Corpseither did not respond at all or denied having the detainee in their custody.We are not aware of any further action by the court to verify these claims. Forexample, at the Balochistan High Court hearing on the case of Mohammad Tariq,the driver of the truck from which Tariq had been abducted provided the courtwith a sworn affidavit describing the involvement of FC personnel. When legalrepresentatives of the Frontier Corps, who appeared at one of the hearings,simply denied that Tariq was in FC custody, the court took no further action.[188]The Balochistan High Court hearing in the case of AbdulGhani has been going on for two years at this writing. FC lawyers haveoccasionally appeared in court denying that Ghani is in FC custody and FCpersonnel reportedly threatened three witnesses not to testify While all threewitnesses gave evidence despite the threats, the case remains pending beforethe court and we are aware of no court action to pursue the claims of FCinvolvement.[189]In the case of Najeebullah Qambrani, a lawyer representingthe victim’s family filed a habeas corpus petition in the BalochistanHigh Court seeking a response from a wide range of federal and local officialsto explain the reasons for Qambrani’s detention or to release him. Butwith the exception of the local police, none of the authorities mentioned inthe petition ever appeared before the court and at every hearing the policeclaimed that Qambrani was not in their custody. While the court informed thepetitioners’ lawyer that “intelligence agencies” and theFrontier Corps had told the court that they had no had information regardingQambrani’s abduction or whereabouts, the court refused to disclose anydetails of submissions made to it by those bodies. After Balochistanauthorities in January 2010 announced a reward for information leading toQambrani’s arrest, claiming he was a wanted terrorist, the BalochistanHigh Court did take a positive step, ordering the Balochistan Home Ministry tosubmit an FIR detailing the charges against Qambrani. But when the ministryeventually issued a statement that the earlier claim that Qambrani was aterrorist had been a clerical error, there is no evidence the court tookfurther action to locate him.[190]In nine other cases documented by Human Rights Watch, onlythe police appeared at court hearings. No representatives of the intelligenceagencies or the Frontier Corps appeared. Where sufficient prima facie evidencewas presented, the courts should have compelled participation by thesought-after agencies or initiate contempt proceedings.In many of the cases documented in this report, habeascorpus proceedings before the Balochistan High Court have lasted for months oreven years, despite the obvious urgency of the issue. For example, suchproceedings in the case of Ilyas Karim and Naseer Baloch have been ongoingsince May 29, 2010. The court has held several hearings since then, but so farhas not summoned representatives of the Frontier Corps or the intelligenceagencies.Supreme Court ofPakistanPakistan’s Constitution provides theSupreme Court significant powers to act beyond its appellate jurisdiction.These include having original jurisdiction (suo moto action) to passenforceable orders on “a question of public importance with reference tothe enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights” in the constitution.[191]After President Musharraf dismissed the chiefjustice in 2007, little Supreme Court activity took place until the judiciarywas restored. Hearings on enforced disappearance cases resumed in 2009. On May4, 2010, the Supreme Court formed the Commission of Inquiry for MissingPersons as described above.[192]Since 2009, the Supreme Court has reviewedabout 600 alleged disappearance cases from across Pakistan, including dozens ofcases from Balochistan: Yet in only a fraction of these have the whereabouts ofthe victims been determined.The Supreme Court has been instrumental inordering the police and the provincial courts to launch investigations intodisappearance cases. In several cases documented in this report, the police orBalochistan High Court agreed to take the families’ complaints only afteran order was issued by the Supreme Court. However, even in cases wherethe Supreme Court has held a hearing on a Baloch disappearance case andcompelled the production of some information from the intelligence agencies, ithas neither led to further information on their whereabouts or prosecution ofthose responsible for their alleged disappearance or abduction.For instance, after the Balochistan High Court dismissed apetition on behalf of disappearance victim Din Mohammad Baloch, thenongovernmental organization Voice for Baloch Missing Persons filed a separate petitionon Baloch’s case in the Supreme Court. In June 2010, the court toldBaloch’s lawyers that the ISI had reported to the court that Baloch wasnot in their custody but was being held by the chief of the Mangal tribe. TheISI did not provide any further details about these claims to the court and thecourt did not share their submissions with Baloch’s lawyers. The familyis unaware of any further action taken by the Supreme Court in this case.[193]Similarly, in the case of the disappearance of MohammadIqbal, Nawaz Ahmed, Jasum Ali, and Zahid Ali, their relatives filed a habeascorpuspetition in the Balochistan High Court and eventually the casereached the Supreme Court. During Supreme Court proceedings that commenced onMay 16, 2009, legal representatives of the Federal Ministry of Interior claimedMohammad Iqbal had been released, but the family denied this. Iqbal’sfamily was convinced that Iqbal remained in secret detention, especiallybecause in March 2010 two prisoners released from the Army cantonment in Quettatold them that they had shared a prison cell with Iqbal shortly before theirrelease. The family is unaware of any further action undertaken by the SupremeCourt, despite Iqbal remaining missing at this writing.[194]The Supreme Court’s approach to enforced disappearancecases has been to focus on establishing the whereabouts of the missingindividuals while being reluctant to press for accountability of securityforces and government agencies. On several occasions, even in situations whereofficials responsible for disappearances eventually produced or released thedetainees, the court has been unwilling to use its suo moto powers tohold them accountable, instead emphasizing that its primary task was to tracepeople and that it would address questions of accountability later.[195]This approach suggests that the court does not treat these cases as crimes,undercutting the deterrent effect of the law. By doing so it has contributed tothe impunity enjoyed by security agencies, who for good reason believe and actas if they are above the law.Commission of Inquiryfor Missing PersonsFollowing a Supreme Court order on May 4,2010, the Pakistani government set up the aforementioned Commission ofInquiry for Missing Persons to investigate enforced disappearances throughoutthe country, including in Balochistan.[196] The Commission was headedby a retired justice of the Supreme Court, Kamal Mansur Alam.Commenting on the establishment of the CIMP, Supreme CourtJustice Javed Iqbal said that, “It will have an access to the spy agenciesas well for investigation and recovery of missing persons.” He said thatthe Supreme Court would not interfere in the work of the CIMP, “butdefinitely observe its performance.”[197]The CIMP was charged with preparing a comprehensive list ofthe “disappeared,” collecting evidence or testimony about missingpersons, recommending appropriate procedures for tracing missing persons, andproviding compensation to victims. The CIMP, which had subpoena powers but nopower to file criminal charges, was also supposed to address the“responsibility of individuals or organizations” involved inenforced disappearance of persons and suggest ways and means to prevent therecurrence of such incidents.[198]Victim families and Baloch activistsexpressed little confidence in the CIMP’s ability to adequatelyinvestigate disappearance cases. The chairperson of the Voice of theBaloch Missing Persons, Nasrullah Baloch, said that his group had decided toboycott the proceedings of the CIMP because the commission refused to registerthe majority of the disappearance cases from Balochistan, and that in manycases “eyewitnesses recorded their statements against security agenciesbefore the commission but not a single missing person was recovered or added byofficials to the list of the missing in their inquiry.”[199]By October 2010, the CIMP said it had processed 169 cases onthe list of 194 cases provided to it by victim families and human rightsgroups. It had traced 74 of the missing individuals. Of 55 cases registeredfrom Balochistan, the CIMP said it had traced 23 individuals. It also removedthe names of 23 persons from its list of missing persons “because oftheir incomplete addresses and credentials” and additionally deleted thenames of 72 persons from the list that, “were not found as cases ofenforced disappearances.”[200]The CIMP’s report was presented to the Supreme Courton January 22, 2011, but it has not been released to the public. On January 28,the Supreme Court said thatthe CIMP had traced 290 disappeared personsand 78 of them had been recovered from the custody of various agencies. Thecourt ordered the attorney general to prepare a list of missing persons knownto be in the custody of intelligence agencies so that it could order criminalproceedings against relevant officials.[201]A new Commission of Inquiry for Missing Persons wasestablished by the federal Ministry of Interior on March 1, 2011, headed byFazal-ur-Rehman, a retired justice of the Balochistan High Court, and MuhammadSharif Virk, retired Inspector-General of Police for Khyber Pakhtunkhwaprovince. The new commission’s terms of reference are to trace thewhereabouts of the 136 missing persons that the previous commission was unableto locate. The new commission will also seek to trace the whereabouts ofmissing persons referred to it by the Supreme Court of Pakistan, human rightsorganizations, or other non-governmental organizations and individuals. Thecommission is to “fix responsibility on individuals or organizationsresponsible for enforced disappearance of persons,” including theregistration of First Information Reports against individuals for whom primafaciethere is evidence of culpability. The commission will alsorecommend standard operating procedures for law enforcement and intelligenceagencies to record details of the arrest of individuals suspected of beinginvolved in disappearances. It will have the power to order a policeinvestigation into any matter coming before it, and the power to order theproduction of any person suspected of being in the illegal detention of lawenforcement or intelligence agencies.[202]In a number of cases documented by Human Rights Watch,families said that they had submitted cases to the commission yet were notaware of any action taken by the CIMP on their cases aside from, in some cases,collecting the testimonies of the family members.Justice Raja Fayyaz Ahmed, who presided over a three-memberbench hearing the cases, observed that the “government appears to behelpless before the spy agencies.” Citing the CIMP’s report, thecourt said that it had also recommended to the government to pay compensationto the families of people who had been illegally detained.The Supreme Court rejected suggestions offered by thegovernment and amicus curiae that another tribunal or commission should beestablished to locate missing persons. The court stated: “In ourestimation, it will not be fruitful in view of the submission made by the otherside that the horrible experience of picking up persons by intelligenceagencies, with or without police knowledge, is still going on.” The courtsaid that it would hear cases of missing persons and ensure their recoveryitself. However, though the CIMP appears to have concluded its investigationand the Supreme Court has declared the problem of disappearances to be ongoing,the court’s rhetoric has yet to be matched by commensurate action.VI. RecommendationsTo the Government of Pakistan and the ProvincialGovernment of BalochistanRegarding Accountability for Enforced DisappearancesInvestigate all allegations of enforced disappearances,including those documented in this report, until the fate of each victimis clearly and publicly established. Investigate all related allegationsof torture, extrajudicial killings, or other abuses.Account for every person detained by all authorities inBalochistan, and in particular those accused of involvement in attacks byBaloch armed groups or arrested in military operations in Balochistan.Instruct the police to register all cases of abductionsand unlawful arrests, even if the alleged perpetrators include thepersonnel of the intelligence agencies, the Frontier Corps, or othersecurity forces.Ensure that the police and Commission of Inquiry forMissing Persons (CIMP) have the necessary authority and resources tovigorously investigate cases of disappearance, including those perpetratedby the intelligence agencies and paramilitary forces.Authorize the police and the CIMP to obtain informationfrom any state agencies, including the military and intelligence agencies,about the whereabouts and status of the disappeared. Provide the policeand the CIMP with investigative powers to make unannounced andunaccompanied searches of security force facilities and records.Empower the CIMP to compel the attendance of thoseimplicated in carrying out or ordering disappearances and the disclosureand production of relevant documents.Dismiss from service and prosecute as appropriate allofficials, regardless of rank, found responsible for committing orordering disappearances or related abuses. Hold superior officers, whethercivilian or military, criminally accountable if they knew, or should haveknown, that forces under their command had committed or were about tocommit criminal acts, and they did not take reasonable steps to preventsuch acts or punish those responsible.Provide appropriate compensation, counseling, and socialassistance programs to victims of disappearances and their family members.Regarding Steps to Prevent Enforced DisappearancesRequire arresting officers to identify themselves andpresent official identification.Inform detainees immediately of the reasons for arrest andany charges against them. Inform the family promptly of the arrest andlocation of the detainee. Allow direct contact with family and unhinderedaccess to legal counsel as soon as possible, but in all cases within 24hours.Bring detainees promptly before a judge and inform them ofthe reasons for arrest and any charges.Ensure that all persons detained by security forces areheld at recognized places of detention.Ensure that all places of detention maintain recordsregarding every detainee, including the date, time, and location ofarrest, the name of the detainee, the reason for detention, and the specificunit of the security forces effecting the detention. The records should beavailable to detainees’ families, counsel, and other legitimatelyinterested persons. All transfers of detainees should be reflected in therecords.Promptly charge detained individuals with a cognizablecriminal offense or release them in a manner permitting reliableverification that they have been released.Order the military, intelligence agencies, the FrontierCorps, the police, and all other security and intelligence agencies topromptly respond to inquiries and comply with all habeas corpus ordersissued by the courts.Ensure that the military, intelligence agencies, theFrontier Corps, the police, and all other security and intelligenceagencies are trained in and fully comply with the requirements ofinternational human rights law.Release accurate information on all those formallyarrested or otherwise taken into custody, detained, and released inBalochistan and elsewhere in Pakistan.Establish a workable witness and victim protectionprogram.Regarding Legal ReformIntroduce legislation making enforced disappearances acriminal offense punishable by sanctions commensurate with the gravity ofthe crime.Sign and ratify the International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and enact nationallegislation that gives force to its provisions.Repeal or revise all laws that allow arrest and detentionon vaguely defined charges and grant sweeping immunity to the securityforces. These laws include Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance (1960),the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, the “Sedition Law” Section 124-Aof the Pakistan Penal Code, and the Security of Pakistan Act, 1952.Regarding Working with the United Nations to AddressDisappearancesIssue invitations to United Nations special mechanisms,including the Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances,special rapporteurs on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, on MinorityIssues, on Protecting Human Rights While Countering Terrorism, and onTorture.To the Commission of Inquiry for Missing Persons(CIMP)Use all authority under its mandate to preventdisappearances and related abuses and to ensure that those responsible areheld accountable. In particular:Fix responsibility on individuals or organizationsresponsible for disappearances, including by ordering registeration orfiling First Information Reports against individuals for whom there isprima facie evidence of responsibility.Order the immediate production of any person suspected ofbeing illegally detained by law enforcement or intelligence agencies.Order a police investigation or, when required, a specialinterior ministry inquiry with clear authority to investigate military,paramilitary, or intelligence agency complicity into any allegeddisappearance case before the commission.Press the national and provincial governments and allintelligence and security agencies to end disappearances and holdperpetrators accountable.To Pakistan’s International Partners, in Particularthe United States,United Kingdom, and Other Countries Working with Pakistan’s Securityand Intelligence AgenciesDemand that the government of Pakistan make it a priorityto end the practice of disappearance and arbitrary detention and that ithold all persons who order or carry out disappearances accountable.Communicate directly to the agencies responsible fordisappearances, including the army, ISI, IB, Frontier Corps, police, andother law enforcement and intelligence agencies they have relationshipswith, and demand an end to disappearances. Make it clear that continueddisappearances will result in conditions on or an end to relationshipswith those agencies.Suspend police and military assistance and cooperationprograms with the Frontier Corps, Frontier Constabulary, police, andPakistan Army units based in Balochistan until military and civilianauthorities fully investigate and take appropriate action regardingallegations of disappearance and other abuses by their forces.Insist that the government and all state agencies make ita priority to account for every person detained in Balochistan, and inparticular those accused of involvement in attacks by Baloch armed groupsor arrested in military operations in Balochistan.Urge the Pakistani government to sign and ratify theInternational Convention for the Protection of All Persons from EnforcedDisappearance and enact national legislation that gives force to itsprovisions.Ensure that adequate vetting and oversight mechanisms arein place to deter as possible human rights violations by security unitsfunded and trained by foreign forces.The US should fully implement the US Leahy law, whichprohibits the provision of military assistance to any unit of the securityforces or a foreign country where there is credible evidencethat such unit has committed gross violations of human rights, such astorture, ill-treatment, or “flagrant denial of the right to life,liberty or the security of the person,” and that no effectivemeasures are being taken to bring those responsible to justice.[203]AcknowledgementsThis report was written and researched byHuman Rights Watch researchers. Mustafa Qadri, a consultant with the AsiaDivision, researched and wrote some sections of the report. Ali Dayan Hasan, Pakistandirector, provided editorial and expert review. It was edited by Brad Adams,Asia director; James Ross, Legal and Policy director; and Joseph Saunders,deputy director to the Program department.Production and formatting assistance wasprovided by Pema Abrahams, coordinator in the Asia division. Kathy Mills,prepared the report for publication, and Fitzroy Hepkins provided publicationand production assistance.Appendix I: Cases of Alleged Enforced Disappearancesfrom Balochistan Documented by Human Rights WatchThe following 45 cases of alleged enforced disappearancesare based on information gathered by Human Rights Watch since 2010. The casesdocumented are from 2008-10 and are presented in reverse chronological orderfrom when the individual first “disappeared.” Ages of the victimsare at the time of their arrest or abduction. All case descriptions are basedon interviews with family members and other witnesses, victims themselves incases where they have been released, as well as lawyers and local activists whoin some cases provided additional details. All quotations, unless otherwiseindicated, come from interviews conducted by Human Rights Watch.Case 1:  Enforced Disappearance of ShamsBaloch, Age 49On July 1, 2010, Shams Baloch, the former mayor of Khuzdartown in Khuzdar district, was in an ambulance accompanying his sick mother to ahospital in Quetta. About an hour after they left Khuzdar, at a checkpoint inMian Ghundi, soldiers in Frontier Corps (FC) uniforms stopped the ambulance andordered the driver and Baloch to get out.FC personnel then proceeded to beat Baloch, holding othersat gunpoint. One of Baloch’s relatives, who was in the ambulance with him,told Human Rights Watch that about four armed men in civilian clothes arrived ashort time afterwards in a white double-door Toyota pickup and took Baloch withthem. The relative said Sham’s mother fainted in shock.On July 2, 2010, one of Baloch’s relatives tried tofile a report with police in Quetta but, according to the man, the police saidthey “had no authority to investigate such disappearances.” AmnestyInternational later reported that a joint investigation by police andintelligence authorities concluded that Baloch had been stopped by FC personnelon July 1 but was abducted “in front of them by persons unknown.”[204]Baloch’s family believe that he was taken by Pakistanintelligence agents acting jointly with the Frontier Corps because of hisinvolvement in local politics as a member of the Central Committee of theBalochistan Republican Party (BRP) and the Baloch National Front (BNF). Just aweek before his abduction, Baloch’s home village in Khuzdar districtstaged a popular strike over lack of electricity.There is to date no information on Baloch’s fate or whereabouts.Cases 2 and 3:  Enforced Disappearance ofNaseem Baloch, 32, and Ilyas Karim, 31At around 1:30 p.m. on May 25, 2010, medical doctor NaseemBaloch, Ilyas Karim, and 25-year-old “Rahim” (not his real name)left the Bolan Medical Complex, one of the main hospitals in Quetta. Balochwent into a nearby pharmacy while Karim and Rahim waited for him in their carparked on the street outside.According to Rahim, as soon as Baloch stepped out of thepharmacy, two pickup trucks suddenly pulled up in front of their car. Six orseven men in civilian clothes accompanied by uniformed FC soldiers left their vehiclesand apprehended Rahim, Karim, and Baloch. Many people witnessed the incident,as it occurred in the afternoon in a busy downtown district of Quetta. Rahimsaid they did not resist arrest.The three men were put in the vehicles and driven in awesterly direction. At the Goli Mar Chowk, a square on Brewery Road in the sameQuetta district, the FC soldiers took the three men out of the vehicle, blindfoldedthem, and put them into another vehicle. It was not evident whether this was adifferent vehicle from one used initially.The vehicle stopped again some minutes later and, accordingto Rahim, the detainees were separated and moved into an enclosed space that hepresumed was a detention facility. Rahim told Human Rights Watch:I don’t know what the facility was. I remained forthe next two days and was constantly interrogated and tortured. First, theybound my arms behind my back, and then they threw me on the ground face downand someone sat on my back. Whenever they asked me a question, theinterrogators pulled my head back by grabbing my hair and kept asking,“Who are you? Why have you come here to Quetta?”I explained that I was a farmer in Awaran [district ofBalochistan], and they also asked about my family, and about Dr. Naseem andIlyas. When I told them that they were my friends, they screamed, “Youare lying to us! Dr. Naseem is a separatist. Tell us what Naseem is doing. Why ishe involved in separatism?”They beat me all over my body and on the soles of my feet withtheir fists and feet. They hit me for around one to two hours continuously inthe morning, then again in the evening. At night they would not let me sleep orlie down, I was forced to stand. If I started to fall asleep they would hit meon the back and shoulders to keep me awake.Rahim said he did not see his two friends in detention, butcould sporadically hear what he believed was Baloch “day and night”screaming from an adjoining “torture cell.”On the second day of Rahim’s abduction, his captorsdrove him blindfolded to a street that was walking distance from his home inQuetta and released him. Rahim said he could not walk properly and struggled toget home. He said he was covered in bruises, his arms were numb because theyhad been tied up for the previous two days, his feet were swollen, and he hadpain while urinating during his first night at home.To date, the whereabouts and fate of Baloch and Karim areunknown. Their relatives and the staff of the Bolan Medical Complex where Balochworked as a doctor filed an application for a First Information Report (FIR)with Quetta police on May 26, 2010, alleging that the Frontiers Corps andintelligence agencies were responsible for the enforced disappearance. Relativesof Baloch and Karim also filed a petition with the Balochistan High Court onMay 29, 2010. The court has held several hearings, but so far has not summonedrepresentatives of the Frontiers Corps or the intelligence agencies. On June 2,2010, relatives of Baloch and Karim also filed their cases with the Commissionof Inquiry for Missing Persons (CIMP).Relatives of the disappeared men told Human Rights Watchthat on June 5, 2010, the chief minister of Balochistan, Aslam Raisani,informed them that both Baloch and Karim were in the custody of the MilitaryIntelligence (MI) wing of the Pakistan Army. A relative of Baloch said,“All that we were told was that Dr. Naseem was the right-hand man of Dr.Allah Nazar [a Baloch nationalist leader wanted by Pakistan authorities on anumber of terrorism charges]. But apart from that they told us nothing.”Baloch, a leading member of the Baloch StudentsOrganization, had previously been forcibly disappeared along with Dr. AllahNazar and Akhtar Nadeem in March 2005. The three men were held for three monthsin solitary confinement in Karachi and Quetta before being released in DeraGazi Khan in southern Punjab, far from their homes. Baloch was never chargedand told his relatives that he had been tortured and interrogated throughoutthe three-month period. At the time of writing, Human Rights Watch had receivedreports that both Ilyas Karim and Naseem Baloch had been released by theircaptors, but further information about this was not available. Theirwhereabouts remain unknown and Baloch human rights activists suggest they mayhave gone into hiding to avoid re-arrest.Cases 4 and 5: Enforced Disappearance of Rindhan, 30,and Six-Week-Long Enforced Disappearance of “Ahmad A.”In the late morning of April 24, 2010, several Khaki-coloredmilitary trucks drove into a village in the remote Thali district ofBalochistan. According to witnesses, a group of about 50 or 60 uniformedsoldiers clearly identifiable as belonging to the Pakistan Army spread aroundthe village and started conducting house-to-house searches. One of thewitnesses told Human Rights Watch the soldiers also engaged in massive lootingin the village and burned down some houses:The soldiers gathered all of the flour that we store forthe winter months, took all the jewelry they could lay their hands on, and twomotorcycles. Anything of value, they took it. They then proceeded to burn thehomes, destroying all the remaining belongings inside them, including clothes,mattresses, and cookware. I saw everything from a distance because I happenedto be walking back to the village at the time. I saw them [the soldiers] goingfrom house to house, starting a fire in each one separately… about 20homes in total.According to the witness, the soldiers were also looking formen from the village. But all the men and older boys were away working in thefields or in markets. The soldiers could only find one elderly man, named“Ahmad A.” (not his real name), whom they took into custody. A fewof the soldiers grabbed Ahmad and put a green hood over his head and placed himin one of the trucks.After putting Ahmad in their truck, the witness said, thesoldiers saw 30-year-old farmer Rindhan walking towards the village from a distance.When Rindhan noticed the soldiers, he started running away, but some of thesoldiers chased him, grabbed and blindfolded him, and put him in one of thetrucks.Ahmad’s grandson told Human Rights Watch that hisgrandfather was in detention for one-and-a-half months. The family had noinformation about him during that time, but were too afraid to ask governmentauthorities, especially since there were no police stations or courts in theirvillage and the community was fearful of Pakistan’s security forces.Ahmad’s grandson said that upon release, Ahmad toldthem that he and Rindhan were both held in the same prison cell on the day oftheir abduction, although he did not know where it was. They were bothinterrogated and beaten with wooden sticks and leather straps and were punchedand kicked. The interrogators asked the men about the location of Baloch armedgroup camps and whether anyone from their village was involved with Balocharmed groups.After two days in detention, Rindhan was transferred to adifferent cell, but Ahmad could still hear what he believes was Rindhanscreaming as he was tortured and interrogated.Ahmad was released in June 2010 and, according to hisgrandson, has been in poor physical and mental health ever since. Rindhan’swhereabouts remain unknown at this writing. Fearful of contacting local orfederal authorities, the victims’ families and other villagers haverelied on civil society organizations, like the Voice of Baloch Missing Persons,to inquire about Ahmad and Rindhan’s abduction, their treatment incaptivity, and Rindhan’s fate. At the time of writing, Human Rights Watchhad received reports that Rindhan had been released by the Army and hassubsequently gone into hiding, but further information about this was not available.Case 6: Enforced Disappearance of Mehboob Wadela,32After visiting his father on April 2, 2010, Mehboob Wadela,a Baloch National Movement (BNM) member, was travelling by minibus from Karachito Gwadar. At the Yusufgot bus terminal near Northern Bypass Toll Plaza, on theoutskirts of Karachi, two police cars and two double-cabin Toyota Hilux pickuptrucks stopped near the bus. A group of men in civilian clothes mounted the buswhile the police officers waited in their cars.Witnesses later told Wadela’s family that when the mengrabbed Wadela and checked his identity card, one of them said, “This issomeone we’ve been looking for.” They then took him off the bus andput him into one of the Toyota cars. The pickups immediately drove off. The policecars also left, but in a different direction. Witnesses said they believed thepolice were from Maripur police station.Wadela’s family found out about his abduction the sameday from one of the passengers who was on the same bus. When they made inquiriesat the bus terminal, the employees there told them that a day before theabduction “people from the agencies” came and questioned them aboutthe bus routes and schedules.Wadela’s relatives then inquired at the Maripur policestation, but they say the police refused to lodge an FIR, saying they had nottaken anyone and that they could not accept an FIR against the “agencies.”The police admitted they had two cars at the bus terminal at the time of theabduction, but also repeated that there was nothing they could do about theagencies.Wadela’s father approached various senior officials inthe police, as well as a senator and the prime minister’s office, but couldnot manage to find any information about Wadela’s fate or whereabouts.The bodies of Mehboob Wadela and another man, Arif Rehman, were found near HadhCross in the Ormara district of Gwadar on February 23, 2011.[205]Cases 7 and 8: Enforced Disappearances ofNasibullah Langao, 14,and Abdul Waheed, 12On March 5, 2010, 14-year-old Nasibullah Langao and12-year-old Abdul Waheed, students from Ismail village in Hudda district, wereallegedly disappeared after they started making inquiries about the killing ofLangao’s uncle, Abdul Majid Langao.In March 2010, FC soldiers and men in civilian clothesarrived at the house of Abdul Majid Langao, an activist with the BalochNational Front (BNF). In front of multiple witnesses, they knocked on the doorand, as soon as Abdul Majid opened, shot him dead. The men took away AdbulMajid’s body as well as various pieces of property from the house. Inresponse to protests in the village, the body was eventually returned to thefamily, but not the property.According to a friend of the boys’ families, Abdul Majid’snephew Nasibullah Langao took his friend Abdul Waheed to the Frontier Corps andto the police asking what happened to his uncle and for his belongings. Fivedays after Abdul Majid’s killing, FC soldiers and men in civilian clothesdetained the two children from the street in their neighborhood in broaddaylight. They have not been seen since.The boys’ families asked a local nongovernmentalorganization working with the families of the “disappeared” to makeinquiries about them. At the time they spoke to Human Rights Watch, they hadnot managed to obtain any information about their fate or whereabouts.Case 9: Enforced Disappearance of Bohir Khan, 26On the evening of March 31, 2010, Bohir Khan was having teawith his three cousins in the Askari Park region of Quetta, close to a largearmy residential area and Khalid Airbase. He went out to purchase credit forhis mobile phone from a local store but has not been seen since.After Khan did not return and did not answer their calls,his cousins searched the neighborhood for him. When they failed to find him,Khan’s family filed an application for an FIR at the Bijli Ghar policestation in Quetta later that same day.Khan’s friend told Human Rights Watch that in June2010 a man who had recently been released from a detention facility in Quetta contactedhim and said that he had seen Khan in the facility. According to Khan’sfriend, the man said that he had seen Khan during the last two weeks of hisdetention in June 2010. He said he regularly communicated with Khan,particularly at night when the guards would leave, because their cells wereclose to each other. To his knowledge, Khan was subjected to food and sleepdeprivation and frequently beaten. He said he could often hear him screaming.As far as he was aware, Khan was still in detention after his release.The former detainee did not know exactly where the facility waslocated because he was hooded before he was brought there and during hisrelease. But he said he was released next to Askari Park, in the same region ofQuetta where Bohir Khan was last seen.Khan’s family held a press conference in Quetta onApril 5, 2010, seeking information on his fate and whereabouts. But the familysaid they were fearful of directly approaching government authorities andespecially Pakistan’s military and intelligence agencies. One ofKhan’s relatives said, “We are afraid of the agencies and army andcannot even come close to them. How can we ask them if they have takenBohir?”Khan’s family believes he was taken because the familyhas a history of involvement in Baloch nationalist politics and activism. Theysaid that three of Khan’s relatives have previously been forciblydisappeared—one in the 1970s and two in 2008. At the time of writing,Human Rights Watch had received reports that Khan had been released by hiscaptors, but further information about this was not available.Case 10: Enforced Disappearance of Abdul WahabBaloch, 14On March 15, 2010, Abdul Wahab Baloch, a 14-year-old fromTump distict, was on his way to meet a friend who lived in the same town. Hewas travelling in a car with a young man, “Mahmoud” (not his realname).At around 10 p.m., three FC trucks and two jeeps, which awitness believed belonged to the security agencies, stopped Mahmoud’scar. Uniformed FC soldiers from Turbat division waved down the car, opened thedoors, and immediately pulled Baloch out of his passenger seat. The witnesssaid that the agencies’ vehicles were parked behind the FC trucks andthat the soldiers put Baloch, handcuffed, into one of the FC trucks. He believesthe security forces must have been told by informants about Baloch’stravels. The soldiers ordered Mahmoud to leave right away, which he did.Baloch’s father filed an application for an FIR with theTump police. However, the police said that they did not know anything about theincident. The family did not go to the FC base because, based on the experienceof other families, they were convinced the soldiers would not give them anyinformation.To date, Baloch’s whereabouts remain unknown.Case 11: Enforced Disappearance of Mir AbdulWaheed Resani Baloch, 45Over the last 15 years, Pakistani security forces havedetained Mir Abdul Waheed Resani Baloch, a senior member of the BRP centralcommittee, numerous times. He was held in FC jails in Mastung and in Quetta.On January 2, 2010, a court in Khozdar ordered Baloch releasedafter 10 months’ detention in Khozdar cental jail. However, withinminutes of his release, the police picked him again in the street in front ofmultiple witnesses. The police took him to Mastung police station, where hetried to speak to the press.According to a relative of Baloch, a senior police officer interruptedBaloch and announced that he would like to “talk to Baloch inprivate,” and took him to another room. The relative told Human RightsWatch:We waited for about 10 minutes and then asked about him.The officer came back and said, “Sorry, we had to transfer him somewhereand we cannot tell you where, so you should all leave.” We waited forabout six hours, and then left. The same day, officers from the [police] anti-terroristunit came to our house, claiming they were looking for him. They pretended hehad escaped from custody. Of course, they knew he was not there, and instead oflooking for him they just looted our house, taking away money, jewelry, mobilephones, and expensive clothes.On January 4, Baloch’s relatives went to the police,who denied having any knowledge of his whereabouts. They accepted an FIR whichsimply said that Baloch was “missing.” Three days later the family fileda petition with the Balochistan High Court. The court sent inquiries to the chiefminister, home minister, and inspector-general of the police. Theirrepresentatives, who appeared in court, denied having any knowledge of Baloch’swhereabouts and claimed they were looking for him.Baloch’s relatives said that after his forceddisappearance, Chief Minister Aslam Raisani temporarily suspended the districtpolice officers (DPOs) for Mastung and Much because the Mastung DPO allegedlyhad handed Baloch over to the Much DPO. A month later, however, both officerswere reinstated.The fate and whereabouts of Baloch remain unknown to thefamily at this writing.Cases 12 and 13: Enforced Disappearance of MazharKhan, 21, and Two-Month-Long Enforced Disappearance of Abdul Rasool, 26At around 10 p.m. on December 19, 2009, a group of unknownarmed perpetrators abducted Mazar Khan and Abdul Rasool from Khan’s housenear Kili Station in Noshki district.According to an eyewitness, seven men in civilian clothes,their faces covered with scarves, broke down the gate to Khan’s house andburst in, firing their pistols in the air. The eyewitness said Rasool resistedand one of the men hit him on the temple with his pistol butt, but Khan did notresist. The assailants tied the two men’s wrists and ankles andblindfolded them. Then they dragged them outside, put them into one of theirthree pickup trucks, and drove away.The next day, relatives of Khan and Rasool reported theabductions to police at Kili Station. “The police said they cannot doanything about kidnappings,” one of Khan’s relatives told HumanRights Watch.In mid-February 2010, Rasool was released by his captors. Hetold Human Rights Watch about his ordeal:On the day of the abduction, after travelling for 15 to 20minutes by car, it stopped and I was dragged outside and into a room. Idon’t remember anything about the building I was in because I was stillblindfolded. But after whoever brought me in had left, I removed my blindfoldand saw that I was alone in a small, dark room. I had no idea where Mazhar was.Rasool said that soon after he had been brought in, some menentered the room and asked him if he was involved in Baloch politicalactivities. They kept him in this room for a month and 25 days, and then movedhim to another location, some three-hours drive away. They kept him there foranother five days. Then at night the captors put Rasool into a vehicle,blindfolded and handcuffed. They drove for a few hours, after which the vehiclecarrying him stopped. His captors removed Rasool from the car, stillblindfolded and handcuffed, and told him he was being released on Chaman Roadon the outskirts of Quetta and then drove off.Fearful of being abducted again, Abdul Rasool did notapproach government authorities about his disappearance. But Khan’sfamily filed an application for an FIR with police in Noshki on February 17,2010. Although the police recorded the FIR, it only stated that Khan was amissing person and made no mention of the circumstances of his abduction. OnFebruary 21, relatives of both men filed a statement about the abductions withthe Balochistan High Court. The next day, relatives of Khan and Rasool metrepresentatives of the Balochistan Home and Tribal Affairs Ministry, who saidthey would record Khan’s abduction but could do nothing to investigate it.In March 2010, the Balochistan High Court accepted a habeascorpus petition requesting the federal Ministries of Defense and Interior,Balochistan provincial government, MI, the Directorate for Inter-ServicesIntelligence (ISI), and the Kili Station police to provide information oncharges brought against Khan and Rasool. The high court has since held fivehearings but only police representatives have ever appeared before it. They havedenied having any knowledge of the abductions.Mazhar Khan’s whereabouts remain unknown at thiswriting.Case 14: Enforced Disappearance of Abdul Ghaffar Lango,39On December 11, 2009, a group of unknown men abducted AbdulGhaffar Lango, the leader of the Balochistan National Party (BNP), outside ahospital in Karachi in Sindh province.At 3 p.m. that day, Lango was leaving the Institute ofSurgery and Medicine, a hospital in Karachi, together with his wife, who had justbeen discharged after surgery. Lango’s wife told Human Rights Watch thatas the couple reached the main gate, two white Toyota Vigo pickup trucks droveup at high speed in front of them and suddenly stopped. About 10 men incivilian clothes approached the couple. One started beating Lango with the buttof his rifle until Lango lost consciousness and fell to the ground. The men thendragged him into one of the cars and drove away. According to Lango’swife, there were many witnesses to the incident since it took place in acrowded area in broad daylight.The same day, Lango’s relatives tried to lodge acomplaint about his abduction at the Garden police station in Karachi, but the policerefused. A police officer at the station told the family that Lango had beendetained because he was a BNP leader and authorities wanted to restrain himfrom participating in politics. But the police would not provide anyinformation on his whereabouts.The family filed a petition with the Sindh High Court onJanuary 12, 2010. On January 15, the court ordered the Deputy Attorney Generaland Advocate General of Sindh to submit a report on Lango’s whereaboutswithin two weeks. On March 3, Sindh Deputy Attorney General Umer Hayat Sindhutold the court on behalf of the director general of the Intelligence Bureauthat Lango had not been detained or arrested by the Intelligence Bureau (IB),which, he explained, was “only an intelligence agency that does notdetain anyone for interrogation.” Police representatives also told the courtthat Lango was not in their custody. No other security or intelligenceauthorities reported on Lango’s whereabouts.Lango had previously been abducted on June 27, 2007, fromthe Mastung region of Balochistan by unknown perpetrators, whom he believed tobe from one of Pakistan’s intelligence agencies. He was in detentionuntil February 13, 2008, a total of seven months, after which his captorshanded him over to the police. They told the police that he had been picked up thesame day—on February 13, 2008—not June 27, 2007.The police did not bring charges against his abductors. Theydid bring 18 charges against Lango related to his alleged involvement inattacks on police, security forces, and bombings in Balochistan. Lango remainedin police custody while the charges against him were being heard in the courts.However, he was never charged and was eventually released in May 2009.On July 1, 2011 Abdul Ghaffar Lango’s corpse was foundin an abandoned hotel near Lakbado area of Gadani town in the Lasbela districtof Balochistan. The local police represented by the Station House Officer (SHO)of Gadani Police Station told the local media that “the body boremultiple marks of brutal torture. Cause of death is stated to be a severe woundin the head, caused by a hard rod or some other hard or sharp object.”[206]Cases 15 and 16: Enforced Disappearance ofSangat-Sana Baloch, 31,and Kambar BalochOn December 7, 2009, Sangat-Sana Baloch, a central committeemember of the BRP from Khad Khuchu, was on his way to Jacobabad. In Kalpur,near Quetta in Balochistan, he changed cars and got into a truck driven byKambar Baloch to continue his journey.At around 4 p.m., as the truck was leaving Kalpur, it wasstopped by a police car and two civilian vehicles that blocked the road. Theroadblock was located at Bolan Pass on the Quetta-Sindh highway. As the truckapproached the roadblock, Sangat-Sana Baloch gave his cell phone and notebookto a fellow passenger. He reportedly told the passenger that he had beenabducted twice before and wanted to ensure that these items did not end up inthe hands of the security forces.While police looked on, men in civilian clothes opened thetruck doors and started beating Sangat-Sana, Kambar, and the other passenger inthe truck.Sangat-Sana’s family learned the details of theabduction from the passenger who was later released. The man told them that duringthe abduction, men in plainclothes put all three men into their car, drove forabout an hour, and forced them into a building, where they started beating thethree while accusing them of being “freedom fighters.” The man saidthey beat him for about an hour-and-a-half, but, having realized that he had nopolitical affiliation or involvement, handed him over to the police, who releasedhim. He did not know what happened to Sangat-Sana Baloch or Kambar Baloch afterwards,and the two men were not heard from again.The day after the abduction, on December 23,Sangat-Sana’s family went to the Kalpur police station but failed toobtain any information. One of his relatives told Human Rights Watch:We spoke to the deputy superintendent [of the police], andhe said the security agencies took Sangat. But they refused to take the FIRsaying there was nothing they could do. They also said it was not the firsttime people got abducted in that place, on that road, and that families werecoming to the police to complain but police couldn’t do anything aboutit.The family filed a petition with the Balochistan High Courtin 2010.Baloch’s family said that two years before theabduction, on June 13, 2007, security agencies tried to abductSangat-Sana’s brother Obaid, having mistaken him for Sangat-Sana. Thesecurity forces stopped Obaid’s car at Lakpass on the national highway betweenQuetta and Mastung and attacked Obaid and “Fazl” (not his realname), another relative who was in the same car, beating them with rifle butts.The passengers resisted, and residents from a nearby village quickly came totheir help. A scuffle followed between the security personnel and thevillagers, and the security personnel eventually decided to leave. An officerwho seemed to be in charge then told Obaid, “You escaped this time, butwe’ll be watching you now.”In another incident, about a month-and-a-half before the abduction,Sangat-Sana Baloch went to Mastung to visit his cousin. On his way back toKhad-Kuchu, he noticed two cars following him. Believing those were the cars ofthe security agencies, Baloch left his car and ran into an adjacent field untilhe reached a nearby village where the residents hid him for several hours. Thesecurity personnel searched for Baloch but did not find him and after they lefthis relatives picked Baloch up and brought him back home.At the time of writing, Human Rights Watch had been informedthat Kambar Baloch’s bullet-riddled body had been found in January 2011 inthe Pidarak area of Kechh district, some 550 kilometers west of Quetta. SangatSana-Baloch’s whereabouts remain unknown.Case 17: Enforced Disappearance of Lichi, 37At 3 p.m. on November 19, 2009, five men wearing white shalwarkameez (traditional Pakistani clothes) abducted Lichi (full name unknown)from a hotel in Vindr in Lasbela district.According to two witnesses interviewed by Human RightsWatch, as soon as Lichi finished his tea and began to leave the hotel, a whitefour-door Toyota Vigo pickup drove right up to the hotel’s front gate.Once Lichi saw the car, he tried to run away. But five men immediately jumpedout of the pickup truck, grabbed him, and bundled him into the car. The hotelis in a busy market area of Vindr and the witnesses claim many others also sawLichi being abducted.One hour after the incident, the hotel manager went toLichi’s home and told his relatives what had happened. His relatives wentto Mehdi Bugti police station the next morning to report the abduction, butpolice refused to register an FIR.On December 24, 2009, Lichi’s family wrote a letter tothe chief justice of the Balochistan High Court describing the abduction, butreceived no response.In February 2010, following an order by the Supreme Court ofPakistan, police finally lodged an FIR. On July 3, 2010, Lichi’s familygave evidence about his disappearance before the CIMP in Quetta. They told the commissionthat Lichi was not involved in politics and that they believed he had beenabducted by Pakistan’s intelligence agencies because he belongs to theMarri tribe. Pakistan’s security forces have targeted members of theMarri tribe because it is considered to be closely linked to Baloch armedgroups.At this writing, the fate and whereabouts of Lichi remainunknown.Case 18: Enforced Disappearance of SamiullahMengal, 21At 1 p.m. on November 16, 2009, Samiullah Mengal, a memberof the nationalist Baloch Students Organization-Azad (BSOA), and his35-year-old brother, Abdul-Rehman Mengal, had just left a tailor’s shopon Dr. Bano Road in Quetta when men in civilian clothes confronted them withpistols. Relatives of the two men interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thatwitnesses told them that the assailants tookthe two brothers into a waitingfour-door Toyoto Vigo pickup truck and hooded them. A day later, the captorsreleased Abdul-Rehman Mengal on the Airport Road in Quetta.The next day, Abdul-Rehman’s lawyer filed a habeascorpus petition in the Balochistan High Court. More than a month later,following an order from the Supreme Court of Pakistan, police in Quetta finallylodged an FIR. It alleged the intelligence agencies had abducted Mengal andAbdul-Rehman and subsequently disappeared Mengal.Abdul-Rehman gave evidence before the CIMP regarding hisabduction and Mengal’s continued disappearance during thecommission’s visit to Quetta in June 2010.Since Mengal’s disappearance, the family has notreceived any official information about his fate or whereabouts. However, a manreleased from detention in January 2010 told his relatives and the local mediathat he had shared a prison cell with Mengal. The man did not know, however,where the cell was located as he had been blindfolded when taken there.Mengal had previously been forcibly disappeared on July 19,2009, while cycling to his home in Quetta. In the Satellite Town district ofthe city, several pickup trucks clearly marked as belonging to the FrontierCorps surrounded his bicycle and multiple FC personnel grabbed him. Accordingto Mengal’s relatives, he said that the FC officers took him to theSatellite Town police station a few minutes away from where they had stoppedhim.When several hours later witnesses informed Mengal’sfamily about the arrest, an assistant to Mengal’s lawyer went to thepolice station to inquire about him. But police detained the assistant,allegedly on the orders of the FC, who mistakenly believed the assistant was Mengal’sbrother who was also wanted for questioning by them. The assistant was releasedfive hours later without ever meeting or seeing Mengal.According to Mengal’s family, when police released himtwo weeks later, he seemed traumatized and said that he had been beatenextensively by guards inside a police lock-up and detention center in Quetta.Three months after Mengal’s release, the policearrested him again at the behest of the Frontier Corps on charges of illegalpossession of hand grenades. Mengal spent the next three months in Quettadistrict jail. In October 2009, the court released him on bail to situniversity examinations, but less than a month thereafter he was forciblydisappeared again and remains missing.Cases 19 and 20: Enforced Disappearance of MirSohrab Khan Marri, 27,and Shah Mohammad ZarkoonOn November 8, 2009, Mir Sohrab Marri and Shah MohammadZarkoon were having tea with seven other men at the front courtyard of the AghaSyed Mohammad Hotel on Masjid Road in Quetta. Suddenly, two Toyota Vigo pickuptrucks, each with four doors and tinted windows, stopped outside the entrance. Accordingto one of the witnesses, five men in civilian clothes and armed with riflesapproached Marri and Zarkoon and told them to follow them, holding the othersat gunpoint. The witness told Human Rights Watch:One of the men told Sohrab and Shah to come with them, theytold the rest of us to stay seated. As soon as they [Marri and Zarkoon] got up,the men grabbed their wrists and walked them back to their cars. They did notresist. As Marri and Zarkoon were led out of the hotel, one of the captorsturned around and said, “If anyone tries anything [to prevent theabduction] we will shoot them.” Then the vehicles left, and that was thelast time we’ve seen them.Marri and Zarkoon’s family and friends believe they wereabducted by members of Pakistan’s intelligence agencies. Witnesses toldHuman Rights Watch that the region of Quetta where the incident took place hasseveral FC checkpoints. Unless Marri and Zarkoon’s abductors worked forthe government, the witnesses argued, the FC guards would have stopped the menarmed with rifles as they normally check every car.Immediately after the abduction, Marri’s fatherbriefly met the Chief Minister of Balochistan, Nawab Mohammad Aslam Raisani, athis residence and handed him a letter detailing the incident. According toMarri’s father, Raisani said he would look into the matter. On November16, 2009, Marri’s family also submitted a letter regarding his disappearanceto the Secretary of Home and Tribal Affairs, Akbar Hussain Durrani. Accordingto one of Marri’s relatives, Durrani hand wrote a note on the letterrequesting police to investigate Marri’s disappearance.On December 12, 2009, the CIMP in Quetta recorded Marri’senforced disappearance. The same day, relatives of both men applied for an FIRregarding the disappearance with police in Quetta. The police did not lodge ituntil March 26, 2010. The FIR mentioned the family’s claim that“Pakistan security agencies” were responsible for Marri’s andZarkoon’s abduction.Marri’s relative also told Human Rights Watch that onthe evening of March 30, 2010, two men claiming to be members of MilitaryIntelligence visited the family at their home in Quetta, saying Marri was intheir custody. Marri’s father told Human Rights Watch:The two men asked me to prepare a sworn affidavit statingthat my son [Mir Sohrab Khan Marri] was not guilty of any crimes. They promisedthat Marri would be released once the affidavit was lodged with police. Thatvery moment, I wrote the affidavit and had it notarized and gave it to the twomen. [After that] they said Marri would be released “in a fewdays.” But my son was not released and we have not seen him since he wentmissing.On June 2, 2010, Marri’s brother gave evidence beforethe CIMP. Representatives of the police and the federal government werepresent, but the commission did not ask them about the whereabouts of Marri orZarkoon. That evening, Marri’s brother received an anonymous phone call.He said the caller asked him why he testified before the Commission andthreatened him, saying, “If you are so keen to meet your brother, we canhelp you meet him.”At the time of Human Rights Watch’s investigations,the families had not received any further information on the two men’sfate and whereabouts and were afraid to make any more inquiries. However, atthe time of writing, it had been reported that Zarkoon had reappeared, butfurther details were not available.Case 21: Enforced Disappearance of NajeebullahQambrani, 27On the night of October 22, 2009, a group of uniformedFrontier Corps soldiers and men in civilian clothes abducted NajeebullahQambrani from his house on Kamrani Road, Quetta. Qambrani’s brother, wholives in the same house, said he witnessed the entire incident. He told HumanRights Watch that at around midnight he heard loud noises. He said:I was woken up by what sounded like people jumping over thewalls of our house. Then I heard a loud “bang!” and I realized someonewas trying to smash down our [metal] front gate. Then someone from behind thegate shouted, “Open the door!” I immediately opened the gate andstepped back out of fear of being hit. Approximately 20 men in camouflageuniforms with FC badges accompanied by three men in plain clothes entered thehouse. I was told to wait outside while the soldiers searched the house.As I stepped outside the broken front gate to see what washappening, I noticed about six cars. All of them were black four-door Toyota Vigopickups. Then I saw Najeebullah being dragged away by some of the soldiers. Hewas not resisting. I tried to approach him, but one of the FC soldiers made athreatening gesture with his fist and I turned back and returned to the house.Two days after the abduction, Qambrani’s familyapplied for an FIR at Sarai police station in Quetta, claiming Qambrani hadbeen abducted by the FC and “agencies.” But Qambrani’sbrother said that the police refused to lodge the FIR because, according to thepolice, “they could not register an FIR against security forces.”Qambrani’s family held a press conference to publicizehis disappearance. Although Najeebullah Qambrani had previously been a memberof the Baloch Republican Party, his relatives told Human Rights Watch that heleft politics in 2008 and was working only as a farmer.On October 29, 2009, a lawyer representing Qambrani’sfamily filed a habeas corpus petition in the Balochistan High Court seekingthat the federal Ministry of Interior, Balochistan Ministry of Interior, MI, ISI,FC, Frontier Corp Intelligence Unit (FCIU), and police at Sariab Stationexplain the charges against Qambrani or release him. With the exception of thepolice, none of the authorities mentioned in the petition have ever appeared beforethe court. At every hearing the police claimed that Qambrani was not in theircustody.According to Qambrani’s brother, the court informedtheir lawyer that “intelligence agencies” and the Frontier Corps hadtold the court that they had had no information regarding Qambrani’sabduction or whereabouts. But the court refused to disclose to his lawyer anydetails of submissions made to it by intelligence agencies or the FrontierCorps.Following an order from the Supreme Court of Pakistan,police in Quetta finally registered an FIR regarding Qambrani’s disappearanceon January 5, 2010. On January 21 police came to Qambrani’s house anddemanded to have his national ID card and a photo of him, threatening to arrestthe family should they refuse. The following day, Balochistan authorities announceda Rs 500,000 (approximately US $5,800) reward for information leading to Najeebullah’sarrest, claiming he was a wanted terrorist.After the announcement, the Balochistan High Court orderedthe Balochistan Home Ministry to submit an FIR detailing the charges againstQambrani. But at successive hearings the ministry failed to provide one.Finally on April 3, 2010, the Home Secretary removed the reward forQambrani’s arrest and issued a statement that he had earlier beenerroneously described as a terrorist by an officer of the FC who hadsubsequently left the force.At the time of writing, Human Rights Watch had receivedreports that Najeebullah Qambrani had been released by his captors but furtherinformation about this was not available.Case 22: Enforced Disappearance of Abdul Nasir, 27On October 14, 2009, motorcycle trader Abdul Nasir wasrepairing a motorcycle in his friend’s shop in Quetta. At around 11:30a.m., a double-door pickup truck suddenly stopped outside the entrance. Fourmen in civilian clothes stepped out of the truck and entered the shop. Awitness to the incident told Human Rights Watch:The first one to enter the shop shouted, “Don’tlook at us, look at the ground!” All four of them were carrying guns,pistols I think. One of them pointed his gun at Abdul Nasir and shouted,“Get up!” As soon as Abdul Nasir got off the ground the man walkedhim to their car. Since that time I have not seen Abdul.Nasir’s family reported his abduction to the QuettaCity police station on April 9, 2010. In response, the police did not lodge anFIR but sent a letter to the Secretary of Home and Tribal Affairs forBalochistan, Akbar Hussain Durrani, saying they could not investigate or arrestmembers of the Army, the Frontier Corps, or “secret agencies”according to section 549 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The police gave thefamily a copy of the letter. Police from the Quetta City station did eventuallylodge an FIR on October 14, 2009, but it did not mention the army, the FrontierCorps, intelligence agencies, or any government authorities. It merely saidthat Nasir had gone missing.On January 24, 2010, a lawyer acting on behalf ofNasir’s family filed a missing person petition with the Balochistan HighCourt. On February 21, 2010, Quetta police issued another statement, submittedto the court by lawyers on behalf of Nasir’s family, stating that policewere not allowed to enter the Army cantonment (base) in Quetta to investigatewhether Nasir was detained there. Although court hearings were ongoing at thiswriting, only police representatives, and no other agency representatives, haveappeared before the Court. Even police appearances have been rare. At the timeof writing, Human Rights Watch had received reports that Abdul Nasir had beenreleased by his captors, but further information was not available.Cases 23, 24, and 25: Enforced Disappearance ofChakkar Khan Marri, 24, Two-Month-Long Enforced Disappearance of “SalmanS.” (not his real name), 24, and Administrative Detention of Five OthersOn September 3, 2009, a group of Baloch students including ChakkarKhan Marri and “Salman S.,” and five others were meeting with the vice-chancellorof Balochistan University in Quetta to lobby for the reopening of theuniversity, which had been closed for three months due to violence in Quetta.According to Salman S., after the students left theVice-Chancellor’s office, they gathered with other students at Block 8 ofthe university campus to protest the closure of the university. The protestingstudents included a group from an ethnic Pashtun student organization.Almost as soon as Marri, Salman S., and the five other studentsjoined the group, nearly 20 FC soldiers, who were waiting near their trucks atthe university grounds, approached them. They told the Pashtun students todisperse and started beating and cursing all the Baloch students taking part inthe protest. The soldiers arrested Marri, Salman S., and the other fivestudents and put all of them into the trucks. Salman S. told Human RightsWatch:After a few minutes of driving, all seven of us were takento the police station at the Quetta Railway Station. At the police station, we weretransferred into the custody of other agents. I believe they were fromPakistan’s secret intelligence agencies. There were many of them [intelligenceagents], all wearing white shalwar kameez [traditional casual Pakistanidress for men]. They took off our shirts and blindfolded each of us with them,leaving us half-naked.Two of the students were released later the same day.Another two were released six days later on September 9. Another was releasedon September 11. Salman S. was released at the end of November 2009. Marriremains missing.Salman S. and two other students are currently facingterrorism-related charges before the Anti-Terrorism Court.Salman S. told Human Rights Watch that he was kept hoodedfrom the moment of his abduction to his release and did not know whether theother students were with him. He also said that on the day of his release, hehad a brief conversation with Marri in the courtyard of the facility. WhenSalman S. asked Marri about his health, he replied, “Be quiet, the guardsare here, if they hear us they will beat us again.”Upon his release, Salman S. immediately told Marri’sfamilies about the abductions. Marri’s family helped Salman S. to lodgean application for an FIR with police and a petition with the Balochistan HighCourt. The other released students went into hiding, too afraid of beingabducted again to pursue justice for their illegal arrests.In January or February 2010, a boy released from Kuli Campin Quetta’s Army cantonment told Marri’s family that he had spokento Marri briefly in prison no more than three days prior to his release.Salman S. and Marri’s brother submitted an applicationfor an FIR regarding the abductions with the police station at Balochistan Universityin Quetta on February 22, 2010. The police rejected the application because,according to Marri’s brother, it charged senior officials of the FC, theMI, the ISI, FCIU, and the Vice Chancellor of Balochistan University withresponsibility for the disappearances.According to Marri’s brother, the police said theywould accept the application for an FIR only if the applicants removed allreferences to the high-level authorities. The applicants refused and triedeight more times to lodge the original FIR application, but each time thepolice rejected it.A lawyer acting on behalf of Marri’s family filed apetition with the Balochistan High Court in early March 2010. The petitioncharged the IB, ISI, MI, and the vice chancellor with responsibility forMarri’s enforced disappearance.The Balochistan High Court has held four hearings on Marri’sdisappearance case, but each time has deferred the matter to another hearingdate. Legal representatives of the police have attended the hearings, butrepresentatives of the government or intelligence agencies have not.Marri’s lawyer asked the court to call representatives of the IB, ISI,and MI but, according to Marri’s brother, the judge told Marri’slawyer that this was not “my problem.” Marri’s lawyer alsoasked the court to call the Balochistan Home Secretary, but according to thelawyer, government lawyers informed the court that the Secretary was too busyto appear before it. On June 2, 2010, the court told Marri’s lawyer toremove the reference to the vice-chancellor from the petition or it would dismissit altogether.At the time of writing, Human Rights Watch had receivedreports that Chakkar Khan Marri had been released by the FC, but furtherinformation was not available.Case 26: Enforced Disappearance of Abdul Mujeeb,24Abdul Mujeeb was unit secretary of the BSOA and convener ofthe Tulwar Advisory Council, a body that resolves disputes between differentstudent organizations.On September 1, 2009, Mujeeb was at the Arts Faculty ofBalochistan University in Quetta, speaking to his classmates and teachers.According to a witness, two FC pickup trucks were parked next to a universityexit close to the Arts Faculty. The witness said that an FC major called Mujeebto approach the trucks and then placed him into one of the trucks. Mujeeb didnot resist arrest, nor was he hooded or handcuffed.On September 3, 2009, police at the Balochistan Universitystation refused an application for an FIR filed by Mujeeb’s familybecause it mentioned the Frontier Corps and the MI. However, following an orderfrom the Supreme Court of Pakistan, on February 9, 2010 police at the samestation lodged an FIR against the Frontier Corps and MI.Mujeeb’s brother told Human Rights Watch that onSeptember 26, 25 days after his arrest, Mujeeb contacted him on his mobilephone. They spoke for several minutes. Mujeeb said he had been detained by theMI. His brother told Human Rights Watch that he could hear someone in thebackground telling Mujeeb in Urdu not to speak in his native tongue, only inUrdu. His brother subsequently tried to redial the number on which Mujeebcontacted him, but he could not connect.In March 2010, Mujeeb’s family filed a petition withthe Balochistan High Court. Only lawyers for the police attended theBalochistan High Court hearings even though the court had given notice to theHome Ministry, the Frontier Corps, and the MI to appear before it.Five people released from Kuli Camp at the Army base inQuetta between September 2009 and March 2010 told Mujeeb’s family thatthey had seen him in detention there. All five told Mujeeb’s family thatthey were kept in solitary confinement most of the time, although theyoccasionally shared a cell with others, including with Mujeeb. The formerdetainees told Mujeeb’s relatives that the interrogators routinely tookthem to a separate room where they tied them up, hung them upside down, andbeat them. Although the detainees were hooded, at night they would remove thehoods after the guards had left and were also able to see Mujeeb.At the time of writing, Human Rights Watch had receivedreports that Abdul Mujeeb had been released by his captors, but furtherinformation was not available.Case 27: Enforced Disappearance of Din MohammadBaloch, 40On June 29, 2009, medical doctor Din Mohammad Baloch was ona night shift at a small medical clinic in the Ornach area of Khuzdar district.A staff member, “Bukhtiar” (not his real name),was also in the clinic. He told Baloch’s family that at around 2:30 a.m.seven men entered the clinic. A few of them tied Bukhtiar up and locked him ina room, while the others went into Baloch’s office. It was dark, Bukhtiarsaid, and he could not see the men clearly or determine whether they werewearing uniforms. Bukhtiar said he could hear loud noises that sounded like ascuffle between Baloch and the perpetrators, and then he heard the men draggingBaloch out.When Bukhtiar finally freed himself around 30 minutes later,he informed Baloch’s family. The family went to the local police stationlater the same day, but the police refused to lodge an FIR into the abduction,offering no explanation. Two days later the police lodged an FIR based on aninterview with Bukhtiar. The FIR said that Baloch was taken by unknown men.Several months after Baloch’s disappearance, localnewspapers reported that the Frontier Corps had arrested him and two others inconnection with an armed attack on the Frontier Corps on August 14, 2009. Thealleged attack took place nearly two months after Baloch had been abducted.Baloch’s brother managed to speak to the author of the article, who toldhim that the information came from the Special Branch of the Police, theintelligence arm of the Balochistan Police Service. However, governmentauthorities have not officially confirmed that Baloch is in FC custody orspecified the charges against him.Baloch’s family told Human Rights Watch they believedBaloch had been abducted by intelligence agencies because he was a seniormember of the Baloch National Movement. Baloch’s brother said that he hadmet the Chief Minister of Balochistan, Nawab Mohammad Aslam Raisani, on July 15and in August 2009. On the latter occasion the Chief Minister told him thatBaloch was in the custody of the intelligence agencies, but did not specifywhich one. Human Rights Watch wrote to Chief Minister Raisani seekingconfirmation that he had made these allegations, but received no response fromRaisani or his office.A lawyer acting on behalf of Baloch’s family filed apetition regarding Baloch’s “disappearance” with theBalochistan High Court on July 4, 2009. On May 27, 2010 the court orderedpolice to locate him, with the presiding judge saying that they should“do everything” to find him. The court has not had any furtherhearings since then. On May 23, 2010, relatives also submitted the case to theCIMP.The Voice for Baloch Missing Persons, a local Balochnongovernmental organization, filed a separate petition on Baloch’s disappearancein the Supreme Court. In June 2010, the Supreme Court told Baloch’slawyers that the ISI had reported to the court that Baloch was not in theircustody but was being held by the chief of the Mangal tribe. However, the ISIdid not provide any further details about these claims to the court, and thecourt did not share their submissions with Baloch’s lawyers.At this writing, the family has not been able to obtain anyfurther information regarding Baloch’s fate or whereabouts.Case 28: Enforced Disappearance of Haji MurradKhan Marri, 65On June 28, 2009, farmer Haji Murrad Khan Marri left hishouse to go grocery shopping at a local market in the town of Hub. A relativeof Marri, who spoke to eyewitnesses, told Human Rights Watch that as Marri lefthis house in the industrial Sukaran area, a red Toyota Corolla suddenly droveup. Four men in civilian clothes and carrying machine guns jumped out of thecar, grabbed Marri, and put him inside the car.Two family friends who witnessed the incident immediatelyinformed Marri’s family, and the family went to the local Hayt policestation in Hub. The police suggested that Marri could be with relatives orfriends. When the family returned to the police station the following day, thepolice, according to Marri’s relative, said that they could not doanything about such cases because they “happen in Balochistan everyday.”For nine months Marri’s family had no informationabout his fate or whereabouts. Then, on January 10, 2010, Balochistan Home andTribal Affairs Minister Zafar Zehri announced a Rs 3,000,000 (approximately US$3,400) reward for the capture of Marri and others whom Zehri claimed werewanted Baloch “separatists.”According to Marri’s family, on March 27, 2010, an FCofficer called Marri’s family and said that Marri was in their custody.The FC said Marri had been charged with murder and possession of Indiancurrency and explosives. FC Col. Asad Shahzad Kattak held a press conferencethe same day saying Marri had been arrested in Chaman, close to the Balochistanborder with Afghanistan, while crossing into Pakistan from Afghanistan.According to Col. Kattak, Marri had been placed in police custody in Saddarpolice station in Chaman. However, neither Marri’s lawyer, nor his familyhas been allowed to see him.The criminal case against Marri is pending before theBalochistan High Court. His disappearance case has been added to a combinedpetition filed by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan with the SupremeCourt of Pakistan in January 2010. Following a Supreme Court order, the Haytpolice finally lodged an FIR into Marri’s disappearance.At the time of writing, Human Rights Watch had receivedreports that Haji Murrad Khan Marri had been released by his captors, butfurther information was not available.Case 29: Enforced disappearance of Zakir MajeedBaloch, 24On June 8, 2009, Zakir Majeed Baloch, a student politician,was driving from Nushki district along with his two friends,“Sheraz” and “Hamid” (not their real names). Accordingto Sheraz, at around 4 or 5 p.m., two pickup trucks with no license plates, aToyota Vigo and a Toyota Surf, stopped their van. Sheraz told Human RightsWatch:Five or six men, all in civilian clothes, came out of thepickups and pointed their guns at us. We thought straight away that they werefrom the [intelligence] agencies. When I saw they had guns I knew we had tolisten to them. As soon as we got out of our van they started beating us withtheir fists and gun butts. It felt like an eternity, but they hit us forprobably no longer than five to ten minutes. Then they blindfolded us andchained our wrists behind our backs. They put Zakir in one of the cars and thetwo of us in the other one.Inside the car, as it was driving away, the men kepthitting us, asking where we were going, where we were coming from, and what wewere doing in the region. We told them we were students from Nushki. Some 40minutes later the car stopped, and they took the chains off our wrists andpushed us out, still blindfolded. After the car left, we managed to get a rideback to Mastung. But we still don’t know what happened to Zakir.Zakir Baloch’s relatives tried several times toregister the case with the police and the Balochistan High Court, but bothrefused. According to them, the police said that they “could not registerdisappearances alleging the involvement of Pakistan’s intelligenceagencies.”On October 6, 2009, following a Supreme Court of Pakistanorder that required the police to register all enforced disappearance casescountrywide, the police finally lodged an FIR into Baloch’s case. TheBalochistan High Court accepted a petition regarding his case later that month.On January 22, 2010, Pakistan’s National CrisisManagement Cell said Baloch had been released to his family, but his family saidhe had not returned home and his whereabouts remain unknown to them.Members of Baloch’s family went on hunger strikeoutside the Quetta Press Club in June 2010 to protest the continued failure ofthe authorities to locate him. But they said threatening anonymous phone callsmade them stop the strike.Baloch’s family and friends believed that he wastargeted because of his role as a Vice-Chairman for the Baloch StudentsOrganization-Azad, a student political party that advocates Balochistan’sseparation from Pakistan. According to the family, Baloch has been politicallyactive, especially on the issues related to the fate of missing persons inBalochistan.The family has not received any further information abouthis fate or whereabouts.Case 30: Enforced Disappearance of Mohammad Tariq,25On May 17, 2009, university student Mohammad Tariq wastravelling in a truck from Tump district to the city of Turbat in Balochistan’ssouthern Mand region close to the Iranian border. There were over a dozen otherpassengers in the truck.At approximately 3 p.m., uniformed FC soldiers in a pickup truckwith FC markings drove up to the truck ordered the driver to stop. The driver,who knew Tariq, later told Tariq’s family that the soldiers then told allpassengers to get out of the truck and lined them up. The soldiers went throughthe line, asking each passenger’s name, and as soon as they heardTariq’s they grabbed him and took him aside. The soldiers then orderedthe other passengers back into the truck, but they and the driver could seeTariq being led into the FC vehicle. The truck proceeded to Turbat, where the driverimmediately told one of Tariq’s friends that he had been taken by the FrontierCorps.A group of Tariq’s friends and his brother went to theFC camp near where the truck had been stopped. But, according to Tariq’sbrother, the FC commander denied having Tariq in custody.Lawyers for Tariq’s family filed a petition with theBalochistan High Court on May 28, 2009, which has held at least four hearingsin the case. The truck driver provided the court with a sworn affidavitdescribing Tariq’s abduction by the FC personnel. Nonetheless, legalrepresentatives for the Frontier Corps, who appeared at one of the hearings,denied that Tariq was in FC custody.The Turbat police repeatedly refused to accept anapplication for an FIR into Tariq’s case until they were ordered to do soby the Supreme Court on February 5, 2010. The FIR that was finally lodged mentionedthe FC commander in Turbat and the Minister for Home and Tribal Affairs ofBalochistan, the responsible provincial minister for the FC.Tariq’s family also reported the case to the CIMP onJune 2, 2010.At this writing, the family has not been able to obtain anyfurther information on Tariq’s fate or whereabouts.Cases 31, 32, and 33: Enforced Disappearance and ExtrajudicialKilling of Sher Mohammed Baloch, 35, Ghulam Mohammed Baloch, 40, and LalaMunir, 50On April 3, 2009, Sher Mohammed Baloch, Ghulam Mohammed Baloch,and Lala Munir were in their lawyer’s office in a local courthouse in Turbat.All three had pending criminal cases, which they had been contesting in the courtssince 2007. Relatives of the three said that after their initial arrest in 2006and subsequent release on bail, Sher and Ghulam had been repeatedly threatenedby the security agencies, both in the course of the court proceedings andthrough phone calls.According to Sher Mohammed Baloch’s relative, on April3, 2009, FC military personnel secured Turbat while the court heard the casesagainst the three men. As the men were talking to their lawyer after thehearing, a group of about five or six people in civilian clothes entered theoffice and started smashing things and accused the three men of being“terrorists.” Witnesses at the courthouse later told relatives thatmen they believed were security agency personnel handcuffed and hooded thethree men and put them in cars. They also said that the FC military vehicleswere there, and the incident happened in front of numerous witnesses.Sher Mohammed Baloch later managed to call a friend from hismobile phone, saying they were being taken away by the security agencies, butdid not manage to say anything else.The next day, the BRP filed a petition with the police inTurbat. The lawyer for the men also submitted a petition to the court about theattack in his office. No action was taken on either complaint. Protests againstthe abduction were held in Karachi and in Balochistan.The police on April 9, 2009 informed the families that they receiveda phone call informing them of three bodies found in Pedarak town, near Turbat.A forensic team brought by police found the victims’ hands were tied andtheir heads were hooded. The team also found many spent cartridges at thescene, which they handed over to the police. The families went to the hospitaland identified the bodies of the three men. They said there were multiplebullet wounds to the bodies, and what they believed to be signs of torture onthe bodies, including burn marks and bruises on their chests and backs.The families said that they were not aware of any results ofthe investigation into the forced disappearances and apparent extrajudicial killings.Case 34: Enforced Disappearance of Jallil AkhamRiki, 35On February 13, 2009, Jallil Akham Riki, a BRP activist fromChulam Jhan village in Quetta, was leaving a local mosque after Friday prayers.In front of multiple witnesses, four cars surrounded him. Uniformed FC soldiers,together with men in civilian clothes whom witnesses believed to be from theISI, ordered him into one of the cars. A witness later told the family thatRiki tried to escape, but the FC soldiers threatened to shoot him. Theyblindfolded him and put him into the car.The day after his abduction, his family filed a habeascorpus petition with the Balochistan High Court. The court sent notices to the FrontierCorps and the ISI, but neither appeared in court nor responded.A group of human rights defenders raised Riki’s casewith Balochistan Chief Minister Aslam Raisani. One activist told Human RightsWatch that Raisani said that Riki had been detained by the ISI on suspicion ofinvolvement in various crimes, including the burning of the Pakistani flag andshouting of anti-government slogans. Human Rights Watch wrote to Chief MinisterRaisani seeking confirmation that he had alleged as stated above, but receivedno response from Raisani or his office.The family said it had learned from a released detainee thatRiki had been held in Kuli Camp in Quetta for at least eight months. Thedetainee, who was released in November 2009, told the family that he and Rikihad been cellmates since Riki’s arrest in February 2009. According toRiki’s relative, the former detainee said that Riki had been severelytortured and had serious health problems. He said Riki was so weak that he hadto help him wash his clothes and look after himself.In February 2010, Riki’s family applied with the localpolice for an FIR against the ISI and the Frontier Corps. After that,Riki’s father started receiving anonymous phone calls. The callers toldhim to revoke the FIR or otherwise he would share Riki’s fate.At this writing, the family has not been able to obtain anyfurther information on Riki’s fate or whereabouts.Cases 35 and 36:  Repeated Enforced Disappearanceof Bashir Azeem, 76, and Six-Month-Long Enforced Disappearance of Zakar QambraniBashir Azeem, a medical doctor and the secretary general ofthe BRP, has been subjected to an enforced disappearance at least three times, in2005, 2006 and 2009.In September 2005, a group of men in civilian clothesarrived at his clinic in Sibi and took him away, saying they had interceptedhis conversations with Navar Akhbar Bugti, an influential tribal chieftain andkey Baloch nationalist leader killed by Pakistani forces in August 2006. Azeemsaid the men brought him, blindfolded, to a room where two men in Frontier Corpuniforms interrogated him about his contacts with Bugti. Unsatisfied with hisanswers, they said they would take him to Quetta, to be interrogated byhigher-ranking officers.Azeem said the two men brought him to a cantonment area in HannaUtak Valley in Quetta. There, he was held in a cell for seven days andinterrogated about his activities. During this time, his family had noinformation about his whereabouts. He believed that his son’s efforts tolocate him through contacts in the military eventually helped to secure hisrelease.In February 2006, when Azeem arrived at his clinic, his soninformed him that MI officers had been asking about him and said he should comeand see the MI officer, a Major Nadim. Azeem went to the police station, wherethe major had an office. Azeem said that after asking him a couple ofquestions, the major told him he was under arrest. Azeem spent 10 hours alonein the major’s office, and then two officers handcuffed and blindfoldedhim and transferred him to another place. Azeem told Human Rights Watch:They put me in a cold cell with no mattress. When theyallowed me in the morning to go out for my prayers, I saw men in FC uniformsand realized I was in their jail. They kept me there for 15 days. They did notallow me to inform my family. I eventually managed to inform them through amullah at the base who used to know me.Then they released me, warning me not to make any speechesor press statements about my arrest. I believe they detained me at the timemainly to prevent me from participating in any Baloch activities during [PakistaniPresident] Musharraf’s visit to the region.The third forced disappearance began on February 6, 2009. Ataround 7 p.m., Azeem was travelling in a car with a colleague from the BRP,Zakar Qambrani. They were on their way to a press club in Quetta to announcethe merger of BRP with another Baloch party, the National Congress.On the road, their car was blocked by three cars. A group ofarmed men in civilian clothes took both Azeem and Qambrani out of their car,blindfolded them, and put them into a jeep. They took away Azeem’s cellphone, glasses, watch, and the money he had on him. Azeem said:We drove for about 30 minutes, and then entered a compound.I heard a guard at the gate asking for the officers’ identification. Theyput us into an underground cell and one of the officers started kicking me withhis boots and beating me with a stick, accusing me of being a traitor andcarrying out anti-state activities. There were other detainees there as well,held in six separate cells.On the third day of my detention, the officers put me intoa car, drove for about 40 minutes, and brought me to a three-story building. Ina room there, a high-ranking officer interrogated me, saying theywouldn’t allow people like me “to disintegrate the state.”Three times during these interrogations he sent me down to a cellar where otherofficers beat me with a leather strap, saying this would continue until I startedcooperating. And then they brought me back to my cell.But the same evening they again put me into a car, drove mefor about 12 hours, and brought me into another underground cell. There was nofloor in the cell, just the dirt ground, and a plastic bottle for urinating.They soon brought me for another interrogation. They hung me upside down by thefeet and kept asking who was financing us, and where the militants were.The following days they continued torturing me in variousways. They pushed pins under my nails, put a chair on my back and sat on top ofit, and put me for 48 hours into a room where I could only stand but not move.When they took me out, my legs were so swollen that I collapsed on the floorand fainted. They had to take me to a hospital, but three days later theyreturned me to my cell.Azeem said the officers then stopped torturing him and justheld him in his cell without further interrogations. On March 31, 2009, anofficer brought him white clothes and told him to get dressed and come out.Azeem said he thought they were about to execute him, but instead they drovehim for about two hours and then dropped him on the side of the road. From ataxi driver, he found out he was in Karachi and went to stay with his relativesthere.Azeem said that during the entire time of his detention hisfamily had no information about his whereabouts, despite their efforts to findhim. His captors, he said, explained that nobody could help him get out.According to Azeem, they used to say, “Even if the president or chief justicetells us to release you, we won’t. We can torture you, or kill you, orkeep you for years at our will. It is only the Army chief and the ISI chiefthat we obey.”Azeem said that after they first got separated, he had noinformation about his colleague, Zakar Qambrani. Qambrani was eventuallyreleased four months after Azeem. According to Azeem, Qambrani said that he hadbeen held the whole time in a Quetta jail where the two men were first brought.Qambrani’s family also had no information about him until he wasreleased.Case 37: Enforced Disappearance of Abdul Ghani, 18On January 31, 2009, Abdul Ghani was on his way by bus fromSibi district to his home district of Thali. At about 7:30 p.m. FC personnel ata major checkpoint in Sultankot stopped Ghani’s bus. A relative of Ghanitold Human Rights Watch that according to a passenger on the bus, FC soldiersstopped the bus and ordered all the men out. The men, about 30 to 35 in total,were told to stand in two separate lines with their backs to each other. Theythreatened to shoot anyone who looked up, and when two men lifted their headswhen Abdul Ghani’s name was mentioned, the soldiers hit them in the face.The two identified Abdul Ghani, and the soldiers then grabbed and hooded himand took him away. Everyone else was allowed to return to the bus and when itreached Thali, they told his family what happened.That evening at about 8:30 p.m. Ghani’s relatives inThali and his friends on the bus went to the local police station to complain.According to one of Ghani’s relatives, the police refused to register acase, saying they “do not take FC cases.”In January 2010, the family filed a missing person petitionwith the Interior Ministry. On February 9 the police in Thali finally lodged anFIR regarding Ghani’s forced disappearance. A lawyer acting on behalf ofhis family filed a petition with the Balochistan High Court on February 25. Ghani’srelatives and friends interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that after thelawyers filed the petition, FC personnel threatened three people who witnessed Ghani’sabduction as they crossed the very same checkpoint at Sultankot. “Theysaid, ‘We will disappear you if you go to court,’” one of thewitnesses reported. Despite the threat, all three of them gave evidence in courton April 19, 2010.At this writing court proceedings were underway, and lawyersfor the Frontier Corps have at times appeared in court. However, the FC has notprovided the court with any information about Ghani’s fate or whereabouts.Case 38: Enforced Disappearance of Noor Khan, 28On December 8, 2008, Noor Khan was filling gas at a gasstation in Turbat city. Two double-door pickup trucks, one black and the othera yellow-sand color, drove into the gas station. Eyewitnesses later told Khan’sfamily that around six men in civilian clothes emerged from the vehiclesbrandishing rifles. They immediately grabbed Khan, put a hood and blanket overhis head, and put him into one of the pickups. Then both vehicles drove away.The witnesses immediately informed Khan’s family. Thesame day, the family went to a police station in Turbat to file a missingperson report. One of Khan’s relatives told Human Rights Watch that anofficer at the police station told them, “We don’t have authorityover this, nor can we do anything about it. You know what happens here inBalochistan.”On December 18, 2008, Khan’s family filed a petition withthe Balochistan High Court. At this writing, six court hearings have takenplace. At one of the hearings, a legal representative for the police said Khanwas not in police or FC custody.In February 2010, following an order by the Supreme Court ofPakistan, police lodged an FIR about Khan’s forced disappearance, callingon the Turbat District Police Officer and the commanding officer of the FrontierCorps in Turbat to investigate the case.At this writing, Khan’s family was unaware of anysteps undertaken by the police to locate Khan. His fate and whereabouts remainunknown.Case 39: Enforced Disappearance of Niaz Mohammad,28On July 8, 2007, Niaz Mohammad was walking to work togetherwith two friends in Quetta. One of the friends told Human Rights Watch that asthey were passing the Saddam rail crossing at Sariab rail station, Mohammadstopped to relieve himself while his friends continued walking. At that moment,a four-door white Toyota Vigo pickup truck drove up to Mohammad. Three men in civilianclothes jumped out of the car, grabbed Mohammad, dragged him into the vehicle,and sped off in the direction of Quetta’s Sariakot district.Fearing for their own safety, the witnesses did not tellMohammad’s family about the abduction until a month later. The familytried to obtain some information about Mohammad’s fate through contactsin Pakistan’s intelligence agencies and tribal chiefs, but these effortsproved futile.One of Mohammad’s relatives also reported the case toShalkot police station in Quetta. The police registered the incident, butrefused to lodge an FIR into the case. In 2009, a lawyer acting on behalf ofMohammad’s family filed a petition with the Balochistan High Court,alleging that the Frontier Corps, MI, ISI, IB, and Pakistan government were theperpetrators. At this writing, four hearings have taken place, but onlyrepresentatives of the police have appeared before the court. On each occasion,they have claimed that Mohammad was not in their custody and they did not knowhis whereabouts.Following the general order of the Supreme Court instructingpolice to register FIRs even when they implicate security forces andintelligence agencies, the police finally lodged an FIR into the case on June19, 2010, but the FIR listed Mohammad as a “missing person” withoutreferring to Pakistan’s intelligence agencies.Mohammad’s family told Human Rights Watch that he wasa civil servant working in Quetta and was not politically active, although hedid briefly do social work with the Baloch National Party after the 2007Balochistan earthquake.At this writing, the family has not managed to obtain anyinformation about Mohammad’s fate or whereabouts.Case 40: Enforced Disappearance of Tawakal Khan,64In March 2007, Tawakal Khan, a shepherd, was inside a store inthe Thali district near the city of Sibi. Several eyewitnesses, one of whom wasKhan’s relative, told Khan’s family that four cars and severalmotorcycles suddenly stopped by the store. About 15 men, some in civilianclothes and some in uniforms, got out of their cars. Two entered the shop andasked for Khan by name. After the shop owner pointed at Khan, the men grabbedhim, dragged him outside, and put him into one of the vehicles. Eyewitnessestold Khan’s family that he did not try to resist.The witnesses informed Khan’s family the followingday. A relative told Human Rights Watch that they did not attempt to report theincident to the police because they were worried they would also be “disappeared.”However, in 2009, they filed a petition with the Balochistan High Court. Atthis writing they have not been able to obtain any information on Khan’sfate or whereabouts.Khan’s family and friends said he was not involved inpolitics but they believed he was taken by Pakistan’s intelligenceagencies because he was a senior member of the Marri tribe and at the time ofhis abduction the Pakistan Army was engaged in military operations againstparts of the tribe.Cases 41, 42, 43, and 44: Enforced Disappearanceof Mohammad Iqbal, 30, and 11-Month-Long Enforced Disappearance of Nawaz Ahmed,Jasum Ali, and Zahid AliOn March 14, 2007, FC soldiers took into custody universitystudent Mohammad Iqbal and three of his friends: Nawaz Ahmed, Jasum Ali, andZahid Ali.According to Iqbal’s family, who later spoke to Ahmed,Jasum Ali, and Zhad Ali, the soldiers detained the four men at approximately 9a.m. on the road between the districts of Tump and Mand in Balochistan, andtook them to the FC camp in Turbat. A shepherd who knew Iqbal witnessed theincident from a distance and immediately told Iqbal’s family.Iqbal’s brother told Human Rights Watch that when he went to theFC’s Turbat camp the same day, the camp commander said that Iqbal and thethree other men had been “detained for questioning and would be releasedin a matter of hours.” When Iqbal’s brother next inquired about hiswhereabouts on April 25, 2007, another FC officer from the same camp at Turbat,Maj. Abdul Rehman, told him that all four men had been transferred to Quetta.After their release, Ahmed, Jasum Ali, and Zahid Aliconfirmed that together with Iqbal they were first held in Turbat, in an open-airFC prison, and then were transferred to a jail in Quetta’s armycantonment. They said that in Quetta, interrogators subjected them to sleepdeprivation and asked about their participation in armed Baloch groups, whichthey denied. Ahmed, Jasum Ali, and Zahid Ali were released from the Quetta Armycantonment on February 16, 2008, but they do not know who released them becausethey were blindfolded.Relatives of the four men filed a habeas corpus petition inthe Balochistan High Court and eventually the case reached the Supreme Court ofPakistan. During Supreme Court proceedings that commenced on May 16, 2009,legal representatives for the federal Ministry of Interior claimed MohammadIqbal had been released, but Iqbal’s family denied this.After the four men had gone missing, their familiesrepeatedly tried to apply for a FIR naming the Frontier Corps, but the policerepeatedly refused. The FIR was finally registered more than two years later onFebruary 8, 2010, after an order from the Supreme Court of Pakistan. In theFIR, relatives of the four men accused the Frontier Corps in Tump, localpolice, and the Home Secretary of Balochistan of involvement in the forceddisappearances.Two prisoners released from the army cantonment in Quetta inMarch 2010 told Iqbal’s family that for the last two months of theirdetention they shared a prison cell with Mohammad Iqbal. Iqbal’s familysaid they had informed the Supreme Court of Pakistan of these witnesses’testimony through their lawyers.Iqbal’s brother told Human Rights Watch that theybelieved the four men were targeted because they belong to the Rind tribe. Atthe time of their abduction, parts of the Rind tribe were involved in armedclashes with Pakistan security forces in the Ziarat Kalig region where the fourmen were camping the night before their disappearance.At this writing, there have been no further developments inthe case and Iqbal’s fate and whereabouts remain unknown.Case 45:  Three-Month-Long Enforced Disappearanceof “Asad,” Age 22In December 2006, “Asad” (not his real name), amember of the Baloch Students Organization, was travelling from his native townof Tump to Karachi by bus. In Turbat, three jeeps blocked the bus. A group ofarmed men in civilian clothes got on the bus, called Asad by name, and draggedhim out. They did not provide any explanation and just told Asad that theywould shoot him if he resisted.The men put a hood on Asad’s head, handcuffed him, andput him in one of their vehicles. Asad said that they also gave him aninjection in the shoulder which made him lose consciousness. When he woke up,he was hanging upside down in some room. He told Human Rights Watch:I was naked, chained by the ankles to the ceiling, my handstied behind my back. I still had a hood on my head and couldn’t seeanyone, but soon five or six men [judging by the voices) came in, and startedbeating me with sticks—all over my body. They spoke Urdu with a Punjabiaccent and kept asking the same questions about why I wanted independence and whetherI knew some Baloch leaders. They accused me of killing soldiers andagencies’ people. It lasted for about three hours, with constantbeatings. I fainted twice. When they finally released the chains, I crashed onthe ground, blood streaming all over my body.After the initial interrogation, the security forces put Asadin a car and transferred him to another location. Asad said they travelled forwhat felt like two days during which he was not given food or water and was notallowed to use a restroom. They eventually arrived in Quetta and Asad was put intoa cell. He said that for the first four days he was in solitary confinement,regularly interrogated and beaten. The interrogators, according to Asad,repeatedly said, “If you are so eager to fight, don’t fight againstMuslims—go join Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan, and kill Christians andJews!”After four days, Asad was transferred to another cell wherehe could communicate with other detainees. They told him that they were in KuliCamp in Quetta. Asad spent another month-and-a-half there and then wastransferred to another detention facility. He did not know where the otherdetention facility was, but believed it was still in Quetta, about an hour awayfrom the Kuli Camp. He spent another two months there, after which the men whomhe believed were from the security agencies put him in the car, hooded, and,after two or three hours of driving, handed him over to the police.Asad’s family, who found out about his abduction fromother passengers on the bus, had no information about his whereabouts duringhis disappearance. His father applied for an FIR with the Turbat police andinquired with the magistrate there, but both the police and the magistrate saidthere was nothing they could do about it.Asad was eventually brought before the magistrate and thenthe Anti-Terrorism Court in Turbat. In both courts Asad gave a detailed accountof what happened to him. He said it would have been obvious to those present inthe court that he had been tortured. He could not stand on his own; two policeofficers had to hold him up during the proceedings. The judges, according to Asad,“showed sympathy,” but said there was nothing they could do about histreatment.Asad was released on bail in 2007 and has been in hidingsince then. He said the security agencies came looking for him in Tump. They alsocalled his phone, saying they would catch him again and this time would killhim.Appendix II: Letter to Chief Minister BalochistanThis letter was sent to the Chief Minister of Balochistan onApril 8, 2011. At the time of writing, no reply had been received:His Excellency Nawab Aslam RaisaniChief Minister BalochistanChief Minister’s SecretariatZarghon Rd.QuettaRe: BalochistanDear Chief Minister,I am writing about enforced disappearances in Balochistan.Human Rights Watch is gathering information for a report we will soon release.We understand the government has taken some steps since assuming office in 2008to address the issue. In order to accurately reflect those developments and tomake sure the information in our report is up to date, we would appreciateresponses from the relevant officials and institutions to the questions in theattached.We appreciate your response by May 19, 2011.Thank you for your consideration.Sincerely,Brad AdamsExecutive DirectorAsia DivisionHuman Rights Watch understands that the issue of enforceddisappearances in Balochistan has been on the government’s agenda sincethe return to civilian rule in 2008. Has your government, in accordance withits public commitments to end enforced disappearances, directed relevant lawenforcement authorities to end the practice of enforced disappearances? Hasyour government ordered relevant law enforcement agencies to conduct seriousinvestigations into alleged disappearances? Please specify what directions havebeen given to the police, Frontier Corps, military authorities, intelligenceagencies, or other state institutions regarding cases of disappearances.Whataction has been taken by these forces to investigate cases of allegeddisappearances?Whatsources of information does the government use to assess the problem ofenforced disappearances in the country?What is the precise procedure for investigating“disappearance” complaints submitted to the state and federalauthorities? How many such complaints have been received since the governmentassumed office in 2008?Intotal, how many people were disappeared from Balochistan during the rule ofGeneral Musharraf from 1999-2008 according to government estimates?Howmany are still missing?Howmany have been released?Whichstate institutions were responsible for disappearances?Howmany of the disappeared people during this period have been subsequentlycharged with a crime? In each case please explain what crime the person hasbeen charged with and the status of the case.Howmany were charged with terrorism-related charges?Intotal, how many people in Balochistan have been disappeared since yourgovernment assumed office in 2008.Howmany of these are still missing?Howmany have been released?Whichstate institutions were responsible for disappearances?Howmany of the disappeared people during this period have been subsequentlycharged with a crime? In each case please explain what crime the person hasbeen charged with and the status of the case. How many were charged withterrorism-related offenses?Yourgovernment is on record for having apologized for “state abuses” inBalochistan. How many military, paramilitary, and civilian law enforcementpersonnel and members of the armed forces have been arrested on charges ofperpetrating such abuses?What is the current status of the government’sinvestigation into state complicity in enforced disappearances in Balochistan?Has anyone been arrested and charged?Do thepolice automatically open investigations following claims of disappearances inBalochistan? If not, why not?Appendix III: Letter to Prime Minister Yousuf Raza GilaniThis letter was sent to the Prime Minister of Pakistan, theInterior Minister of Pakistan, and the Chief Minister of Balochistan on May 4,2011. At the time of writing, no reply had been received:Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani,Prime Minister’s Secretariat,Constitution AvenueIslamabadRe: BalochistanDear Prime Minister,I am writing about enforced disappearances in Balochistan.Human Rights Watch is gathering information for a report we will soon release.We understand the government has taken some steps since assuming office in 2008to address the issue. In order to accurately reflect those developments and tomake sure the information in our report is up to date, we would appreciateresponses from the relevant officials and institutions to the questions in theattached.We appreciate your response by May 19, 2011.Thank you for your consideration.Sincerely,Brad AdamsExecutive DirectorAsia DivisionHuman Rights Watch understands that the issue of enforceddisappearances in Balochistan has been on the government’s agenda sincethe return to civilian rule in 2008. Has your government, in accordance withits public commitments to end enforced disappearances, directed relevant lawenforcement authorities to end the practice of enforced disappearances? Hasyour government ordered relevant law enforcement agencies to conduct seriousinvestigations into alleged disappearances? Please specify what directions havebeen given to the police, Frontier Corps, military authorities, intelligenceagencies, or other state institutions regarding cases of disappearances.What actionhas been taken by these forces to investigate cases of alleged disappearances?Whatsources of information does the government use to assess the problem ofenforced disappearances in the country?What is the precise procedure for investigating “disappearance”complaints submitted to the state and federal authorities? How many suchcomplaints have been received since the government assumed office in 2008?Intotal, how many people were disappeared from Balochistan during the rule ofGeneral Musharraf from 1999-2008 according to government estimates?Howmany are still missing?Howmany have been released?Whichstate institutions were responsible for disappearances?Howmany of the disappeared people during this period have been subsequently chargedwith a crime? In each case please explain what crime the person has beencharged with and the status of the case.Howmany were charged with terrorism-related charges?Intotal, how many people in Balochistan have been disappeared since your governmentassumed office in 2008.Howmany of these are still missing?Howmany have been released?Whichstate institutions were responsible for disappearances?Howmany of the disappeared people during this period have been subsequentlycharged with a crime? In each case please explain what crime the person hasbeen charged with and the status of the case. How many were charged withterrorism-related offenses?Yourgovernment is on record for having apologized for “state abuses” inBalochistan. How many military, paramilitary, and civilian law enforcementpersonnel and members of the armed forces have been arrested on charges ofperpetrating such abuses?What is the current status of the government’sinvestigation into state complicity in enforced disappearances in Balochistan?Has anyone been arrested and charged?Do thepolice automatically open investigations following claims of disappearances inBalochistan? If not, why not?Questions on Specific CasesWe would appreciate information on the status of thefollowing cases of alleged disappearances in Balochistan, including:The current status of each disappeared person, ifknown;Whether the person was killed, charged, or released;Whether anyone was held accountable in any way for thedisappearance;Whether and how much compensation was paid to thevictims or their family members.Has an investigation been opened in each case and ifso by whom and what is the current status of the investigation?What investigative measures have been undertaken to locate theperson and establish the perpetrators?1. Shams Baloch, age 49On July 1, 2010, Shams Baloch, the 49-year-old former mayorof Khuzdar town in Balochistan was stopped by soldiers from the Frontier Corpand handed over to four armed men in plainclothes. On July 2, 2010, one ofBaloch’s relatives tried to file a report with police in Quetta but,according to the man, the police said they “had no authority toinvestigate such disappearances.” Amnesty International later reported thata joint investigation by police and intelligence authorities concluded thatShams Baloch had been stopped by the FC personnel on July 1 but was abducted“in front of them by persons unknown.”2-3. Naseem Baloch, age 32 and Ilyas Karim, age 3132–year-old medical doctor Naseem Balochand31-year-old Ilyas Karim were picked up from a pharmacy near the BolanMedical Complex, one of the main hospitals in Quetta. Their relatives and thestaff of the Bolan Medical Complex where Baloch worked as a doctor filed anapplication for an FIR with Quetta police on May 26, 2010, alleging that the FCand intelligence agencies were responsible for the disappearance. Relatives ofBaloch and Karim also filed a petition with the Balochistan High Court on May29, 2010. The court has held several hearings, but so far has not summonedrepresentatives of the FC or the intelligence agencies. On June 2, 2010,relatives of Baloch and Karim also filed their cases with the Commission ofInquiry for Missing Persons (CIMP). Relatives of the disappeared men told HumanRights Watch that on June 5, 2010, the office of the Chief Minister ofBalochistan, Aslam Raisani informed them that both Baloch and Karim were in thecustody of the Military Intelligence (MI) wing of the Pakistan Army. Reportsindicate that both Karim and Baloch have been released but no action has beentaken against their abductors.4. Rindhan, age 30In the late morning of April 24, 2010, several Khaki-coloredmilitary trucks drove into a village in the remote Thali district ofBalochistan. During the military operation, soldiers saw 30-year-old farmerRindhan who started running away, but some of the soldiers chased him, grabbedand blindfolded him, and put him in one of the trucks. An eyewitness told HumanRights watch that Rindhan was held in the same prison cell on the day of theirabduction, although he did not know where it was. After two days in detention,Rindhan was transferred to a different cell, but Ahmad could still hear what hebelieves was Rindhan screaming as he was tortured and interrogated.  HumanRights Watch had received reports that Rindhan had been released by the Armybut we are not aware of any action taken against his abductors.5. Mehboob Wadela, age 32On April 2, 2010, 32-year-old Mehboob Wadela of the BalochNational Movement (BNM) was abducted on the outskirts of Karachi by men in twopolice cars and two double cabin Toyota Hilux cars. Witnesses said theybelieved the police were from Maripur police station. The body of MehboobWadela and another man, Arif Rehman, were found near Hadh Cross in the Ormaradistrict of Gwadar on February 23, 2011.6-7. Nasibullah Langao, age 14, and Abdul Waheed, age 12On March 5, 2010, fourteen-year-old Nasibullah Langao and12-year-old Abdul Waheed, students from village Ismail in Hudda, Quetta,disappeared after they started making inquiries about the killing ofLangao’s uncle, Abdul Majid Langao. Human Rights Watch has been told thatwhile Majid Langao’s dead body has been been recovered, the two childrenremain missing.8. Bohir Khan, age 26On March 31, 2010, 26 year-old Bohir Khan went out topurchase credit for his mobile phone from a local store in the Askari Parkregion of Quetta, close to a large army residential area and Khalid Airbase.Human Rights Watch understands that Khan has been released by his captors butno action has been taken against his abductors.9. Abdul Wahab Baloch, age 14On March 15, 2010, Abdul Wahab Baloch, a 14-year-old schoolboy from Tump was on his way to meet a friend who lived in the same town whenthree FC trucks and two jeeps which, according to a witness, belonged to thesecurity agencies, stopped the car and took him away. Baloch’s fatherfiled an FIR with Tump police. However, the police said that they did not knowanything about the incident.10. Mir Abdul Waheed Resani Baloch, age 45On January 2, 2010, a court in Khuzdar released Baloch afterhis 10-month detention in Khozdar cental jail. However, within minutes of hisrelease, the police picked him again in the street in front of multiplewitnesses. The police took him to Mastung police station, where he held a pressconference. During the press conference a senior police officer suddenlyannounced that he would like to “talk to Baloch in private,” andtook him to another room from where he disappeared. On January 4,Baloch’s relatives went to the police, who denied having any knowledge ofhis whereabouts. They accepted an FIR which simply said that Baloch was“missing.” Three days later the family filed a petition with theBalochistan High Court. Baloch’s relatives said that after thedisappearance the Chief Minister suspended district police officers for Mastungand Much because the Mastung DPO allegedly handed Baloch over to the Much DPO.A month later, however, both officers were reinstalled.11-12. Mazhar Khan, age 21, and two-month long enforced disappearance ofAbdul Rasool, age 26At around 10 p.m. on December 19, 2009, a group of unknownperpetrators abducted 21 year-old Mazar Khan and 26 year-old Abdul Rasool fromKhan’s house near Kili Station in the Noshki district of Balochistan.According to an eyewitness to the abduction interviewed by Human Rights Watch,seven men in civilian clothes, their faces covered with scarves, broke down thegate to Khan’s house and burst in, firing their pistols in the air. Thecaptors tied the two men’s wrists and ankles and blindfolded them. Thenthey dragged them outside, put them into one of their three pick-up trucks, anddrove away. The next day, relatives of Khan and Rasool reported the disappearanceto police at Kili Station. In the middle of February 2010, Rasool was releasedby his captors.In March 2010, the Balochistan High Court accepted a habeascorpus petition requesting the Secretary of Defense, Federal Ministry ofInterior, Government of Balochistan, MI, the Directorate for Inter-ServicesIntelligence (ISI) and Station House Officer of Kili station police to provideinformation on charges brought against Khan and Rasool. The Court has sinceheld five hearings but only police representatives have ever appeared beforeit. They have denied having any knowledge of the abductions.13. Abdul Ghaffar Langao, age 39On December 11, 2009, a group of unknown men abducted AbdulGhaffar Langao, the 39 year-old leader of the Balochistan National Party (BNP).The same day, Langao’s relatives tried to lodge a complaint about hisabduction at the Garden police station in Karachi, but the police refused. Thefamily filed a petition with the Sindh High Court on January 12, 2010. On January15, 2010, the court ordered the Deputy Attorney-General and Advocate General ofSindh to submit a report on Langao’s whereabouts within two weeks. OnMarch 3, Deputy Attorney General for Sindh province Umer Hayat Sindhu told thecourt on behalf of the director-general of the Intelligence Bureau that Langaohad not been detained or arrested by the Intelligence Bureau (IB).14. Sangat-Sana Baloch, age 31On December 7, 2009, 31 year-old Sangat-Sana Baloch, acentral committee member of the BRP from Khad Khuchu was abducted in Kalpur,near Quetta in Balochistan. At around 4 p.m., as the truck was leaving Kalpur,it was stopped by a police car and two civilian vehicles that blocked the road.The roadblock was located at Bolan Pass on the Quetta-Sindh highway. On December23, Sangat-Sana’s family went to the Kalpur police station but failed toobtain any information. The family filed a petition with the Balochistan HighCourt in 2010.15. Enforced disappearance of Lichi, age 37At 3 p.m. on November 19, 2009, five men wearing whitetraditional Pakistani clothes abducted 37 year-old Lichi from a hotel in Vindrin the Lasbela district of Balochistan. In February 2010, following an order bythe Supreme Court of Pakistan, police finally lodged an FIR. On July 3, 2010,Lichi’s family gave evidence about his disappearance before the CIMP inQuetta. They told the Commission that Lichi was not involved in politics andthat they believed he had been abducted by Pakistan’s secret intelligenceagencies because he belongs to the Marri tribe.16-17. Enforced disappearance of Mir Sohrab Khan Marri, age 27, and ShahMohammad Zarkoon, age unknownOn November 8, 2009, Mir Sohrab Marri and Shah MohammadZarkoon were having tea with seven other men at the front courtyard of the AghaSyed Mohammad Hotel on Masjid Road in Quetta. Suddenly, two Toyota Vigo pickuptrucks, each with four doors and tinted windows, stopped outside the entrance.According to one of the witnesses, five men in plainclothes and armed withrifles approached Marri and Zarkoon and told them to follow them, holdingothers at gunpoint.Marri’s relative also told Human Rights Watch that onthe evening of March 30, 2010, two men claiming to be members of MilitaryIntelligence visited the family at their home in Quetta, saying Marri was intheir custody. On June 2, 2010, Marri’s brother gave evidence before theCIMP. Representatives of the police and the federal government were present,but the Commission did not ask them about the whereabouts of Marri or Zarkoon.That evening, Marri’s brother received an anonymous phone call. He saidthe caller asked him why he testified before the Commission and threatened him,saying, “If you are so keen to meet your brother, we can help you meethim.”18. Enforced disappearance of Najibullah Qambrani, age 27In the late evening of October 22, 2009, a group ofuniformed Frontier Corps soldiers and men in plainclothes abducted 27 year-oldNajibullah Qambrani from his house on Kamrani Road, Quetta. Two days after theabduction, Qambrani’s family applied for an FIR at Sarai Police Stationin Quetta claiming Qambrani had been abducted by the FC and“agencies.” But Qambrani’s brother said that the policerefused to lodge the FIR because, according to the police, “they couldnot register an FIR against security forces.”On October 29, 2009, a lawyer representing Qambrani’sfamily lodged a habeas corpus petition in the Balochistan High Court. Atevery hearing the police claimed that Qambrani was not in their custody.Following an order from the Supreme Court of Pakistan, police in Quetta finallyregistered an FIR regarding Qambrani’s disappearance on January 5, 2010.19. Enforced disappearance of Abdul Nasir, age 27On October 14, 2009, 27 year-old motorcycle trader, AbdulNasir, was repairing a motorcycle in his friend’s shop in Quetta. Ataround 11.30 a.m., four men in plainclothes in a double door pickup truckabducted him. Nasir’s family reported his disappearance to the QuettaCity police station on April 9, 2010. On January 24, 2010, a lawyer acting onbehalf of Nasir’s family filed a missing person petition with theBalochistan High Court.20. Enforced disappearance of Abdul Mujeeb, age 24Twenty four-year-old Abdul Mujeeb was Unit Secretary of the(BSOA) and convener of the Tulwar Advisory Council, a body that resolveddisputes between different student organizations. On September 1, 2009, Mujeebwas at the Arts Faculty of Balochistan University in Quetta, speaking to hisclassmates and teachers. According to a witness, two FC pickup trucks wereparked next to a university exit close to the Arts Faculty. The witness saidthat an FC major called Mujeeb to approach the trucks and then placed him intoone of the trucks. Mujeeb did not resist arrest, nor was he hooded orhandcuffed.On September 3, 2009, police at the Balochistan Universitystation refused an application for an FIR filed by Mujeeb’s familybecause it mentioned the FC and the MI. However, after an order from theSupreme Court of Pakistan, on February 9, 2010, police at the same stationlodged an FIR against the FC and MI.Mujeeb’s brother told Human Rights Watch that onSeptember 26, 25 days after his arrest, Mujeeb contacted him on his mobilephone. They spoke for several minutes. Mujeeb said he had been detained by theMI. His brother told Human Rights Watch that he could hear someone in thebackground telling Mujeeb in Urdu not to speak in his native tongue, only inUrdu. In March 2010, Mujeeb’s family filed a petition with theBalochistan High Court. Only lawyers for the police attended the BalochistanHigh Court hearings even though the court had given notice to the HomeMinistry, the FC and the MI to appear before it.21. Enforced disappearance of Din Mohammad Baloch, age 40On June 29, 2009, 40-year-old medical doctor Din MohammadBaloch was on a night shift at a small medical clinic in the Ornach area ofKhuzdar district, Balochistan when he was abducted. Several months afterBaloch’s disappearance, local newspapers reported that the FC hadarrested him and two others in connection with an armed attack on the FC onAugust 14, 2009. The alleged attack took place nearly two months after Balochhad been abducted. In June 2010, the Supreme Court told Baloch’s lawyersthat the ISI had reported to the court that Baloch was not in their custody butwas being held by the chief of the Mengal tribe. However, the ISI did notprovide any further details about these claims to the court, and the court didnot share their submissions with Baloch’s lawyers.22. Enforced disappearance of Haji Murrad Khan Marri, age 65On June 28, 2009, 65 year-old farmer Haji Murrad Khan Marrileft his house to go grocery shopping at a local market in the town of Hub whenhe was abducted by armed men in plainclothes driving in a red Toyota Corolla.For nine months Marri’s family had no information about his fate orwhereabouts. Then, on January 10, 2010, Balochistan Home and Tribal AffairsMinister Zafar Zehri announced a Rs 3,000,000 (approximately US $3,400) rewardfor the capture of Marri and others whom Zehri claimed were wanted Baloch“separatists.”On March 27, 2010, an FC officer called Marri’s familyand said that Marri was in their custody. The FC said Marri had been chargedwith murder and possession of Indian currency and explosives. FC Col. AsadShahzad Kattak held a press conference the same day saying Marri had beenarrested in Chaman, close to the Balochistan border with Afghanistan, whilecrossing into Pakistan from Afghanistan. According to Col. Kattak, Khan hadbeen placed in police custody in Saddar police station in Chaman. However,neither Marri’s lawyer nor his family has been allowed to see him.The criminal case against Marri is pending before theBalochistan High Court. His disappearance case has been added to a combined petitionfiled by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan with the Supreme Court ofPakistan in January 2010. Following a Supreme Court order, the Hayt policefinally lodged an FIR into Marri’s disappearance.23. Enforced disappearance of Zakir Majeed Baloch, age 24On June 8, 2009, Zakir Majeed Baloch, a 27-year-old studentpolitician, was driving from Nushki district of Balochistan along with his twofriends when five or six men, all in plainclothes abducted him. On October 6,2009, following a Supreme Court of Pakistan order that required the police toregister all disappearance cases countrywide, the police finally lodged an FIRinto Baloch’s case. The Balochistan High Court accepted a petitionregarding his case later that month. On January 22, 2010, Pakistan’sNational Crisis Management Cell said Baloch had been released to his family,but his family said he had not returned home and his whereabouts remain unknownto them.24. Enforced disappearance of Mohammad Tariq, age 25On May 17, 2009, 25 year-old university student MohammadTariq was travelling in a truck from Tump district to the city of Turbat in theMand region close to the Iranian border. At approximately 3 p.m., a pickuptruck with FC markings drove up to the truck and FC soldiers ordered the driverto stop. The driver, who knew Tariq, later told his family that uniformed FCsoldiers then told all passengers to get out of the truck and lined them up.They went through the line, asking for the passengers’ names, and as soonas they heard Tariq’s they grabbed him and took him aside. The soldiersthen ordered the other passengers to return to the truck, but they and thedriver could see Tariq being led into the FC vehicle. The truck proceeded toTurbat. On arrival the driver immediately told one of Tariq’s friendsthat he had been taken by the FC.The Turbat police continuously refused to accept anapplication for an FIR into Tariq’s case until they were obliged to do soby a Supreme Court order on February 5, 2010. When they finally lodged the FIRsoon after the Supreme Court order, it mentioned the FC commander in Turbat andthe Minister for Home and Tribal Affairs of Balochistan, the responsibleprovincial minister for the FC.Lawyers for Tariq’s family lodged a petition with theBalochistan High Court on May 28, 2009, and, at this writing, the court hasheld at least four hearings. The driver of the truck Tariq was travelling inprovided the court with a sworn affidavit describing Tariq’s abduction bythe FC personnel. Nonetheless, legal representatives for the FC, who appearedat one of the hearings, denied that Tariq was in FC custody. Tariq’sfamily also reported the case to the CIMP on June 2, 2010.25-26. Enforced disappearance and extra-judicial killing of Sher MohammedBaloch, age 35, Ghulam Mohammed Baloch, age 40, and Lala Munir, age 50On April 3, 2009, Sher Mohammed Baloch, Ghulam MohammedBaloch, and Lala Munir were in their lawyer’s office in a localcourthouse in Turbat. They were discussing the criminal cases pending againstthem, which they had been fighting in courts since 2007. Relatives of the threesaid that after their initial arrest in 2006 and subsequent release on bail,Sher and Ghulam had been repeatedly threatened by representatives of thesecurity agencies, both in the course of the court proceedings and throughphone calls.According to Sher Mohammed’s relative, on April 3,2009, the entire town of Thurbat was secured by FC military personnel while thecourt heard the cases against the three men. As the men were talking to theirlawyer after the hearing, a group of about five or six people in civilianclothes entered the office and started smashing everything around, accusing thethree men of being “terrorists.” Witnesses at the courthouse latertold relatives that agency personnel handcuffed and hooded the three men andput them in cars. They also said that the FC military vehicles were there, andthe incident happened in front of numerous witnesses.Sher later managed to dial a friend from his mobile phone,saying they were being taken away by the agencies, but did not manage to sayanything else.The next day, the BRP filed a petition with the police inTurbat. The lawyer also submitted a petition to the court about the attack inhis office. There was no action on either complaint. The families alsocomplained to the HRCP, and there were protests against the abduction in bothKarachi and in Balochistan.On April 9, the police received a phone call informing themof three bodies found in Pedarak, near Turbat. The police informed thefamilies, who later came to the hospital and identified the victims as SherMohammed Baloch, Ghulam Mohammed Baloch, and Lala Munir. The relatives saidthere were multiple bullet holes on the bodies and that the forensic team foundmany spent cartridges at the scene, which they handed over to the police. Thevictims’ hands were tied and they were still hooded. The relatives saidthey saw what they believed to be signs of torture on the bodies, includingburn marks and bruises on their chests and backs.27. Enforced disappearance of Jallil Akham Riki, age 35On February 13, 2009, Jallil Akham Riki, a BRP activist fromChulam Jhan village in Quetta, was leaving a local mosque after prayers. Infront of multiple witnesses, four cars surrounded him. Uniformed FC soldiers,together with men in civilian clothes whom witnesses believed to be from theISI, ordered him into one of the cars. One of the witnesses later told thefamily that Riki wanted to escape, but the FC soldiers threatened to shoot himand then put him into the car, blindfolded. Riki has been missing since.The day after his abduction, his family launched a habeascorpus petition with Balochistan High Court. The court sent notices to theFC and the ISI, but they neither appeared in court nor responded. They alsoreported the case to the HRCP, which included it into its joint petition onenforced disappearances brought before the Supreme Court, but this has notproduced any results.A group of human rights defenders brought up the case withthe Chief Minister of Balochistan. According to one of the activists, theminister said that Riki had been detained by the ISI on suspicion ofinvolvement in various crimes, including the burning of the Pakistani flag andshouting of anti-government slogans.The family also learned from one of the released detaineesthat Riki had been held in Kuli Camp in Quetta for at least eight months. Thedetainee, who was released in November 2009, told the family that he and Rikihad been cellmates since Riki’s arrest in February 2009. According toRiki’s relative, the former detainee said that Riki had been severelytortured and had serious health problems. He said Riki was so weak that he hadto help him wash his clothes and look after himself.In February 2010, Riki’s family filed an FIR againstthe ISI and the FC with the local police. After that, Riki’s fatherstarted receiving anonymous phone calls. The callers requested that they revokethe FRI and warned that otherwise they would share Riki’s fate.28-29. Several instances of enforced disappearance of Bashir Azeem, age 76,and 6-month-long enforced disappearance of Zakar Qambrani.Seventy-six year old Bashir Azeem, a medical doctor and thesecretary general of the BRP, has been subjected to an enforced disappearanceat least three times, in 2005, 2006, and 2009.  In September 2005, a groupof men in civilian clothes arrived at his clinic in Sibi and took him away,saying they had intercepted his conversations with Navar Akhbar Bugti, an influentialtribal chieftain and key Baloch nationalist leader killed by Pakistan forces inAugust 2006. Azeem said the men brought him, blindfolded, to a room where twomajors interrogated him about his contacts with Bugti. Unsatisfied with hisanswers, they said they would take him to Quetta, to be interrogated by higherofficers.Bashir said the officers brought him to a cantonment area inHanna Utak Valley in Quetta. There, he was held in a cell for seven days andinterrogated about his activities. During this time, his family had noinformation about his whereabouts. He believed that his son’s efforts tolocate him through contacts in the military eventually helped to secure hisrelease.In February 2006, when Azeem came to his clinic, his soninformed him that MI officers had been asking about him and said he should comeand see the MI officer, Major Nadim. Azeem went to the police station, wherethe major had an office. Azeem said that after asking him a couple ofquestions, the major told him he was under arrest. He spent ten hours alone inhis office, and then two officers handcuffed and blindfolded him andtransferred him to another place.The third arrest took place on February 6, 2009. On thatday, at around 7 p.m., Azeem was travelling in a car with a colleague from theBRP, Zakar Qambrani. They were on their way to a press club in Quetta toannounce the merger of BRP with another Baloch party, the National Congress.On the road, their car was blocked by three cars. A group offully armed men in civilian clothes took both Azeem and Qambrani out of theircar, blindfolded them, and put them into a jeep. They took away Azeem’scell phone, glasses, watch, and the money he had on him.On March 31, 2009, an officer brought him white clothes andtold him to get dressed and come out. Azeem said he thought they were about toexecute him, but instead they drove him for about 2 hours and then dropped himon the side of the road. From a taxi driver, he found out he was in Karachi andwent to stay with his relatives there.Azeem said that during the entire time of his detention hisfamily had no information about his whereabouts, despite their efforts to findhim. His captors, he said, explained that nobody could help him get out.According to Azeem, they used to say, “Even if the President or ChiefJustice tells us to release you, we won’t. We can torture you, or killyou, or keep you for years at our will. It is only the Army Chief and the ISIchief that we obey.”Azeem said that after they first got separated, he had noinformation about his colleague. Zakar Qambrani. Qambrani was eventuallyreleased four months after Azeem. He said that he had been held the whole timein Quetta in the jail where the two men were first brought. Qambrani’sfamily also had no information about him until he was released.30. Enforced disappearance of Abdul Ghani, age 18On January 31, 2009, 18 year-old Abdul Ghani was on his wayfrom Sibi district to his home district of Thali. At 7.30 p.m., FC personnel ata major checkpoint in Sultankot, Balochistan, stopped the bus that Ghani wastravelling on.In January 2010, several months after the Pakistaniparliament passed the Aghaz-e-Haqooq-e-Balochistan law (see Background for moreinformation), the family filed a missing person petition with the InteriorMinistry. The police in Thali finally lodged an FIR regarding AbdulGhani’s disappearance on February 9, 2010. A lawyer acting on behalf ofhis family filed a petition with the Balochistan High Court on February 25, 2010.Ghani’s relatives and friends interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thatafter the lawyers filed the petition, the FC personnel threatened three peoplewho witnessed Ghani’s abduction as they crossed the very same checkpointat Sultankot. “They said, “We will disappear you if you go tocourt,’” one of the witnesses said. Despite the threat, all threeof them gave evidence in the court on April 19, 2010.Although at this writing the court proceedings wereunderway, and lawyers for the FC have occasionally appeared in court, the FChas not provided the court with any information about Ghani’swhereabouts.31. Enforced disappearance of Noor Khan, age 28On December 8, 2008, 28 year-old Noor Khan was filling gasat a gas station in Turbat city, Balochistan. Suddenly, two double door pickuptrucks, one black and the other a yellow-sand color, surged into the gasstation. Eyewitnesses later told Khan’s family that around six men inplainclothes came out of the vehicles brandishing rifles. They immediatelygrabbed Khan, hooded him, threw a blanket over his head, and put him into oneof the trucks. Then both vehicles drove away.The witnesses immediately informed Khan’s family. Thesame day, the family went to a police station in Turbat to file a missingperson report. One of Khan’s relatives told Human Rights Watch that anofficer at the police station told them, “We don’t have authorityover this, nor can we do anything about it. You know what happens here inBalochistan.”On December 18, 2008, Khan’s family filed a petitionwith the Balochistan High Court. At this writing, six court hearings have takenplace. At one of the hearings, a legal representative for the police said Khanwas not in police or FC custody. In February 2010, following an order by theSupreme Court of Pakistan, police lodged an FIR about Khan’sdisappearance, calling on the Turbat District Police Officer and the commandingofficer of the FC at Turbat to investigate the case.32. Enforced disappearance of Mohammad Yahya, age about 45At around 3 p.m. on August 11, 2008, high school teacherMohammad Yahya was driving his motorcycle from the local bazaar to his house inthe Nushki region. A witness later told Yahua’s family that a car with nolicense plates cut off Yahya’s motorcycle, forcing it to stop. Severalmen in plainclothes jumped out of the car, grabbed Yahya, bundled him intotheir car and sped off.Three hours after the incident, Yahya’s relatives wentto a police station in Nushki. But police refused to record the incidentbecause the family could not identify the perpetrators. Yahya’s relativesmade inquiries with FC personnel in Quetta and with the superintendant of theQuetta District Jail, but in both places the officials denied having Yahya incustody.In late August, 2009, Yahya’s family met Akbar HussainDurrani, Secretary of the Balochistan Ministry of Home and Tribal Affairs. Theyspoke to him for a few minutes and, according to the family, Durrani said hewould investigate the disappearance. The family also filed a petition regardingYahya’s disappearance with the Balochistan High Court, but at thiswriting has not received any information regarding his fate and whereabouts.33. Enforced disappearance of Niaz Mohammad, age 28On July 8, 2007, 28 year-old Niaz Mohammad was on his way towork together with two friends. One of the friends told Human Rights Watch thatas they were passing the Saddam rail crossing at Sariab Rail Station in Quetta,Mohammad stopped to relieve himself while his friends continued walking. At thatmoment, a four-door white Toyota Vigo pickup truck drove up to Mohammad. Threemen in plainclothes jumped out of the car, grabbed Mohammad, dragged him intothe vehicle, and sped off in the direction of Sariakot district of Quetta.Fearing for their own safety, the witnesses did not tellMohammad’s family about the abduction until a month later. The familytried to obtain some information about Mohammad’s fate through contactsin Pakistan’s intelligence agencies and tribal chiefs, but these effortsproved futile.One of Mohammad’s relatives also reported the case toShalkot police station in Quetta. The police registered the incident, butrefused to lodge an FIR into the case.  In 2009, a lawyer acting on behalfof Mohammad’s family filed a petition with the Balochistan High Court,alleging the FC, MI, ISI, IB, and the Pakistan government as the perpetrators.At this writing, four hearings have taken place, but only representatives ofthe police have appeared before the court. On each occasion, they have claimedthat Mohammad was not in their custody and they did not know his whereabouts.Following the general order of the Supreme Court, the policefinally lodged an FIR into the case on June 19, 2010, but the FIR listedMohammad as a “missing person” without referring toPakistan’s intelligence agencies.Mohammad’s family told Human Rights Watch that he wasa civil servant working in Quetta and was not politically active, although hedid briefly do social work with the Baloch National Party during the 2007Balochistan earthquake.34. Enforced disappearance of Tawakal Khan, age 64In March 2007, 64 year-old shepherd Tawakal Khan was insidea store in the Thali region of Balochistan near the city of Sibi. Severaleyewitnesses, one of whom was Khan’s relative, later told Khan’sfamily that four cars and several motorcycles suddenly stopped by the store.About 15 men, some in plainclothes and some in uniforms, got out of their cars.Two entered the shop and asked for Khan by name. After the shop owner pointedat Khan, the men grabbed him, dragged him outside and put him into one of thevehicles. Eyewitnesses told Khan’s family that he did not try toresist.The witnesses informed Khan’s family the followingday. A relative told Human Rights Watch that they did not attempt to report theincident to the police because they were worried they would also be“disappeared.” However, in 2009, they filed a petition with theBalochistan High Court. Yet at this writing, they have not been able to obtain anyinformation on Khan’s fate and whereabouts.Khan’s family and friends said he was not involved inpolitics but they believed he was taken by Pakistan’s secret intelligenceagencies because he was a senior member of the Marri tribe and at the time ofhis abduction the Pakistan Army was engaged in military operations againstparts of the Marri tribe.35-36. Enforced disappearance of Mohammad Iqbal, age 30,  and 11month-long enforced disappearance of Nawaz Ahmed, Jasum Ali, and Zahid AliOn March 14, 2007, FC soldiers detained 30-year-olduniversity student Mohammad Iqbal and three of his friends, Nawaz Ahmed, JasumAli, and Zahid Ali.According to Iqbal’s family, who later spoke to Ahmed,Jasum Ali, and Zhad Ali, the FC soldiers detained the four men at approximately9 a.m. on the road between the districts of Tump and Mand in Balochistan, andtook them to the FC camp in Turbat. A shepherd who knew Iqbal witnessed theincident from a distance and immediately told his family. Iqbal’s brothertold Human Rights Watch that when he went to the FC’s Turbat camp thesame day, the camp commander said that Iqbal and the other three men had been“detained for questioning and would be released in a matter ofhours.” When Iqbal’s brother next inquired about his whereabouts onApril 25, 2007, another FC officer from the same camp at Turbat, Maj. AbdulRehman, told him that all four men had been shifted to Quetta.Ahmed, Jasum Ali, and Zahid Ali confirmed this informationto the family. They said that together with Iqbal they were first held inTurbat, in an open-air FC prison, and then were transferred to a jail inQuetta’s army cantonment. They said that in Quetta interrogatorssubjected them to sleep deprivation and asked about their participation inarmed Baloch groups, which they denied. Ahmed, Jasum Ali, and Zahid Ali werereleased on February 16, 2008 outside Quetta Army cantonment, but they do notknow who released them because they were blindfolded. Iqbal remained in prison.Relatives of the four men lodged a habeas corpus petitionin the Balochistan High Court and eventually the case reached the Supreme Courtof Pakistan. During Supreme Court proceedings that commenced on May 16, 2009,legal representatives for the Federal Ministry of Interior claimed MohammadIqbal had been released, but Iqbal’s family denied this.Following the disappearances, the families of the four menalso repeatedly tried to apply for a FIR against the FC, but the police onlyregistered it more than two years later on February 8, 2010, after an orderfrom the Supreme Court of Pakistan. In the FIR, relatives of the four men haveaccused the FC in Tump, local police and the Home Secretary of Balochistan ofinvolvement in the disappearances.Two prisoners released from the army cantonment in Quetta inMarch 2010 told Iqbal’s family that for the last two months of theirdetention they shared a prison cell with Mohammad Iqbal. Iqbal’s familysaid they had informed the Supreme Court of Pakistan of these witnesses’testimony through their lawyers.37. 3 months-long enforced disappearance of “Asad”Asad, age 22In December 2006, “Asad” (not his real name), a22 year-old member of the Baloch Students Organization, was travelling from hisnative town of Tump to Karachi by bus. In Turbat, three jeeps blocked the bus.A group of armed men in plainclothes got on the bus, called Asad by name, anddragged him out. They did not provide any explanation and just told Asad thatthey would shoot him if he resisted.The men put a hood on Asad’s head, handcuffed him, andput him in one of their cars. Asad said that they also gave him an injection inthe shoulder which made him lose consciousness. When he woke up, he was hangingupside down in some room. After the initial interrogation, the security forcesput Asad in a car and transferred him to another location. Asad said theytravelled for what felt like two days during which he was not given food orwater and was not allowed to go to the bathroom. They eventually arrived toQuetta and put Asad into a cell. He said that for the first four days he was insolitary confinement, regularly interrogated and beaten. The interrogators,according to Asad, repeatedly said, “If you are so eager to fight,don’t fight against Muslims—go join Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan,and kill Christians and Jews!”After four days, Asad was transferred to another cell wherehe could communicate with other detainees. They told him that they weredetained in Kuli Camp in Quetta. Asad spent another month-and-a-half there andthen was transferred to another detention facility. He did not know where theother detention facility was, but believed it was still in Quetta, about anhour away from the Kuli Camp. He spent another two months there, after whichthe men who he believed were from the security agencies put him in the car,hooded, and, after two or three hours of driving, handed him over to thepolice.Asad’s family, who found out about his abduction fromother passengers on the bus, had no information about his whereabouts duringhis disappearance. His father filed an FIR with the Turbat police and inquiredwith the magistrate there, but both the police and the magistrate said therewas nothing they could do about it.Asad was eventually brought before the magistrate and thenthe Anti-Terrorism Court in Turbat. In both courts Asad gave a detailed accountof what happened to him. He said it would have been obvious to those present inthe court that he had been tortured. He could not stand on his own; two policeofficers had to hold him up during the proceedings. The judges, according toAsad, “showed sympathy,” but said there was nothing they could doabout his treatment. Asad said that ISI personnel, in FC uniforms, were presentduring the hearing, so the court did not dare to launch any investigations intotheir actions.Asad was released on bail in 2007 and has been in hidingsince then. He said the agencies came looking for him in Tump. They also calledhis phone, saying they would catch him again and this time would kill him.38-39. 5-month long enforced disappearance of Aziz Khan Bugti, age 30, andMegla Khan Bugti, age 35In April 2005, two brothers, 30 year-old Aziz Khan Bugti and35-year-old Megla Khan Bugti were travelling from Hyderabad, Sindh, to Karachiin their car. Relatives in Karachi who were expecting them by the eveningstarted getting worried when the brothers did not arrive. They tried to findout what happened to them, but did not find any information. During the nextfive months, the families had no information about their fate or whereabouts.They were too scared, however, to launch an FIR. Family members say that thebrothers were not political activists but did various jobs for Nawab AkhbarBugti.In 2005, the authorities announced the arrest of the twobrothers. Even after the announcement, however, their relatives were notallowed to meet with them. The family believed that the brothers were initiallytaken by the “agencies” and then handed over to the police. Afterthe two brothers were transferred to Karachi central jail, the relatives werefinally allowed to meet with them. At that time, Aziz told his brother thatthey had been subjected to torture while in police custody.During the court hearing, which happened shortly after thearrest was announced, the two brothers plead not guilty to the charges of abombing and other acts of terrorism. The anti-terrorism court sentenced both ofthem to death. At the time of writing, the appeal was still pending in theSupreme Court.The brother’s relatives told Human Rights Watch thatanother 13 members of their family have gone missing since 2008.[1]Censusof Pakistan 1998, Balochistan Provincial Report; and World Bank, BalochistanEconomic Report: From Periphery To Core, Volume II, 2008.[2]Censusof Pakistan 1998, Balochistan Provincial Report.[3]Robert G. Wirsing, “Baloch Nationalism And The Geopolitics Of EnergyResources: The Changing Context Of Separatism In Pakistan,” United StatesArmy War College, Strategic Studies Institute, April 2008, http://www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/pdffiles/pub853.pdf(accessed November 22, 2010).[4]Ibid. The Quetta Shura is a militant organization composed of the topleadership of the Afghan Taliban. It formed after US-led forces attacked theTaliban in Afghanistan in November 2001 and its senior leadership escaped intoPakistan.[5]Ibid. See also Maha Atal“China’s Pakistan Corridor,” Forbes Asia, May 10, 2010, http://www.forbes.com/global/2010/0510/companies-pakistan-oil-gas-balochistan-china-pak-corridor.html(accessed November 22, 2010).[6]SeeAhmed Rashid, Descent Into Chaos (New York: Viking, 2008), pp. 283-287.[7]HumanRights Commission of Pakistan, “Human Rights Violations: Conflict InBalochistan,” August 2006, http://hrcp-web.org/pdf/Conflict%20in%20balochistan--%20Complete.pdf(accessed November 22, 2010). According to the Geneva-based InternalDisplacement Monitoring Center, violence in 2005 around Dera Bugti districtalone displaced around 6,000 people and killed scores. The total number ofpeople displaced from all districts remains unknown, with estimates rangingfrom tens to hundreds of thousands.[8]“Pakistan Fails to Curb Violence inBalochistan,” Sify, July 6, 2010, http://sify.com/news/pakistan-fails-to-curtail-violence-in-balochistan-news-international-khgqOpbaide.html(accessed November 22, 2010).[9]Madiha Sattar,“Balochistan: Pakistan’s other war,” The AfPak Channel:Foreign Policy, February 15, 2011, http://afpak.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2011/02/15/Balochistan_pakistans_other_war(accessed March 28, 2011).[10]Syed Talat Hussain, “Regime of Fear,” Newsline, April 21,2010, http://www.newslinemagazine.com/2010/04/regime-of-fear(accessed November 22, 2010).[11]Salman Masood, “Pakistan Spy Chief to VisitIndia,” New York Times, November 28, 2008, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/29/world/asia/29pstan.html(accessed November 22, 2010). While India consistently denies theseallegations, Pakistani officials say that India’s role in stoking unrestin Balochistan is illustrated by the scale and sophistication of recent attackson Pakistan interests, alleged confessions of captured militants, and pastevidence of support by “foreign” powers for separatist elements.See “What’s the Problem with Pakistan?”Foreign Affairs,March 31, 2009, http://www.foreignaffairs.com/discussions/roundtables/whats-the-problem-with-pakistan(accessed November 22, 2010).[12]Aghaz-e-Haqooq-e-Balochistan,December 9, 2009, preamble.[13]Aghaz-e-Haqooq-e-Balochistan, December 9, 2009, Section C, Articles 11-14.[14]NasirJamal and Saleem Shahid, “Rs152 billion budget for Balochistan,” Dawn,June 22, 2010, http://news.dawn.com/wps/wcm/connect/dawn-content-library/dawn/the-newspaper/front-page/rs152-billion-budget-for-balochistan-260(accessed November 30, 2010).[15]RajaAsghar, “Govt offers olive branch to Balochistan,” Dawn,November 25, 2009, http://news.dawn.com/wps/wcm/connect/dawn-content-library/dawn/news/pakistan/04-balochistanpackage-qs-10(accessed November 30, 2010).[16]MurtazaAli Shah, “Baloch nationalists reject package,” The NewsInternational, November 25, 2009.[17]SajidHussain, “18th Amendment Fails To Appease Most Of BalochNationalists,” The News On Sunday, April 11, 2010; Syed TalatHussain, “Regime of Fear,” Newsline, April 21, 2010.[18]SyedTalat Hussain, “Regime of Fear,” Newsline.[19]Ibid.[20]“Pakistan Fails To Curb Violence In Balochistan,” Sify, July6, 2010.[21]A large proportion of the population of urbandwellers comprises people who settled there in the 1930s or at the time ofindependence in 1947. Those committing the recent violence make no distinctionbetween these “settlers” and more recent migrants to the province.Older urban areas (Quetta, Loralai, Zhob, Sibi) were largely inhabited byPashtun settlers (and the Hazara community in Quetta), while the Balochremained largely in the rural villages or small rural towns. Punjabisconstitute the bulk of so-called settlers since independence.[22]For further information see: Human Rights Watch, “TheirFuture is at Stake:” Attacks on Teachers and Schools in Pakistan’sBalochistan Province, December 13, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/12/13/their-future-stake.[23]Violenceagainst women and girls, including rape, domestic violence, and forcedmarriage, remains a serious problem. In one case in 2008, five women were shotand buried alive by members of their own tribe after three of them refused toget married as their families had demanded. Israrullah Zehri, a senator fromBalochistan province, publicly defended the killings as “tribalcustom.” Another legislator, Hazar Khan Bijrani, stands accused of presidingover a tribal jirga (council) that in 2006 ordered the handing-over offive girls, aged six and younger, as “compensation” in a dispute.Human Rights Watch, World Report 2009 (New York: Human Rights Watch,2009), Pakistan chapter, http://www.hrw.org/en/world-report/2009/pakistan.[24]AsianDevelopment Bank, Report and Recommendation to the President on the Pakistan- Balochistan Resource Management Program, 2004. The Pakistani staterecruits men from local communities into the Levies, the Frontier Constabulary,and the Frontier Corps. The Frontier Corps is a federal paramilitary forceconsisting almost entirely of ethnic Pashtuns from the province’snorthern regions. Although the force is part of the civilian federal InteriorMinistry, its forces are commanded by officers of the Pakistan Army.[25]PervezMusharraf, In the Line of Fire: A Memoir, (Simon & Schuster, 2006).[26]See Human Rights Commission of Pakistan annual reports 2001-2010.[27]Ibid.[28]Amnesty International, “Pakistan: 'As if Hell fell onme': The human rights crisis in northwest Pakistan,” ASA33/004/2010, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/ASA33/004/2010/en(accessed April 27, 2011).[29]Human Rights Watch documented Britishcomplicity in the illegal detention and torture of terrorism suspects in aNovember 2009 report; Human Rights Watch, Cruel Britannia: BritishComplicity in the Torture and Ill-Treatment of Terror Suspects in Pakistan,November 24, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/11/24/cruel-britannia-0.[30]Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1973), art. 184. Other highcourts have similar powers subject to article 199.[31]For more information see; Human Rights Watch, Destroying Legality: Pakistan’sCrackdown on Lawyers and Judges, December 18, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/12/18/destroying-legality-0.[32]Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1973), art. 199.[33]For more information, see AmnestyInternational, “Pakistan: Denying the Undeniable: Enforced Disappearancesin Pakistan,” ASA33/018/2008, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ASA33/018/2008/en/0de43038-57dd-11dd-be62-3f7ba2157024/asa330182008eng.pdf(accessed February 7, 2011).[34]Ibid.[35]The Supreme Court has frequently invoked contempt laws againstthe media in order to prevent adverse coverage of judicial conduct. See Human Rights Watch World Report 2011 (New York: HumanRights Watch, 2011), Pakistan chapter,http://www.hrw.org/en/world-report-2011/pakistan.[36]“Pakistan: Release Chief Justice of Supreme Court,” HumanRights Watch press release, March 13, 2007http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2007/03/12/pakistan-release-chief-justice-supreme-court.[37]Human Rights Watch documented Musharraf’s suspension of the constitutionand his crackdown on the judiciary in a December 2007 report; Human RightsWatch, Destroying Legality.[38]For further information see Chapter 6, “State response to enforceddisappearances in Balochistan.” See also Amnesty International,“Pakistan: 'As if Hell fell on me': The human rights crisis in northwestPakistan,” ASA 33/004/2010, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/ASA33/004/2010/en(accessed April 27, 2011).[39]Under the International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (“Conventionagainst Enforced Disappearance”), an enforced disappearance is defined as the“arrest, detention, abduction or any other form of deprivation of libertyby agents of the State or by persons or groups of persons acting with theauthorization, support or acquiescence of the State, followed by a refusal toacknowledge the deprivation of liberty or by concealment of the fate orwhereabouts of the disappeared person, which place such a person outside theprotection of the law.” Conventionagainst Enforced Disappearance, adopted September 23, 2005,E/CN.4/2005/WG.22/WP.1/Rev.4 (2005), art. 2. The convention took effect on December 23, 2010.Pakistan is not yet a party to the convention. See also United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Personsfrom Enforced Disappearances (Declaration against Enforced Disappearances),adopted December 18, 1992, G.A. res. 47/133, 47 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at207, U.N. Doc. A/47/49 (1992), preamble.[40]United Nations Commission on Human Rights,“Report submitted January 8, 2002, by Mr. Manfred Nowak, independentexpert charged with examining the existing international criminal and humanrights framework for the protection of persons from enforced or involuntarydisappearance, pursuant to paragraph 11 of Commission Resolution 2001/46”(New York: United Nations, 2002), E/CN.4/2002/71, 36.[41]International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights (ICCPR), G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), entered intoforce March 23, 1976. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman orDegrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture), G.A. Res.39/46, U.N. Doc. A/39/51, entered into force June 26, 1987. Pakistan ratifiedthe Convention against Torture in 2010. Pakistan signed the ICCPR in 2008 andratified it in 2010.[42]Declaration against Enforced Disappearances, art.10. These provisions are reinforced in article 17 of the Convention againstEnforced Disappearance. Theresponsibility of the competent authorities to inform families of thewhereabouts of those detained and provide for communication of the detaineewith a counsel is further emphasized by the Body of Principles for theProtection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment—anauthoritative United Nations standard summarizing international human rightsprinciples in relation to detention. Bodyof Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention orImprisonment (Body of Principles), adopted December 9, 1988, G.A. Res. 43/173,annex, 43 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 298, U.N. Doc. A/43/49 (1988), principle16(1).[43]ICCPR, art. 6.[44]Thishas been recognized under the Declaration against Enforced Disappearances, preamble;the Convention against Enforced Disappearance, art. 5; and the Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal Court, U.N. Doc. No. A/CONF. 183/9 (July 17, 1998),37 I.L.M. 999, art. 7(1). Pakistan is not a party to the Rome Statute, but manyof the definitions of crimes contained in the ICC are considered reflective ofcustomary international law.[45]Conventionon the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25,annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), enteredinto force September 2, 1990, arts. 9 and 37. Pakistan ratified the CRC onDecember 12, 1990.[46]Constitutionof the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1973), art. 9.[47]Ibid. art.10.[48]For detailed analysis of these legislations, seeTariq Hassan, “Supreme Court of Pakistan: The Case of MissingPersons,” Asia-Pacific Journal on Human Rights and the Law, vol.10 no. 2 (2009), pp. 4-6, https://lawlib.wlu.edu/lexopus/works/67-1.pdf(accessed December 15, 2010).[49]Criminal Procedure Code (1898), Chapters V-VIII, XIII, XIV, XIX.[50]Pakistan Penal Code (1860), Chapter XVI.[51]Ibid.[52]Ibid.[53]Underthe Police Order Act (2002), Section 156(c), police officers who“vexatiously and unnecessarily” detain, search or arrest any personmay be imprisoned for up to five years and fined.[54]The high courts are empowered to make an order “that a person in custodywithin the territorial jurisdiction of the Court be brought before it so thatthe Court may satisfy itself that he is not being held in custody withoutlawful authority or in an unlawful manner” [emphasis added]. Constitutionof the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1973), art. 199.The Supreme Court of Pakistan has stated that the use of words “inan unlawful manner” in this constitutional provision implies that thecourt may examine whether a particular detention was carried out appropriatelyeven where there is statutory authority for the detention. Thus,the court can examine the mala fides of the action taken.See Government of West Pakistan v. Begum AghaAbdul Karim Shorish Kashmiri, A.P.L.D. 1969 S.C.14. In another leading case, the Supreme Courtstated that in exercising constitutional jurisdiction relating to a detention,the court was under an unconditional duty to satisfy itself with regard to thelawfulness of authority of detention and the manner of detention. Once theattention of the court is properly drawn to a case of detention, the onusimmediately shifts to the detaining authority to show the lawfulness of itsauthority in detaining the detainee. The duties, therefore, are specificallythat of the court and the detaining authority. See Muhammad Azam Malik v. A.C.Karachi, A.P.L.D. 1989 S.C. 266.[55]“Five Baloch militant outfits banned,” Dawn, September 9,2010,http://www.dawn.com/wps/wcm/connect/dawn-content-library/dawn/the-newspaper/front-page/5-baloch-militant-outfits-banned-990(accessed October 20, 2010).[56]Underthe ATA, terrorism suspects can be held for up to one year without trial if theirname is listed as belonging to a banned group and the government is satisfiedthat “it is necessary so to do.” Yet the act still requires theauthorities to give notice to a detainee of such detention and provide groundswhich the detainee can challenge. For a detailed analysis of the ATA, which hasbeen amended several times since it was passed in 1997, see AmnestyInternational, “Pakistan: Legalizing the impermissible: The newanti-terrorism law,” ASA 33/034/1997, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/ASA33/034/1997/en(accessed March 14, 2011).[57]TheLahore High Court ruled accordingly September 1, 2006 when assessing the lawfulness of the detention ofHafiz Mohammad Saeed. (Dawn, 2 September 2006.) All High Courtdecisions are subject to appeal in the Supreme Court of Pakistan.[58]Provisions proposed under the amendments included preventive detention for aperiod of 90 days without benefit of judicial review and the admissibility ofconfessions made before the police or military as evidence at trial. As of the timeof writing, the amendments have not been enacted into law.[59]“Pushed to the wall: Report of the HRCPfact-finding mission to Balochistan,” Human Rights Commission ofPakistan, October 5-11, 2009, http://www.hrcp-web.org/pdf/Pushed%20to%20the%20wall.pdf(accessed September 30, 2010); “Missing persons issue biggest hurdle topeace in Balochistan,” Daily Times, January 14, 2010, http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2010\01\14\story_14-1-2010_pg7_26(accessed October 2, 2010).[60]“Over1,100 people missing in Balochistan, says Malik,” Dawn, August 28, 2008, http://archives.dawn.com/2008/08/28/top10.htm(accessed February 1, 2011); Human Rights Watch, World Report 2009, Pakistanchapter, http://www.hrw.org/en/world-report/2009/pakistan.[61]Data provided to Human Rights Watch by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan.[62]“Pushedto the wall: Report of the HRCP fact-finding mission to Balochistan,”Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, October 5-11, 2009, http://www.hrcp-web.org/pdf/Pushed%20to%20the%20wall.pdf(accessed September 30, 2010), p. 5.[63]Military Intelligence (MI) is comprised of the intelligence wings of all threeof Pakistan’s armed forces—the navy, air force, and army. Inpractice, the MI is part of the army and reports directly tothe Chief of Army Staff.[64]The Frontier Corps (FC) is a federally controlled paramilitary force recruitedmostly from the tribal areas but led by Pakistan army officers. FC Balochistanis one of the three major subdivisions of the FC. Subdivisions are headed by adeputed inspector general, who is an army officer, usually ofmajor-general rank, although the force is notionally under Interior Ministry jurisdiction.[65]The Directoratefor Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) is Pakistan's most powerful intelligenceagency. It operates under the effective command of a director-general reportingto the army chief, though formally it reports to the prime minister.[66]The IntelligenceBureau (IB) is Pakistan's principal internal intelligence agency. It iscivilian controlled and operates under the control of the interior ministryreporting to the prime minister.[67]“Spy agencies not above the law,” The Express Tribune, November26, 2010, http://tribune.com.pk/story/81677/intelligence-agencies-are-not-above-the-law-cj/(accessed July 7, 2011).[68]HumanRights Watch interviews with the relatives of Mir Sohrab Marri and ShahMohammad Zarkoon, June 24, 2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I,Enforced disappearance of Mir Sohrab Marri and Shah Mohammad Zarkoon (Cases 19and 20).[69]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Ghaffar Lango, June 23, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of AbdulGhaffar Lango (Case 14).[70]“Corpse of Baloch missing person foundnear Gadani,” Daily Times, July 2, 2011, http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2011%5C07%5C02%5Cstory_2-7-2011_pg7_4,(accessed July 12, 2011)[71]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Shams Baloch, July 3, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Shams Baloch(Case 1).[72]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Najeebullah Qambrani, June 23, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of NajeebullahQambrani (Case 21).[73]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Mujeeb, June 23, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Abdul Mujeeb(Case 26).[74]Human Rights Watch interview with a relativeof Jallil Akham Riki, April 2010, Karachi. For more information, see AppendixI, Enforced disappearance of Jallil Akham Riki (Case 34). Human Rights Watchdid not encounter any other specific cases where Chief Minister Raisani isalleged to have admitted to ISI or other state involvement in disappearances.However, in September 2010 Raisani called on security forces to bring to trialanyone abducted on suspicion of involvement in Baloch armed groups. Hiscomments on that occasion remain one of the most prominent examples of officialadmission that Pakistan security forces are involved in disappearances inBalochistan. “Raisani demands recovery of missing persons,” Balochhal,September 30, 2010, http://www.thebalochhal.com/2010/09/raisani-demands-recovery-of-missing-persons/(accessed April 16, 2011).[75]The letter to Raisani is provided in Appendix II.[76]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Mohammad Tariq, July 2, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofMohammad Tariq (Case 30).[77]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Ghani, June 29, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Abdul Ghani(Case 37).[78]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Mehboob Wadela, April 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Mehboob Wadela(Case 6).[79]Human Rights Watch interview with “Ahmad A.” (not his real name),June 29, 2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforceddisappearance of Rindhan and six-week -long enforced disappearance of“Ahmad A.” (Cases 4 and 5).[80]The Baloch Republican Party is an ethnic Baloch political party thatcalls for the complete separation of Balochistan province from the Pakistanstate. It does not contest parliamentary or local elections in Pakistan. It isthe political arm of the Baloch Republican Army (BRA), an armed group dominatedby the Bugti tribe from the northwest Dera Bugti region of Balochistan. Membersof the BRP and BRA are considered enemies of the state by Pakistan authorities.On September 8, 2010, Federal Interior Minister Rehman Malik announced that theBRP and BRA and four other Baloch political groups would be banned and theirassets frozen. The other four political groups are the Baloch Liberation Army,the Baloch Liberation Front, Lashkar-i-Balochistan, and the Baloch MusallahDifa Organisation. “Five Baloch militant outfits banned,” Dawn,September 9, 2010, http://www.dawn.com/wps/wcm/connect/dawn-content-library/dawn/the-newspaper/front-page/5-baloch-militant-outfits-banned-990(accessed October 20, 2010).[81]TheBaloch National Front is a political alliance of several ethnic Balochpolitical parties and social organizations including the Baloch BarAssociation, the Baloch Women Panel, the BRP, and BSOA. Although the differentgroups that are part of the BNF have varied social and political perspectivesthey generally advocate for an independent state of Balochistan.[82]TheBaloch National Movement is an ethnic Baloch political organization that callsfor the separation of Balochistan province from Pakistan. On November 20, 2010,the body of BNM president Lala Hameed Baloch was found in the Hiruk region ofTurbat, Balochistan. Muhammad Zafar,” Daily Times, November 20,2010, http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2010\11\20\story_20-11-2010_pg1_6(accessed July 7, 2011).[83]TheBalochistan National Party is an ethnic Baloch political party that calls forincreased social and economic autonomy for the province of Balochistan. It hasnot contested elections in Pakistan since the government it formed in theprovince after victory in the 1997 elections was dismissed by the federalgovernment of then Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in 1998. However, a few BNPmembers contested general elections held in 2002 as independent candidates andfour won seats—one each in the national senate and assembly, two in theprovincial assembly. However, all four representatives and a number of localgovernment representatives resigned in protest at the killing of Nawab AkbarBugti by Pakistan forces in 2006.[84]The BalochStudents Organisation (BSO) was founded in 1967 as aMarxist-Leninist separatist group in Balochistan and participated inthe 1973-1977 insurgency. Today the group is divided into several fractions, ofwhich the BSO (Mohiuddin), led by Mohiuddin jan Baluch, takes the hardest lineon national liberation; it supports the BNP and seeks no compromise with thestate less than independence.[85]HumanRights Watch interviews with the relatives of Chakkar Khan Marri and detainedstudent “Salman S.” (not his real name), June 23, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Chakkar KhanMarri and “Salman” (Cases 23 and 24).[86]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Mujeeb, June 23, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Abdul Mujeeb(Case 26).[87]Human Rights Watch interview with a friend of Zakir Majeed Baloch, July 1,2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofZakir Majeed Baloch (Case 29).[88]Human Rights Watch interview with “Rahim,” June 29, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Naseem Balochand Ilyas Karim (Cases 2 and 3).[89]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Tawakal Khan, June 29, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Tawakal Khan (Case40).[90]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Mohammad Iqbal, June 24, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofMohammad Iqbal and 11-month-long enforced disappearance of Nawaz Ahmed, JasumAli, and Zahid Ali (Cases 41, 42, 43, and 44).[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Rahim, June 29, 2010,Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Naseem Baloch and IlyasKarim (Cases 2 and 3).[92]HumanRights Watch interview with a witness to the disappearance of Abdul Nasir, June23, 2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearanceof Abdul Nasir (Case 22).[93]HumanRights Watch interview with a family friend of Langao, April 2010, Karachi. Formore information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of NasibullahLangao and Abdul Waheed (Cases 7 and 8).[94]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Jallil Akham Riki, April, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of JallilAkham Riki (Case 34).[95]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Wahab Baloch, April 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of AbdulWahab Baloch (Case 10).[96]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Sangat-SanaBaloch, April and June 26, 2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I,Enforced disappearance of Sangat-Sana Baloch and Kambar Baloch (Cases 15 and16).[97]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Najeebullah Qambrani, June 23, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of NajeebullahQambrani (Case 21).[98]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Din Mohammad Baloch, April 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of DinMohammad Baloch (Case 27).[99]The letter is provided in Appendix II.[100]For more on security force and intelligence agency involvement in“disappearances” and other abuses in Balochistan see Chapter I“Background: Conflict and Abuses in Balochistan.”[101]Human Rights Watch interview with a witness to the abduction of Mazhar Khan andAbdul Rasool, June 23, 2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I,Enforced disappearance of Mazhar Khan and two-month-long enforced disappearanceof Abdul Rasool (Case 12 and 13).[102]HumanRights Watch interview with a friend of Zakir Mujeed Baloch, July 1, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of ZakirMujeed Baloch (Case 29).[103]HumanRights Watch interview with relatives of the three men, April 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance and extrajudicialkilling of Sher Mohammed Baloch, Ghulam Mohammed Baloch, and Lala Munir (Cases31, 32, and 33).[104]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Mir Abdul Waheed Resani Baloch, April2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofMir Abdul Waheed Resani Baloch (Case 11).[105]HumanRights Watch interview with Bashir Azeem, April 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Bashir Azeem (Case 35).[106]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Ghaffar Lango, June 23, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of AbdulGhaffar Lango (Case 14).[107]HumanRights Watch interview with Rahim, June 29, 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Naseem Baloch and IlyasKarim (Cases 2 and 3).[108]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative ofSangat-Sana Baloch, April and June 26, 2010, Karachi. For more information, seeAppendix I, Enforced disappearance of Sangat-Sana Baloch and Kambar Baloch(Case 15 and 16).[109]See ICCPR, art. 9 (“No one shall be deprived of his liberty except onsuch grounds and in accordance with such procedure as are established bylaw.”).[110]A detailed examination of British complicity in the illegaldetention and torture of terrorism suspects was documented by Human RightsWatch; Human Rights Watch, Cruel Britannia; Human Rights Watch also documented secret CIA detention centersin Pakistan in a 2007 report: Human Rights Watch, Ghost Prisoner: Two Yearsin Secret CIA Detention, February 26, 2007,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/02/26/ghost-prisoner-0;US complicity in the nine-month-long secret detention of two US citizens, Zainand Kashan Afzal was documented in 2005 by Human Rights Watch; “Pakistan:Two US Citizens ‘Disappeared,’” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, March 9, 2005,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2005/03/08/pakistan-two-us-citizens-disappeared.[111]“Pakistan: Army officers acknowledged that adisappeared person was in their custody but the courts failed to recoverhim,” Asian Human Rights Commission, January 25, 2011, http://www.ahrchk.net/statements/mainfile.php/2011statements/3051/(accessed February 7, 2011).[112]Mir Mohammad Ali Talpur “Anti-Baloch clique?— II” The Balochhal, February 1, 2010,(accessedFebruary 7, 2011).[113]HumanRights Watch interview with Asad, April 2010, Karachi. For more information,see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Asad (Case 45).[114]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Mujeeb, June 23, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Abdul Mujeeb(Case 26).[115]HumanRights Watch interviews with the relatives of Chakkar Khan Marri and“Salman S.” (not his real name), June 23, 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Chakkar Khan Marri and “Salman”(Case 23 and 24).[116]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Jallil Akham Riki, April 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of JallilAkham Riki (Case 34).[117]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Ali Ashgar Bangulzai, April 2010,Karachi.[118]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Mohammad Iqbal, June 24, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofMohammad Iqbal and 11-month-long enforced disappearance of Nawaz Ahmed, JasumAli, and Zahid Ali (Cases 41, 42, 43, and 44).[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Bashir Azeem, April 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Bashir Azeem (Case 35).[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Asad (not his real name), April 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Asad (Case45).[121]HumanRights Watch interview with Bashir Azeem, April 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Bashir Azeem (Case 35).[122]HumanRights Watch interview with Rahim, June 29, 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Naseem Baloch and IlyasKarim (Cases 2 and 3).[123]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Bohir Khan, June 24, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Bohir Khan(Case 9).[124]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Jallil Akham Riki, April, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of JallilAkham Riki (Case 34).[125]HumanRights Watch interview with Rahim, June 29, 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Naseem Baloch and IlyasKarim (Cases 2 and 3).[126]HumanRights Watch interview with the mother of Abdul Qayyum Baloch, April 2010,Karachi.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with relatives of the three men, April 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance and extrajudicialkilling of Sher Mohammed Baloch, Ghulam Mohammed Baloch, and Lala Munir (Cases31, 32, and 33).[128]Ibid.[129]Muhammad Zafar, “Six missing personsfound dead in Balochistan,” Daily Times, November 20, 2010,http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2010\11\20\story_20-11-2010_pg1_6,(accessed December 15, 2010).[130]AsianHuman Rights Commission, “Extrajudicial killings rapidly increase inBalochistan,” press release, November 24, 2010,http://crisisbalochistan.com/secondary_menu/human-rights/asian-human-rights-commission-extrajudicial-killings-rapidly-increase-in-balochistan.html,(accessed June 9, 2011).[131]Ibid.[132]Ibid.[133]“Protestorscondemn murder of Ali Sher Kurd,”Daily Times, September28, 2010, http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2010\09\28\story_28-9-2010_pg11_7,(accessed December 15, 2010).[134]AsianHuman Rights Commission, “Extrajudicial killings rapidly increase inBalochistan.”[135]Muhammad Zafar, “Bullet-riddled bodies of twoBalochs found,” Daily Times, October 22, 2010, http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2010\10\22\story_22-10-2010_pg7_5(accessed December 15, 2010).[136]AsianHuman Rights Commission, “Extrajudicial killings rapidly increase inBalochistan.”[137]“5bullet-riddled bodies found in Balochistan,” The Nation, December 19,2010, http://www.nation.com.pk/pakistan-news-newspaper-daily-english-online/Politics/19-Dec-2010/5-bulletriddled-bodies-found-in-Balochistan(January 26, 2011).[138]“Twobullet-riddled bodies found near Turbat,”The Daily Times,February 11, 2010, http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2011%5C02%5C11%5Cstory_11-2-2011_pg7_4(accessed January 26, 2011).[139]Ahmer Mustikhan, “Baloch activist whose disappearance case was filed withUN killed in captivity,” Examiner.com, February 11, 2011, http://www.examiner.com/foreign-policy-in-baltimore/balch-activist-whose-disapperance-case-was-filed-with-un-killed-captivity?render=print(accessed March 28, 2011).[140]“2bullet-riddled bodies found in Balochistan,” The Daily Times,February 15, 2010, http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2011%5C02%5C15%5Cstory_15-2-2011_pg1_5(accessed January 26, 2011).[141]”Disappeared Mohammad Azam Baloch founddead, five others including EDE Public Health Kalat Abdul Rauf Qambaraniabducted,” Baluch Warna, January 25, 2011,http://www.balochwarna.com/modules/news/article.php?storyid=3068 (accessedJanuary 26, 2011); “Dead body of BSO's zonal president Ali Jan Kurdrecovered in Quetta,” The Baluch Hal, January 23, 2011,http://www.thebalochhal.com/2011/01/dead-body-of-bsos-zonal-president-recovered-in-quetta/(accessed January 26, 2011); “Body of disappeared Mumtaz Kurd found inMastung,” Baloch Warna, 20 January 20, 2011,http://www.balochwarna.com/modules/news/article.php?storyid=3061 (accessedMarch 28, 2011) ; “Bullet-ridden bodies of three political activistsfound in Balochistan,” Daily Times, January 17, 2011,http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2011\01\18\story_18-1-2011_pg1_9(accessed March 29, 2011); “Bodies of two young Baloch singersfound,” Baloch Warna, January 17, 2011,http://www.balochwarna.com/modules/news/article.php?storyid=3055 (accessedMarch 29, 2011); “BSO activist Zakaria Baloch’s tortured andbullet-ridden body found in Kalat,” Baloch Warna, January 15,2011, http://www.balochwarna.com/modules/news/article.php?storyid=3050(accessed March 29, 2011); “Two bullet-ridden bodies found inPanjgur,” Daily Times, January 8, 2011,http://dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2011\01\09\story_9-1-2011_pg1_5(accessed March 29, 2011); “BSO Leader Qambar Chakar, 24, Martyred inTurbat,” The Baloch Hal, January 6, 2011,http://www.thebalochhal.com/2011/01/bso-leader-qambar-chakars24-martyred-in-turbat/(accessed March 29, 2011); “Kidnapped Baloch Journalist Alyas Nizar'sBullet-ridden Body Found in Turbat,” The Baloch Hal, January 6,2011,http://www.thebalochhal.com/2011/01/kidnapped-baloch-journalists-bulleet-riddled-body-found-in-turbat/(accessed march 29, 2011); “Bodies of four missing persons found inTurbat ,” The Baloch Hal, December 31, 2010,http://www.thebalochhal.com/2010/12/four-more-missing-persons-dead-bodies-found-in-turbat/(accessed March 29, 2011); “Five bullet-riddled bodies found,” Dawn,December 27, 2010,http://www.dawn.com/2010/12/27/five-bullet-riddled-bodies-found.html (accessedMarch 29, 2011).[142]Human Rights Watch, Their Future is at Stake.[143]AbdulWahab, “The Invisible Hand,” Newsline magazine,September 16, 2010, http://www.newslinemagazine.com/2010/09/the-invisible-hand/(accessed November 1, 2010).[144]Human Rights Watch interview with the mother of Abdul Qayyum Baloch, April2010, Karachi.[145]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Haji Murrad Khan Marri, June 28,2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofHaji Murrad Khan Marri (Case 28).[146]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Din Mohammad Baloch, April 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of DinMohammad Baloch (Case 27).[147]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Najeebullah Qambrani, June 23,2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofNajeebullah Qambrani (Case 21).[148]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Tawakal Khan, June 29, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofTawakal Khan (Case 40).[149]HumanRights Watch interview with Asad, April 2010, Karachi. For more information,see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Asad (Case 45).[150]HumanRights Watch interview with Bashir Azeem, April 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Bashir Azeem (Case 35).[151]HumanRights Watch interviews with the relatives of Mir Sohrab Marri and ShahMohammad Zarkoon, June 24, 2010, Karachi, For more information, see Appendix I,Enforced disappearance of Mir Sohrab Marri and Shah Mohammad Zarkoon (Cases 19and 20).[152]HumanRights Watch interview with a friend of Zakir Majeed Baloch, July 1, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of ZakirMajeed Baloch (Case 29).[153]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Ghani, June 29, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Abdul Ghani(Case 37).[154]See Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, “Annual Report 2007,” http://www.hrcp-web.org/pdf/Archives%20Reports/AR2007.pdfpages 24-25 (accessed April 27, 2011).[155]Theduty to try and punish those responsible for grave violations of human rightshas its legal basis in various treaties, including the ICCPR (art. 2) and theConvention against Torture (arts. 4, 5, and 7). See also United NationsCommission on Human Rights, “Report submitted January 8, 2002, by Mr.Manfred Nowak, independent expert charged with examining the existinginternational criminal and human rights framework for the protection of personsfrom enforced or involuntary disappearance, pursuant to paragraph 11 ofCommission resolution 2001/46” (New York: United Nations, 2002),E/CN.4/2002/71.[156]The UN General Assembly has repeatedlycalled on governments to devote appropriate resources to searching for thedisappeared and to "undertake speedy and impartial investigations."  It has urgedstates to ensure that law enforcement and security authorities are fullyaccountable in the discharge of their duties, and emphasized that suchaccountability must include, “legal responsibility for unjustifiableexcesses which might lead to enforced or involuntary disappearances and toother violations of human rights.” Resolution on Disappeared Persons,adopted by the General Assembly during its 33rd session, UN G. A. Res. 33/173,adopted December 22, 1978.[157]Declarationagainst Enforced Disappearances, arts. 13 and 14. These provisions arereinforced in arts. 4, 6, and 12 of the Convention against EnforcedDisappearance.[158]Principles on the Effective Prevention andInvestigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, E.S.C. res.1989/65, annex, 1989 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (No. 1) at 52, U.N. Doc. E/1989/89(1989). Provision 9 of the Principles states: “There shall be thorough,prompt and impartial investigation of all suspected cases of extra-legal,arbitrary and summary executions, including cases where complaints by relativesor other reliable reports suggest unnatural death in the above circumstances.Governments shall maintain investigative offices and procedures to undertakesuch inquiries. The purpose of the investigation shall be to determine thecause, manner and time of death, the person responsible, and any pattern orpractice which may have brought about that death. It shall include an adequateautopsy, collection and analysis of all physical and documentary evidence andstatements from witnesses. The investigation shall distinguish between naturaldeath, accidental death, suicide and homicide.” Provision 17 of thePrinciples states: “A written report shall be made within a reasonableperiod of time on the methods and findings of such investigations. The reportshall be made public immediately and shall include the scope of the inquiry,procedures and methods used to evaluate evidence as well as conclusions andrecommendations based on findings of fact and on applicable law. The reportshall also describe in detail specific events that were found to have occurredand the evidence upon which such findings were based, and list the names ofwitnesses who testified, with the exception of those whose identities have beenwithheld for their own protection. The Government shall, within a reasonableperiod of time, either reply to the report of the investigation, or indicatethe steps to be taken in response to it.”[159]Guidance on reparation to victims can be found in the UN Basic Principles andGuidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violationsof International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of InternationalHumanitarian Law, G.A. Res. 60/147, U.N. Doc. A/RES/60/147 (December 16, 2005).The Principles reaffirm that a state should provide adequate, effective, andprompt reparation to victims for acts or omissions constituting violations ofinternational human rights and humanitarian law norms.[160]ICCPR,arts. 2(3) and 9(5). The UN Human Rights Committee, which monitorsinternational compliance with the ICCPR, has noted that “reparation caninvolve restitution, rehabilitation and measures of satisfaction, such aspublic apologies, public memorials, guarantees of non-repetition and changes inrelevant laws and practices, as well as bringing to justice the perpetrators ofhuman rights violations.” UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No.31 on Article 2 of the Covenant: The Nature of the General Legal ObligationImposed on States Parties to the Covenant, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/74/CRP.4/Rev.6(2004).[161]Declarationon the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances, Article 19;Convention against Enforced Disappearance, art. 24.[162]Convention against Enforced Disappearance, art.24. This right was reaffirmed in a 2005 resolution by the UN Commission onHuman Rights. The resolution, entitled “The Right to the Truth,”stresses “the imperative for society as a whole to recognize the right ofvictims of gross violations of human rights and serious violations ofinternational humanitarian law, and their families… to know the truthregarding such violations, including the identity of the perpetrators and thecauses, facts and circumstances in which such violations took place.” Theresolution goes on to recognize “the importance of respecting andensuring the right to the truth so as to contribute to ending impunity and topromote and protect human rights.” OHCHR Resolution2005/66, adopted April 20, 2005.[163]United Nations Commission onHuman Rights, “Report submitted January 8, 2002, by Mr. Manfred Nowak,independent expert charged with examining the existing international criminaland human rights framework for the protection of persons from enforced orinvoluntary disappearance, pursuant to paragraph 11 of Commission resolution2001/46” (New York: United Nations, 2002), E/CN.4/2002/71. Nowak furtheremphasizes that in the case of disappearances the reparation is of utmostimportance “not only as a matter of redress for the individual victims,but also as a pre-condition for establishing truth, justice and peace in thesocieties affected by such practices.”[164]“End enforced disappearances in Pakistan,” Amnesty Internationalpress release, undated, http://www.amnesty.org/en/appeals-for-action/end-enforced-disappearances-pakistan(accessed March 29, 2011). In May 2008 the Interior Ministry set up a committeeto investigate cases of all persons subjected to enforced disappearances. Thecommittee included members of the Interior Ministry, parliament, and of thefamilies of the disappeared. However, the government has not to date releasedits findings or reported on any action taken as a consequence.[165]“Strategydevised to implement Balochistan Package: Rehman”, Pakistan Times,November 24, 2009http://pakistantimes.net/pt/detail.php?newsId=6264,(accessed July 7, 2011).[166]“Balochistan package tabled in parliament”, November 25, 2011, PakTribune, http://www.paktribune.com/news/print.php?id=221717,(accessed July 7, 2011).[167]“Top Balochistan minister alleges extrajudicial killings”, bbcnews.com;http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-11832034,(accessed July 7, 2011).[168]See Appendix I[169]Ibid.[170]See Appendix II.[171]A First Information Report (FIR) is awritten document prepared by the police when they receive information about analleged crime. Police are ordinarily obliged to immediately register an FIRdetailing the nature of these crimes. But there is no obligation for police toinvestigate the incident (Criminal Procedure Code, sec. 156; Police Rules, ch.XXV, rule 25-1.). Clear guidelines for making such a decision do not exist. Asa result, throughout Pakistan, FIRs are often either not filed by police orpoorly prepared.[172]Criminal Procedure Code, sec. 156; Police Rules, ch. XXV, rule 25-1.[173]See, e,g, ICCPR, art. 2 (indicating a duty to investigate and prosecute thoseresponsible for grave violations of human rights); see also Declaration againstDisappearances, arts. 13, 14.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative ofSangat-Sana Baloch, April and June 26, 2010, Karachi. For more information, seeAppendix I, Enforced disappearance of Sangat-Sana Baloch and Kambar Baloch(Cases 15 and 16).[175]Human Rights Watch interviews with the relatives of Chakkar Khan Marri and“Salman S.” (not his real name), June 23, 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Chakkar Khan Marri and“Salman S.” (Cases 23 and 24).[176]Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Najeebullah Qambrani, June 23,2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofNajeebullah Qambrani (Case 21).[177]HumanRights Watch interview with a friend of Zakir Majeed Baloch, July 1, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of ZakirMajeed Baloch (Case 29).[178]HumanRights Watch interviews with a relative of Noor Khan, July 3, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Noor Khan (Case38).[179]There is nothing in section 549 of the Criminal Procedure Code (1898)prohibiting the police from investigating illegal detentions by the military.The section states:549. Delivery to military authorities of personsliable to be tried by Court martial.(1)The Central Government may make rules consistentwith this Code and the Pakistan Army Act, 1952 (XXXIX of 1952), the PakistanAir Force Act, 1953 (VI of 1953, and the Pakistan Navy Ordinance, 1961 (XXXV of1961] and any similar law for the time being in force as to the cases in whichperson subject to military naval or air force law shall be tried by a Court towhich this Code applies, or by Court-martial, and when any person is broughtbefore a Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he is liable to betried either by a Court to which this Code applies or by a Court-martial, suchMagistrate shall have regard to such rules and shall in proper cases deliverhim together with a statement of the offence of which he is accused to thecommanding officer of the regiment, corps, ship or detachment to which hebelongs, or to the commanding officer of the nearest military, naval or airforce station, as the case may be, for the purpose of being tried byCourt-martial.(2) Apprehension of such persons. Every Magistrateshall, on receiving a written application for that purpose by the commandingofficer of any body of soldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed at anysuch place, use his utmost endeavour to apprehend and secure any person accusedof such offence.(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code,if the person arrested by the Police is a person subject to the Pakistan ArmyAct, 1952 (XXXIX of 1952) and the offence for which he is accused is triable bya Court-martial, the custody of such person and the investigation of theoffence of which he is accused may be taken over by the Commanding Officer ofsuch person under the said Act.[180]HumanRights Watch interview with a witness to the disappearance of Abdul Nasir, June23, 2010, Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearanceof Abdul Nasir (Case 22).[181]Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1973), art. 199;ICCPR, art. 9(4).[182]Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1973), art. 199.[183]Seee.g., Human RightsCommission of Pakistan, “State of human rights in 2004,” January2005, http://www.hrcp-web.org/pdf/Archives%20Reports/AR2004.pdf,and “State ofhuman rights 2005,” January 2006, http://www.hrcp-web.org/pdf/AR2005.pdf (both accessed February 7,2011); Amnesty International, “Pakistan: Human rights Ignored in the ‘War ofTerror,’” ASA 33/036/2006, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ASA33/036/2006/en/c13e4bf4-d3f0-11dd-8743-d305bea2b2c7/asa330362006en.pdf(accessed February 7, 2011); Amnesty International, “Pakistan: Denyingthe Undeniable: Enforced Disappearances in Pakistan,” ASA 33/018/2008, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ASA33/018/2008/en/0de43038-57dd-11dd-be62-3f7ba2157024/asa330182008eng.pdf(accessed February 7, 2011)[184]For more information, see Amnesty International, “Pakistan: Denying theUndeniable: Enforced Disappearances in Pakistan.”[185]Ibid.[186]The Supreme Court has frequently invoked contempt laws againstthe media in order to prevent adverse coverage of judicial conduct.“Human Rights Watch, World Report 2011, Pakistan chapter, http://www.hrw.org/en/world-report-2011/pakistan.[187]Human Rights Watch interview with Rahim, June 29, 2010, Karachi. For moreinformation, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Naseem Baloch and IlyasKarim (Cases 2 and 3).[188]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Mohammad Tariq, July 2, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofMohammad Tariq (Case 30).[189]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Abdul Ghani, June 29, 2010, Karachi.For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of Abdul Ghani(Case 37).[190]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Najeebullah Qambrani, June 23, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of NajeebullahQambrani (Case 21).[191]Constitutionof the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1973), art. 184. Other high courts havesimilar powers subject to article 199.[192]Qaiser Zulfiqar, “Judicial commissionfor missing persons,” The Express Tribune, May 4, 2010,http://tribune.com.pk/story/10686/judicial-commission-for-missing-persons-formed/(accessed October 15, 2010).[193]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Din Mohammad Baloch, April 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance of DinMohammad Baloch (Case 27).[194]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Mohammad Iqbal, June 24, 2010,Karachi. For more information, see Appendix I, Enforced disappearance ofMohammad Iqbal and 11-month-long enforced disappearance of Nawaz Ahmed, JasumAli, and Zahid Ali (Cases 41, 42, 43, and 44).[195]SeeAmnesty International, “Pakistan: Denying the Undeniable: EnforcedDisappearances in Pakistan.”[196]“Judicial commission for missingpersons,” The Express Tribune, May 4, 2010, http://tribune.com.pk/story/10686/judicial-commission-for-missing-persons-formed/(accessed October 15, 2010).[197]Ibid.[198]AzamKhan, “Commission on missing persons formed, SC told,” TheNation, May 4, 2010,[199]“Supreme Court urged to take suo motonotice,” The Express Tribune, October 17, 2010. http://tribune.com.pk/story/63700/supreme-court-urged-to-take-suo-motu-notice/(accessed October 19, 2010).[200]Imran Mukhtar, “Judicial Commission traces out morepersons,” The Nation, October 8, 2010.[201]QaiserZulfiqar, “Enforced disappearances: SC seeks list for taking actionagainst officials,” Express Tribune, January 28, 2011, http://tribune.com.pk/story/110384/enforced-disappearances-sc-seeks-list-for-taking-action-against-officials/(accessed February 9, 2011).[202]Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary (Islamabad), March 1, 2011,pages 429-431.[203]To comply with the Leahy law, US embassy personnel need to actively monitor thecompliance of military units that benefit from US security assistance withinternational human rights and humanitarian law. The law was applied in October2010 against six Pakistani military units for involvement in serious humanrights abuses in the Swat Valley.[204]Amnesty International, “Pakistan urged to investigate murder and tortureof Baloch activist,” October 25, 2010, http://www.amnesty.org/en/news-and-updates/pakistan-urged-investigate-murder-and-torture-baloch-activists-2010-10-26(accessed February 2, 2010).[205]“Mehboob Wadela and Arif Rehman dead bodies found nearOrmara,” Baloch Samchar, February 23, 2011, http://baluchsarmachar.wordpress.com/2011/02/23/mehboob-wadela-and-arif-rehman-dead-bodies-found-near-ormara/(accessed March 29, 2011).[206]“Corpse of Baloch missing person found near Gadani,” DailyTimes, July 2, 2011.Related ContentJuly 28, 2011News ReleasePakistan: Security Forces ‘Disappear’ Opponents in BalochistanGovernment Fails to Confront Military, Intelligence Agencies on AbusesJuly 28, 2011News ReleasePakistan: Security Forces ‘Disappear’ Opponents in BalochistanRegion / CountryAsia PakistanProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch