Burma's Forgotten Prisoners | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload reportDownload excerpt of report in FRENCHこの報告書の日本語版ダウンロードはこちらDonate NowDownloadsDownload reportDownload excerpt of report in FRENCHこの報告書の日本語版ダウンロードはこちらSeptember 16, 2009Burma's Forgotten PrisonersAvailable InEnglish日本語Map of BurmaClick to expand Image© 2009 Human Rights WatchKey facts about Burma’s PoliticalPrisonersActivists and anyone outspoken against military rule havebeen routinely locked up in Burma’s prisons for years.There are 43 prisons holding political activists in Burma, and over 50 labor camps where prisoners are forced into hard labor projects.Beginning in late 2008, closed courts and courts insideprisons sentenced more than 300 activists including political figures,human rights defenders, labor activists, artists, journalists, internetbloggers, and Buddhist monks and nuns to lengthy prison terms. Some prisonterms handed down were in excess of one hundred years.The activists were mainly charged under provisions from Burma’s archaic Penal Code that criminalizes free expression, peacefuldemonstrations, and forming organizations.The sentencing was the second phase of a larger crackdownthat began with the brutal suppression of peaceful protests in August andSeptember 2007. The authorities arrested many of the activists during andin the immediate aftermath of the 2007 protests or in raids that swept Rangoon and other cities in Burma in late 2007 and 2008.More than 20 prominent activists and journalists,including Burma’s most famous comedian, Zargana, were arrested forhaving spoken out about obstacles to humanitarian relief following CycloneNargis, which struck Burma in May 2008.There are now more than 2,100 political prisoners in Burma—more than double the number in early 2007.Secret trials of political prisoners in late 2008Burma remains one of the most repressive and closedsocieties in the world. A shadowy clique of generals, who call themselves theState Peace and Development Council (SPDC), have ruled the country in oneincarnation or another since 1962.Imprisoning people for their political beliefs is nothingnew. Burma’s most famous dissident and prisoner, Nobel Peace Prize winnerAung San Suu Kyi , has spent most of the years since 1989 under housearrest in Rangoon.In May 2009, authorities arrested Aung San Suu Kyi andtransferred her to Insein Prison related to the unwanted intrusion by anAmerican man who allegedly swam across a lake to her house. Authorities chargedher with breaching conditions of her house arrest order under section 22 of the1975 State Protection Act. On August 11, 2009, a criminal courtinside Insein prison sentenced her to three years of imprisonment, with thesentence reduced to 18 months, to be served under house arrest.One of Aung San Suu Kyi’s deputies, U Tin Oo,had his house arrest order extended for another year on February 12, 2009. Hehas been under total house arrest, like Suu Kyi, since 2003, when pro-militarythugs tried to kill both of them during an attack in northern Burma. In 2005, activists including Hkun Tun Oo and his colleagues in the Shan NationalitiesLeague for Democracy, a political party, were sentenced to over 96 years inprison, the first time such outrageously long terms have been handed down toopposition political activists.While the detention of Suu Kyi has rightly been the subjectof great interest and concern, far less attention has been given to the wholegeneration of activists who are paying for their courage with long prisonsentences in brutal conditions.Zargana, one of Burma’s most famous comediansand actors, is a long-time opponent of military rule who has in recent yearsbecome a high-profile activist and relief worker, assisting many sick andimpoverished Burmese who have been further marginalized by the military’sself-serving development policies.U Gambira is a young Buddhist monk who played a keyrole in the 2007 demonstrations, emblematic of widespread discontent amongyoung people over declining living standards and repressive military rule.Su Su Nway, a woman from Burma’s ruralheartland, challenged Burmese authorities in 2005 when she protested beingforced to build a road in her town and was thrown in prison for it. She hassince become one of the most bold and outspoken labor activists in the country.Min Ko Naing, one of the leaders of the 1988 student-leddemonstrations, spent the years between 1989 to 2004 in prison, mostly insolitary confinement. Upon his release, he and many other long-term activistsformed the “88 Generation Students,” a group who has chosen to stayinside Burma and engage in peaceful protest against military rule to initiatedialogue for political, economic, and social reform.These four prominent people represent diverse strands ofdefiance to military rule and remain in prison today.In the past few years, repression inside Burma has increased in step with long-orchestrated moves to entrench military rule throughnominal political reforms and creation of a civilian apparatus loyal to thearmy.During the September 2007 crackdown, Burmese security forcesbeat, arbitrarily arrested, detained, and shot monks and other protesters inthe streets of Rangoon. Police and plain-clothes paramilitary members arrestedthousands of peaceful participants in the protests in nighttime raids onmonasteries and their homes. At least 31 were killed. In the following days,hundreds more were beaten, arbitrarily arrested, and detained at makeshiftdetention facilities, police stations, and jails.In May 2008, despite Cyclone Nargis, which devastated alarge part of the country days earlier, the SPDC went ahead with aconstitutional referendum widely denounced by the international community as asham. Human Rights Watch reported on the government’s tightening ofalready far-reaching restrictions on freedom of assembly, association, and themedia in the run-up to the referendum.The referendum was a further step in the militarygovernment’s process of “disciplined democracy,” underwaysince multiparty elections in 1990 delivered a resounding defeat to themilitary and its favored party. Since then, the SPDC has carefully orchestratedits so-called democratic process to ensure that political activists and humanrights defenders will be excluded; either by imprisoning them, intimidatingthem, or forcing them into exile. The process aims to convince theinternational community that real change is taking place, when all the militaryis planning is continued repressive rule with a tightly controlled civilianfaçade.In September 2008, the SPDC released over 9,000 prisonersfrom Burma’s jails to divert attention from the one-year anniversary ofthe 2007 crackdown. But of the 9,000, only eight were political prisoners, andone of them was rearrested the next day and detained again for another twomonths. One of the eight was Burma’s oldest political prisoner and one ofits longest serving, 78-year-old U Win Tin, a journalist andpolitical activist, imprisoned at notorious Insein prison in Rangoon from July 1989 until September 2008.In February 2009, the SPDC released more than 6,000prisoners to demonstrate their cooperation with the visiting United Nationsspecial rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, Tomas Ojea Quintana. Only an estimated 31 of them were political activists, many of whomhad been in prison before the 2007 demonstrations.From early October 2008, the military government startedpunishing a broad cross-section of Burmese dissidents and civil society actors.The SPDC stepped up secret trials of hundreds of activists, Buddhist clergy, andhuman rights defenders in prisons, in closed court proceedings across thecountry. The rule of law has been grossly disfigured by military manipulation.Trials are manifestly unfair in Burma for those who opposethe military government. There is no judicial independence: judges in Burma serve at the whim of the SPDC and must follow the directives of the military. Defenselawyers of political activists are provided little or no time or opportunity topresent a defense. Frequently they are not permitted to examine governmentevidence, and at times evidence used against political detainees is fabricated.Defense lawyers have tightly controlled access to their clients, and have beenjailed for requesting that trials meet basic standards of fairness and justice.Families of prisoners are often not permitted to attendtrials. Even if they do find out where their family members are being tried andcan travel there, officials have been barring members of the public fromentering the courtrooms.The military government uses vaguely worded archaic lawsthat criminalize free expression, peaceful demonstration, and forming organizations.Burma’s colonial-era penal code has not fundamentally changed since1861, nor have many other old, repressive laws from Burma’s past.Before the trial starts, the client and defense lawyer meetto discuss the case so that the client can instruct his or her lawyer. Thesemeetings usually happen at police custody centers, where political prisonersare transferred when they are due to appear in court. Police officers andmembers of Special Branch are present and watch these meetings, so there is noprivacy for the client and the lawyer to discuss the case. Once the trialstarts, the judge, the prosecution lawyers, the prosecuting officers, andprosecution witnesses follow SPDC instructions.—Saw Kyaw Kyaw Min, lawyer representing politicalactivists, was charged with contempt of court and fled Burma in December 2008.Many activists have been charged under section 505(b) of thePenal Code which prohibits making, publishing, or circulating “anystatement, rumor, or report...likely to cause fear or alarm to the public or toany section of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit anoffense against the State or against public tranquility.” Other commonlyused charges include damaging or defiling a place of worship with intent toinsult the religion, libel against foreign powers, statements causing publicmischief, unlawful association, and holding foreign currency withoutpermission.The government has charged numerous activists, journalists,monks, and students with being “terrorists” and accused them ofstockpiling explosives and weapons in monasteries.For a current list of political prisoners and charges pleasesee: http://www.aappb.org/prisoners1.html.Harsh prison conditionsSince early 2006, the International Committee of the RedCross (ICRC) has suspended its independent and confidential visits to Burma’s prisons. The military government insisted that government officials be inattendance during interviews with prisoners in direct contravention of theICRC’s operating procedures. Since then, there have been only two visitsto prominent political activists by international officials. The former UNspecial rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, Paulo Pinheiro, visited Insein prison in November 2007 and had brief access to several highprofile prisoners such as Su Su Nway. Pinheiro’s successor, Tomas OjeoQuintana, also briefly visited Insein prison in August 2008 and met Win Tin, U Gambira, and two other prisoners. During his second visit to the prison inFebruary 2009, Quintana could only meet five lesser known andgovernment-screened political prisoners.Conditions in Burmese jails are dreadful. For politicalprisoners, ill-treatment and torture are commonplace. Punishments include beingput into stress positions, beatings, and isolation in cramped and dark cells,otherwise known as “dog cells.” Food and medical treatment areoften poor or nonexistent, and in many cases prisoners have to pay for itthemselves.Some of those sentenced in late 2008 have been transferredto isolated prisons in rugged inhospitable areas. Activists are transferred torural facilities to make it more difficult for families to visit, for lawyersto represent them, and for information on their welfare to get out to theinternational community.Getting detailed information out of Burma’s prisons is extremely difficult and dangerous. In late December 2008, a court sentencedZaw Naing Htwe, the brother of imprisoned ‘88 Generation Students(a prominent dissident group) leader Kyaw Kyaw Htwe, to nine years inprison for receiving a letter from his brother smuggled out of Insein prisonweeks earlier. Three prison guards were also arrested and charged.For political activists, time in prison does not onlyrepresent physical and mental punishment and estrangement from their lovedones. It comes with the knowledge that through long jail terms the military istrying to make them, their friends, and their peaceful movement for democracyand human rights irrelevant to Burma and forgotten by the outside world.ZarganaZargana (also known as Zarganar, whose real name isMaung Thura) is Burma’s most famous social satirist and activist. Aformer dentist (hence his stage name Zargana, “pliers” in Burmese),he became famous in the late 1980s as a stage and TV comedian, especially forhis “Beggar” stage shows in which he and his comedic troupe pokedfun at the corruption of Burmese military leaders, deteriorating livingstandards, and the lack of basic freedoms in Burma.Many of these shows used Burmese wordplay, the art of doubleentendre for which the tonal Burmese language is ripe. Zargana calls thesecalibrated jokes, in Burmese ha tha, “under the table” and“behind the curtain” humor, a uniquely Burmese blend of humor partJon Stewart, part Benny Hill, fueled by irreverent anti-government sentiment.One of Zargana’s most popular jokes centered on theefficiency of the generals in the late 1980s: “Every country has asuccess story to tell. Some like to boast about a citizen with no hands who canstill write, or another with no legs who can still run. But there is no othercountry like Burma. Here we have generals able to rule a country for 40 yearswith no brains!” Playing on Burmese tones, Zargana would shi-kho,the respectful gesture of putting ones hands together and gently bowing, andsay the names of Burmese military leaders but twist the pronunciation of kho,which in another tone means ‘stealing’.During the 1988 uprising, Burmese authorities arrestedZargana for leading other artists in support of the anti-governmentdemonstrations. He was tortured in jail. Following his release in 1989, hespoke out again while campaigning for his mother, who was running forparliament in the lead-up to the 1990 elections. For this he was thrown back inprison for four years. In 1991, during this period of incarceration, he won aHuman Rights Watch/Hellman-Hammett grant for persecuted writers.While in prison the authorities banned Zargana from writing,but he still managed to record his jokes and poems secretly, one of which wascollected in the 1996 PEN Anthology of Imprisoned Writers volume “ThisPrison where I Live”:I send my thoughts beyond these wallsDay in, day out, from dawn to nightI dream the endless daydreamDream the endless journeyThrough the night, frettingChamping at the bitThe one I call for does not comeThe one I wait for never appearsAh, if only I could stop theThinking, seeing, hearing, dreamingI wouldn’t feel a thing.After his release in 1993, Zargana continued to act in playsand some films and was a vocal advocate supporting people living with HIV/AIDS.But his outspoken criticism of military rule meant that he was oftenblacklisted from appearing in public.He made several films in the past decade. His 2006 film“Running Out of Patience” was banned, possibly because he madepublic criticisms of tightening government restrictions on the annual Thingyanwater festival. Authorities criticized his public talks as “inciting publicunrest and violence.”After the lavish 2006 wedding video of President ThanShwe’s daughter was leaked to the general public, sparking widespreadresentment, Zargana quipped about what everyone else in the country suspected:that the wedding was arranged because the president’s daughter, ThandarShwe, was already near giving birth, having been made pregnant by a man otherthan the army officer, favored by her father, whom she married. “In othercountries, instant noodles and instant coffee are popular. Only in Burma are there instant babies,” Zargana joked.Zargana became one of the most prominent artists to raiseprivate donations and organize social relief programs around health issues for Rangoon’s poor. He was often joined by the actor Kyaw Thu who runs the popularnon-profit Free Funeral Service Society, which provides funerals to those inthe community who cannot afford it. Zargana refused caution from family andfriends to tone down his statements and avoid arrest, saying, “How can Irun? I have a big bald head; the police can find me anytime!”During the 2007 demonstrations, Zargana and other artistspublicly supported the monks, handing out alms (food and water) to monks beforea major demonstration. The publicity around this act, and his frequentinterviews with the foreign media, got Zargana arrested again in September2007. For a month, the SPDC moved him between several detention andinterrogation facilities. Conditions in detention were dire. Yet, on hisrelease, with characteristic sardonic humor, he told Human Rights Watch whathappened to him in prison:I was held in the dog cells in solitary confinement foreight days and was not allowed to bathe for three days. I had to relieve myselfon a tray. When it became full, I tried to urinate under the door but the dogstried to bite me.—Zargana, describing his time served in a“Military Dog Cell” to Human Rights Watch, October 2007.Following his October 2007 release, Zargana continued to bepolitically active. After the cyclone struck Burma in May 2008, he mobilized anetwork of more than 400 supporters to drive supplies down to affected areasdaily and to raise money for urgently needed food, water, and shelter.Despite Zargana’s heroic relief efforts, his outspokencriticism of the military government’s ineffectual response landed him injail again. Days before his arrest on June 4, 2008, he gave interviews to foreign news outlets in which he reminded the international community about thecontinuing desperate state of cyclone-affected communities and the poorgovernment response. He told the exile Irrawaddy magazine:I want to save my own people. That’s why we go withany donations we can get. But the government doesn't like our work. It is notinterested in helping people. It just wants to tell the world and the rest ofthe country that everything is under control and that it has already saved itspeople.—Zargana, two days before his arrest in Rangoon, June 2008.Zargana’s trial began in August 2008 in closedproceedings at Insein prison. The charges included “insulting... either[through] spoken or written [means]... another religion” (section 295(a)of the Penal Code) making statements causing public mischief (section 505(b))and sections 32(b) and 36 of the Television and Video Law, sections 22(a) and38 of the Electronic Transactions Law, and section 17(2) of the UnlawfulAssociations Act. These provisions criminalize what should be protected formsof expression and association, including giving interviews to members of theforeign media and possessing video footage or photographs of governmentabuses.Among items seized from his house in the police raid andused as evidence against him were copies of the movie Rambo 4, which isset in Burma, and video and still images of the cyclone-affected areas and ofthe 2007 demonstrations.On November 21, 2008, the prison court sentenced him to 59years in prison. His sentence was reduced by 24 years in February 2009, to 35years.Following his trial, Zargana was transferred to a prison inMyitkyina, Kachin State, in northern Burma, known for its bitterly cold winter.Members of his family made the long trip north to visit him in December, wherethey reported he was in fine spirits and “enjoying the cold.” Hismother, the prominent writer and political activist Daw Kyi Oo, died on March20, 2009.I feel the same way as other mothers whose sons also facethe same fate. Now I am numb. What my son did was for the sake of the country.I don't mind how many cases they charged my son with.—Writer Kyi Oo, Zargana's mother, August 18, 2008.U GambiraPerhaps the most emblematic of the monks is 28-year-old UGambira (real name U Sandawbartha). U Gambira is one of the main leaders ofthe All Burma Monks Alliance, which instituted the patta nikkujjana kamma(overturning the bowls) in September 2007, a gesture effectively signaling thatmembers of the military had been excommunicated by the Buddhist clergy. He isone of the most visible and outspoken young monks who led the demonstrationsand a key organizer, switching his time between Rangoon and Mandalay to avoidthe authorities. Following the crackdown, he went underground.After more than a month in hiding, U Gambira was arrested inMandalay on November 4, 2007. The authorities had arrested his brother AungKyaw Kyaw a few weeks earlier to force U Gambira to surrender, a form ofcollective punishment. They then arrested his father for the same purpose onthe day U Gambira was caught. Authorities held his father for one month in Mandalay prison before releasing him.The regime’s use of mass arrests, murder, torture,and imprisonment has failed to extinguish our desire for the freedom that wasstolen from us. We have taken their best punch. Now it is the generals who mustfear the consequences of their actions. We adhere to nonviolence, but our spineis made of steel. There is no turning back. It matters little if my life or thelives of colleagues should be sacrificed on this journey. Others will fill oursandals, and more will join and follow.—U Gambira, writing in the Washington Post on theday of his arrest, November 4, 2007.The young monk was charged with ten offenses for his role inleading the monk’s alliance, including violations of section 6 of the LawRelating to the Forming of Organizations, and sections of the Penal Code onunlawful assembly (section 145), rioting (section 147), insulting anotherreligion (section 295(a)), and making statements that intend to cause militaryofficials to mutiny or disregard their duties (Section 505(a)).In November 2008, a court sentenced U Gambira to 68 years inprison, 12 of them with hard labor. His brother Aung Ko Ko Lwin received 20years in prison for hiding him and was sent to Kyaukpyu prison in Arakan state,and his brother-in-law Moe Htet Hlyan was also jailed for helping him while onthe run, and is now in Moulmein prison in Mon state.While he was detained at Hkamti prison in Sagaing Divisionin western Burma, his mother Daw Yay made an uncomfortable three day journey byboat to visit him. She told Radio Free Asia: “The trip from Mandalay to [Hkamti] prison was like being sent to hell alive. My life, and myfamily’s life, is just clockwork now. We eat and sleep like robots. Thereis no life in our bodies. The ordeal we are going through—it’s apunishment for our entire family.”In May 2009, U Gambira was transferred to an even moreremote facility at Kale in Sagaing Division. He is said to be in deterioratinghealth. The authorities have refused family members permission to visit him.His 68-year sentence was reduced by five years in June 2009.Ma Su Su NwayOne of the most stalwart activists working to end forcedlabor in Burma is 35-year-old Ma Su Su Nway. In 2005, she won an historicvictory against local officials in her village in Thanlyin township near Rangoon who had forced her and other villagers to build a road. The local officialsresponsible went to prison for eight months, but Su Su Nway herself was alsosentenced to 18 months in Insein prison—for allegedly defaming thevillage chairman.Following international pressure, notably from theInternational Labour Organization (ILO), the authorities released her in June2006. Su Su Nway has since continued to challenge the government and has beenfrequently arrested. In 2007, the ILO and the SPDC agreed on a mechanism to endthe practice of punishing people like Su Su Nway who merely complain aboutforced labor, a clear indication of how deplorable the human rights situationis in Burma.On August 28, 2007, Su Su Nway staged a dramatic smallprotest in downtown Rangoon where she yelled out: “Lower fuel prices!Lower commodity prices!” Thugs from the government-backed UnionSolidarity and Development Association and Swan Arr Shin, directed bymembers of the Special Branch of the Burmese police, attacked her even as someof her supporters linked their arms around her to protect her. The thugs struckSu Su Nway, knocking her down, but she managed to escape. In hiding she gavemany interviews to the press. In one interview she articulated why shecontinued to challenge the military government:Because we are in hiding does not mean that we are inretreat, but we worry that there will be nobody left to stand up for the peopleand to speak out if we all go to jail. We know we are water in their [theregime's] hands, and we cannot escape for long, but before we get arrested wewant to say what we should say during the time we are in hiding.We held the demonstrations not only for us, but for allpeople, including those who beat us and tried to arrest us, including thepolice. Those abusing us are also facing difficult daily lives. They have beenused by the military regime because their lives are under military rule.—Ma Su Su Nway, interviewed in hiding, October 2007.Su Su Nway stayed in hiding until November, 2007, when shetravelled with colleague Bo Bo Wing Hlaing to the hotel where thevisiting UN special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, Paulo Pinheiro, was staying. She raised a banner criticizing the SPDC, usinglanguage that mockingly echoed the SPDC’s own crude propaganda slogans, thesign read: “Oppose those relying on China, acting as thieves, holdingmurderous views.” Authorities immediately arrested her.In November 2008 a special court inside Insein prisonsentenced Ma Su Su Nway to 12-and-a-half years in prison on charges includingsedition (section 124(a)) and making statements that cause fear or alarm to thepublic or induce others to commit offenses against the state or publictranquility (section 505(b)). This sentence was later reduced toeight-and-a-half years.Ma Su Su Nway has significant health concerns, including aserious heart condition and hypertension. According to the AAPPB, prisonauthorities have not provided her with adequate medical care, and she hasdifficulty walking. In November 2008, authorities transferred her to Oo-Boprison in Mandalay, and soon after to Kale prison in Sagaing Division.Min Ko NaingMin Ko Naing (whose name literally means“conqueror of kings”) is a 46-year-old activist who has spent 17 ofthe past 20 years in prison for his political beliefs, most of it in solitaryconfinement. On his release in late 2004, he vowed to stay inside Burma and continue his struggle for basic freedoms. As the 88 Generation Students increasedtheir activities of peaceful defiance against military rule, Min Ko Naingarticulated his approach for peaceful change in an interview with the exiledmedia:Our door remains open for reconciliation. While we are theoppressed who have been struggling against injustice in the country, wecontinue to open our door because we usually find the answer to a problem isbased o­n the principle of national reconciliation. The issue is the statusof the government’s door. We will continue to knock so that we can givethem the message that we need to work together in making a nation instead ofannihilating each other.—Min Ko Naing prior to the demonstrations, April2007.In mid-2008, authorities charged Min Ko Naing andother leaders of the 88 Generation Students—Ko Ko Gyi, Htay Kywe, PyoneCho, Min Zaya, and others—with 22 offenses for theirinvolvement in the demonstrations.We initiated these peaceful marches not only to protestagainst the hike in fuel prices, but to bring attention to the immense sufferingof the people of Burma. Our goal has always been, and will remain, peacefultransition to a democratic society and national reconciliation.—Htay Kywe, in a letter sent to the United NationsSecurity Council while in hiding, September 2007.Min Ko Naing and Ko Ko Gyi are currently beingheld in Kengtung prison in Burma’s northeastern Shan State. According to family members, Min Ko Naing’s eyesight is failing, he has a seriousheart condition, and he has not received any medical care from the authorities.When family members managed to see him in late December 2008, while the weatherin Burma’s far northeast is cold, he said that being held in solitaryconfinement was “like living in a refrigerator.”The September 2007 CrackdownIn August 2007, the SPDC raised fuel prices in Burma without warning, increasing the burden on Burma’s struggling impoverished majority. Thefuel price rise sparked bolder public protests by Burma’s increasinglyassertive civil society. Even during the first half of 2007, groups ofactivists had begun organizing against haphazard electricity supplies, risingfood prices, low education standards, lack of access to health care, and a hostof other daily complaints against military rule.Members of the 88 Generation Students, a politicalorganization composed of former students active during Burma’s 1988 uprising, many of whom had spent time in prison, were at the forefront of thedemonstrations. In peaceful marches through the streets of Rangoon, the 88Generation Students and their supporters called on the military government tobegin peaceful dialogue on political and economic reforms. The SPDC respondedswiftly and, by late August 2007, had arrested most of them.Then, in early September, local authorities attacked Buddhistmonks marching in the northern town of Pakokku, Magwe Division, making demandssimilar to those of the dissidents in Rangoon. This sparked a nationwideBuddhist protest movement. By late September monks were staging peacefulmarches through the streets of Rangoon involving tens of thousands of monks andnuns.In one incident, almost impossible to imagine, hundreds ofmonks marched down University Avenue in Rangoon to the home of Burma’s most famous political prisoner, Aung San Suu Kyi. There the monks chanted andprayed for her while she looked on from her gate. The monks then peacefullywalked away.The sense of hope arising from the steadily growingprocessions did not last. On September 26, Burmese riot police backed up byregular army units and government-backed militias called Swan Arr Shin(Masters of Force) began clearing the streets of Rangoon. During two days ofviolence, security forces shot into crowds of protesters, beat and clubbedmonks and civilian protesters, and arrested thousands of people. Monasteriesand homes were raided numerous times by Burmese security forces looking forsuspects. The United Nations estimated that security forces killed at least 31people, although the true figure is likely much higher. In the full glare ofinternational attention, the SPDC used violence to restore an uneasy calm.The CycloneIn early May 2008 Cyclone Nargis struck lower Burma, leaving more than 150,000 people dead or missing. The overwhelming storm and themassive tidal surges devastated coastal regions, villages, towns, and theformer capital Rangoon, directly affecting over 2.4 million people.The military government’s initial response was toblock and delay aid delivery to the affected Irrawaddy Delta during the crucialfirst weeks after the cyclone. An untold number of people died and sufferedneedlessly as the SPDC treated the cyclone as a national security probleminstead of a natural disaster, demonstrating the shocking disregard they holdfor the welfare of their own people. This was partly explained by theSPDC’s pushing ahead with its constitutional referendum, brutallyprepared through intimidation and vote rigging for months, and held in mostparts of the country only a week after the cyclone. The government claimed a 98percent turnout and said that more than 92 percent had voted in favor of thenew constitution.In the crucial first weeks following the disaster,international assistance and technological expertise built up in Rangoon andneighboring Thailand, but were only slowly released following the visit of UNSecretary-General Ban Ki-moon in late May.In the absence of government assistance and responsibility,Burmese civil society stepped in. In the thousands, individuals and communitiesraised money, collected supplies, and traveled to affected parts of the deltaand the Rangoon area, helping shattered villages. Burmese community aidworkers, private organizations, and citizens working for internationalorganizations helped their people, often against roadblocks, obstructions, andimpediments erected by the authorities.Some observers suggested that the resurgence of civilsociety in the wake of the cyclone showed an opening of humanitarian spaceinside Burma. Yet for Burmese who attempted relief efforts independent of the authoritiesor spoke openly about their frustrations with the government, the threat ofarrest or intimidation was all too real and has continued to the present.In June 2008 alone, Human Rights Watch believes that 22people were arrested for activities related to assisting victims of thecyclone, in many cases because they reached out to the international communityor publicly criticized the SPDC’s performance. The most prominent ofthese is renowned Burmese comedian and activist Zargana, but many others,including former political prisoners, used the brief opening of freedom to helptheir countrymen.Police arrested journalists Eine Khaing Oo, a24-year-old reporter for Eco Vision Journal, and Kyaw Kyaw Thein,a former editor of Weekly Journal, after bringing cyclone survivors to Rangoon and interpreting for them at meetings with the ICRC and the United NationsDevelopment Program (UNDP). Eine Khaing Oo will spend two years in prison andKyaw Kyaw Thein received a seven-year prison term for trying to bring thevoices of cyclone victims to the international community.In a bizarre public relations exercise, the SPDC tried totell the world that Burmese people “are not beggars,” and thereforedid not need handouts. In one infamous line, the state-run media claimed thatthe Burmese didn’t need “foreign chocolate bars” to surviveand that “large edible frogs are abundant” for survivors to eat. Burma’s military ruler, General Than Shwe, toured makeshift camps of survivors handing out DVD players to those without electricity, even as the government bargained with the internationalcommunity over the costs of flying rights for helicopters, and while British,US, and French military vessels loaded with supplies waited in vain off Burma’s coast.U Nay Win and Phyo PhyoAungUNay Win, a doctor who was imprisoned from1989 to 2005 for his political activities, was arrested with his daughter PhyoPhyo Aung on June 14, 2008, for organizing to collect bodies of cyclonevictims for burial. Father and daughter had started an organization called TheGroup that Buries the Dead. The SPDC threw both father and daughter, who hadalready spent 16 years of their lives apart, in prison. They were charged inearly February 2009 under provisions contained in the Unlawful Associations Actthat bans any “organizations that attempt, instigate, incite, abet, orcommit acts that may in any way disrupt law and order, peace and tranquility,or safe and secure communications...or...that attempt, instigate, incite, abetor commit acts that may effect or disrupt the regularity of statemachinery.” Phyo Phyo Aung was also charged under 505(b) of the PenalCode for making statements causing public mischief.The 88 Generation StudentsThe most prominent opponents of military rule in Burma, after internationally known Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, are a groupof former student leaders from the 1988 uprising who spent most of the yearsfrom 1989 to 2004 in prison. Soon after their release, they formed a groupcalled the “88 Generation Students” in 2005.The 88 Generation Students has staged some innovative andeffective campaigns emphasizing non-violent resistance, calling for dialoguewith the military government, and involving Burmese civil society. The grouphas staged prayer meetings for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi and allpolitical prisoners called the “Sunday White campaign,” and in 2007started a letter writing campaign called “Open Heart” to encourageordinary Burmese to write to President Than Shwe detailing their dailystruggles and aspirations. The group said it started the campaign “toshow our respect to the people who boldly asserted political, social andeconomic grievances such as abuses of power, human rights violations, andinjustices done by the authorities.”Thirteen members of the group involved in organizing thepeaceful protests in 2007 were arrested on August 22 of that year. Most of thethirteen were held without charge for several months. Another 22 were arrestedover the course of the following months.The authorities tried to convince the total of 26 male andnine female activists in prison to endorse publicly the SPDC’s politicalreform process in exchange for their release. All declined and remained inprison. In the middle of 2008, the secret trials of many of the group’smembers began.By December 2008, all of the 88 Generation Students on trialhad each received sentences of 65 years, with still more charges pendingagainst them.The charges against them include libel against foreignpowers, statements causing public mischief, and unlawful association:Laws Frequently Used Against Political ActivistsSection 130(b) of the Penal Code: “Whoever, by wordseither spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visiblerepresentations, publishes anything tending to degrade, revile or toexpose to hatred or contempt any Foreign State, Head of State,Ambassador or other dignitary of a Foreign State, with intent to disturbpeaceful and friendly relationship between the Union of Burma and thatForeign State, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descriptionfor a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or withboth.”Section 295(a) of the Penal Code: “Whoever, withdeliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelingsof any class of persons by words, either [through] spoken or written[means], or by visible representations, insults or attempts to insultthe religion or the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punishedwith imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend totwo years, or with fine, or with both.”Section 505(b) of the Penal Code: “Whoever makes,publishes or circulates any statement, rumor or report, with intent tocause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public or toany section of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit anoffence against the State or against the public tranquility, shall bepunished with imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with fine,or with both.”Section 17(1) of the Unlawful Association Act: “Whoever is member ofan unlawful association, or takes part in meetings of any suchassociation, or contributes or receives or solicits any contribu­tionfor the purpose of any such association, or in any way assists theoperations of any such association, shall be punished with imprisonmentfor a term [which shall not be less two years and more than three yearsand shall also be liable to fine].”Section 17(2) of the Unlawful Associations Act: “Whoever manages orassists in the management of an unlawful association, or promotes orassists in promoting a meeting of any such association, or of anymembers thereof as such members, shall be punished with imprisonment fora term [which shall not be less than three years and more than fiveyears and shall also be liable to fine].”Section 32(b) of the Television and Video Law: “Whoever commits oneof the following acts shall, on conviction, be punished withimprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with finewhich may extend to Kyats 100,000 [approximately USD 100] or with both.In addition, the property which relate directly to the offence shallalso be confiscated: (b) copying, distributing, hiring or exhibiting thevideo tape that has no video censor certificate and small-sized videocensor certificate with the permitted serial number with the exceptionof cases exempted under this Law.”Trials were held in secret inside Insein prison in Rangoon, before the 88 Generation Students were all sent to far flung prisons across Burma in late November 2008. The trials of some continued in secret at these remoteprisons, while others were periodically transported back to Rangoon to resumeproceedings.Just 65 years?—Min Zaya to the judge when his sentence wasannounced in court, November 2008.88 Generation Student leader Pyone Cho is currentlybeing held in Kawthaung Prison on the southernmost tip of Burma.Officials sent Aung Thu to Putao prison in the farnorth, close to the Chinese border.Min Zaya, was transferred to Lashio prison in Burma’s eastern Shan State.Htay Kywe is in Buthidaung prison in western Burma’s ArakanState, and is often kept in an isolation cell.Nilar TheinNilar Thein,age 35, is one of the mostprominent women activists in Burma, one of more than 190 women in prison fortheir political activities. She is part of the so-called “96Generation” of student activists who staged bold demonstrations againstmilitary rule in December 1996. She spent eight years in prison from 1996 to 2003.Just before the 2007 demonstrations began, she gave birth to her first child.When police arrested members of the 88 Generation Studentsin late August 2007, Nilar Thein went underground, leaving her four-month-olddaughter with relatives. In several interviews while in hiding after theAugust-September protests, Nilar said that her greatest concern was the arrestsof her friends and colleagues, many of whom had been in prison several timesbefore. Given their prominent activism, Nilar knew that ill-treatment waswaiting for them in custody.“Now, when people they [securityservices] are urgently trying to find, including Htay Kywe ... and Mie Mie, arearrested like this, I am extremely concerned for their safety. I’m reallysad thinking what kind of torture they must be undergoing. We, the Burmesewomen, interested in politics and taking part in politics, are facing violenceand torture and being killed.”Nilar Thein managed to avoid thesecurity services hunting her for more than a year, before they arrested her onSeptember 10, 2008, when she was trying to contact her sick mother.I am so choked up with feeling when I had to leave mydaughter with my mother-in-law. It will not be wrong to say it was the worstday of my life... [yet] I don't regret it at all. I don't because just like mydaughter I see many faces of children in my country who lack a future. Withthat I encourage myself to continue this journey.—Nilar Thein, interviewed by Burmese exiled mediawhile in hiding, March 2008.Nilar Thein was charged with the same list of 22 offenses asthe 88 Generation Student activists. A court sentenced her to 65 years inprison. The authorities transferred her to Thayet prison in Magwe Division incentral Burma.Mie MieMie Mie (whose real name is Ma Thin Thin Aye), age35, is one of the most visible and outspoken activists who demonstrated in2007. Active in anti-government activities since she was a high school studentin 1989, she was arrested and imprisoned that year for several months. In 1996,her involvement in student protests provoked another arrest and prison termuntil 2001. A zoology graduate and mother of two children, she is one of theyounger activists within the 88 Generation Students, and her husband is also anavtivist with the NLD. Following her leading role in the August 2007demonstrations, she went into hiding in late August and authorities arrestedher on October 14, 2007.At her trial in Insein prison along with other 88 GenerationStudent leaders, Mie Mie received 65 years in prison.We will never be frightened!—The words Mie Mie allegedly yelled to judges at hersentencing in November 2008.Her health, due to long spells in prison, has been worseningduring 2008 and 2009.Monks and NunsMany of the detainees convicted and sentenced in 2008 areBuddhist monks and nuns. Some had been arrested during protests on the streets,but others were rounded up during brutal nighttime raids on monasteries andreligious schools in Rangoon in September and October 2007. An estimated 220Buddhist monks are in Burmese prisons.In late 2008, courts sentenced 46 monks and four nuns toprison, many of them with hard labor on charges including “injuring ordefiling a place of worship (Section 295 of the Penal Code), insulting...either [through] spoken or written [means]... another religion” (section295(a)) unlawful assembly, and possession of explosives, allegedly hidden inmonasteries. Included in the 46 are five monks from the Ngwe Kyar Yanmonastery, which suffered a bloody and brutal raid by security forces lookingfor monk leaders on the night of September 26, 2007. The five were sentenced tosix-and-a-half years in prison.The convicted nuns include Daw Ponnami, age 84, DawHtay Yi, age 70, and Daw Pyinyar Theingyi, age 64, fromRangoon’s Thitsa Tharaphu School, all of them sentenced to four yearshard labor. When the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar visited Insein prison in February 2009, he reported that Daw Ponnami “did notknow the reason for her arrest [and] was frail and had difficulty in standingand walking.” After one-and-a-half years in prison, the 84-year-old nunwas released in March 2009.Also tried were senior abbots of the Artharwaddy Monastic School, such as 65-year-old U Yevada. Security forcesbrutally raidedhisschool searching for activist monks on the night of September 26, 2007. Seven monks and nuns from the monastic school were charged withdefiling a place of worship and insulting another religion (Sections 295 and295(a) of the Penal Code).In 2008 courts sentenced:U Kaylartha, a monk from Mandalay, to 35 years inprison.U Sandar Wara toeight-and-a-half years inprison.U Thaddama, a young monk from Garna Puli monastery,to 19 years in prison.Abbot U San Dimar of Kyar Monastery in Rangoon’s Pazundaung township, to eight years in prison under the UnlawfulAssociation Act. He still faces charges under the Explosives Act.U Ahnanda, a 62-year-old monk arrested in January2008, to four-and-a-half years in prison in October 2008. He died of a strokein Insein prison on January 22, 2009. Fifteen other monks and nuns imprisonedalongside him are suffering from malnutrition due to insufficient rations, andthe prison authorities refuse to allow family members to visit them.Journalists, Bloggers, and ArtistsAccording to the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ), there are now 14 Burmese journalists in prison for their activities. A number have beenarrested and convicted of crimes related to their coverage of the 2007crackdown and the May 2008 cyclone.Those imprisoned include well-known journalists Thet Zinand Sein Win Aung, both arrested on February 18, 2008, and charged withpossessing what were deemed unlawful items, including video footage of the 2007crackdown and a copy of the report on the 2007 crackdown by the UN specialrapporteur on human rights in Myanmar. On November 28, 2008, a different court sentenced the two to seven years in prison.Journalists imprisoned for reporting on the cyclone, orsimply sending information or footage regarding the cyclone to foreign mediaoutlets, include Aung Kyaw San, Kyaw Kyaw Thant, and Eine KhinOo.Zaw Thet Htwe was helping Zargana provide cyclonerelief supplies but was arrested for compiling information on thegovernment’s slow response and the magnitude of the devastation. A courtsentenced him to 19 years in prison. Zaw Thet Htwe is a prominent journalistcritical of the government who ran the popular First Eleven sportsnewspaper. In 2003, a court had sentenced him to death for exposing a story ona corruption in football (soccer) funding involving government officials, buthe had been released in 2004 following an international outcry.Blogger Nay Phone Latt, age 28,rose to fameduring the 2007 crackdown when his website became pivotal in providinginformation both inside Burma and to the outside world. In January 2008, policearrested him alongside fellow blogger Thin July Kyaw. They wereeventually charged with using electronic transactions technology to harmnational security or aid the commission of such offense (sections 33 (a) and 38of the Electronic Transactions Law), unlawful distribution of videotapes(section 32(b) and section 36 of the Television and Video Law), and makingstatements causing public mischief (section 505(b) of the Penal Code). InNovember 2008, a court sentenced Nay Phone Latt to 20 years in prison andtransferred him to Kawthaung prison on the southern-most tip of Burma.Popular musicians and artists have not escaped arrest andheavy sentences. In November 2008, a court sentenced famous rapper Win Mawof the Shwe Thanzin (Golden Melody) band to seven years in prison forvideotaping the 2007 demonstrations and then distributing CDs of governmentbrutality. On March 5, 2009, his sentence was extended by another ten years to17 years in total. In November 2008, hip hop star Zay Yar Thaw, a memberof “Generation Wave,” was sentenced to seven-and-a-half years inprison for attending a birthday party for Aung San Suu Kyi, in her absence, atNLD party headquarters on June 19, 2008. Generation Wave was formed by youngBurmese activists following the 2007 crackdown, and includes hip hop artistssuch as Zay Yar Thaw, and young activists such as Arkar Bo, Aung ZayPhyo, Thiha Win Tin, Yan Naing Thu, and Wai Lwin Phyo.Poets Saw Wai and Min Han were also sentencedin November 2008: Saw Wai received two years in prison for publishing a poemcritical of President Than Shwe early in 2008, while Min Han received 11 yearsin prison for a range of charges related to comments he made criticizing themilitary government.NLD activistsFor years the military government has targeted members ofthe opposition National League for Democracy (NLD), the party led by Aung SanSuu Kyi which won national elections in 1990 (the first that had been heldsince 1960) by a landslide. Intimidation, duress, and threats by theauthorities have forced thousands of party members to resign, and more than 450are in prison. Tactics of coercion ranging from spurious legal action to directmilitary orders have shut down scores of NLD offices throughout the country.In the last few years, the NLD youth wing has been mostvisible—comprised of bold and innovative activists who often work inconjunction with other emerging groups such as the 88 Generation Students andGeneration Wave.Courts sentenced an estimated 90 members of the NLDin late 2008 for their activities in 2007 and 2008. Eleven are members of theyouth wing who were charged regarding their involvement in a smalldemonstration on May 15, 2007 in Rangoon, calling for Aung San Suu Kyi’srelease from house arrest. Authorities charged them with instigating publicunrest among other charges. The judge charged the 11 accused and their twolawyers with contempt of court because some of the defendants literally turnedtheir backs on the judge to protest the unfair way the defendants were beingquestioned by the prosecution. All 11 NLD members were sentenced toseven-and-a-half years in prison.Six other members of the NLD from Kyauktada townshiparrested during the 2007 crackdown received lengthy sentences: Kyi Kyi War,11 years; Kyaw Zin Win, 16 years; Kyaw Kyaw Lin, 10 years; AungKyaw Oo, 5 years; Nay Zar Myo Win, 5 years; and Kyin Hlaing,4 years.Win Mya Mya, a prominent NLD activist from Mandalay and a survivor of the 2003 Depayin attack, was sentenced in October 2008 to twelveyears in prison for her activities during the September 2007 demonstrations.She was transferred to the isolated Putao prison in far north Burma in March 2009. She managed to tell her brother before she left, “I am being sent towhere I deserve for my works. You live one day, you die one day. I don’tcare if they send me to the moon.”In February 2009, two NLD members elected to parliamentduring the 1990 elections were sentenced to 15 years in prison. Nyi Buand Tin Min Htut were arrested in August 2008 after releasing a lettercriticizing the SPDC’s political reforms. They were sentenced following asecret trial in Insein prison which their family members and legalrepresentatives were not permitted to attend.Human Rights and Defenders NetworkThe Human Rights Defenders and Promoters Network (HRDP)promotes citizen’s rights in Burma by providing public seminars andtrainings on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and doing human rightsdocumentation work. Its grassroots activities have attracted the attention ofthe authorities for the past several years. In April 2007, two of its memberswere brutally attacked by government-backed USDA thugs as they conductedtrainings for villagers on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in ruralareas near Rangoon.U Myint Aye, a founder of the group, has been activein dissident politics since the 1974 demonstrations in Burma. Authorities arrested him on August 8, 2008, when he was staging a solo protest at his homecommemorating the 20th anniversary of the 1988 uprising. Along withfour of his colleagues from the HRDP, he is charged with bombing the office ofa USDA building in Rangoon in 2008. An estimated 43 members of the group are inprison.The 2007 demonstrations and the cyclone response broughtmany different people together, young and old, who spoke out against governmentactions. Police arrested 25-year-old law student Honey Oo, a member ofthe banned All Burma Federation of Students Union in early October 2007 fororganizing demonstrations. She received nine-and-a-half years in prison.U Ohn Than, age 61, a former government employee, hasbeen staging solo protests against government policies since 1988 when he isnot in prison. He was in prison from 1988 to 1995, and upon his release resumedsolo protests. In 1996, the authorities rearrested him and held him in variousprisons until 2003. From then until 2007, he was arrested several times for hisstoic one-man protests against political repression and rising commodityprices. He would stand outside United Nations offices, government buildings,and opposition political offices, making his case, mostly in silent defianceuntil officials dragged him away.On August 23, 2007, U Ohn Than stood outside the US embassyin Rangoon wearing a prison uniform and holding a large placard calling forinternational assistance and national reforms in Burma, as well as criticizingmilitary rule and China’s and Russia’s veto of a UN SecurityCouncil resolution on Burma in January 2007. As embassy officials looked on,plainclothes security agents bundled him into a van and took him to a policestation.A court sentenced him on April 2, 2008, to life imprisonment for sedition under section 124(a) of the Penal Code. U Ohn Than is nowsuffering from cerebral malaria, but has refused all medical assistance fromprison authorities and his family. His daughter managed to visit Hkamti prison,Sagaing Division, but he refused to take any medicine.Form a Government that Represents the PeopleListen and Act On What People WantEnd Military Ruling, NowChina and Russia's Vetoes—Go To Hell!—Slogans on some of the placards U Ohn Than heldoutside the US embassy in Rangoon, August 23, 2007, just before his arrest byplainclothes police.LawyersIn a new twist on the SPDC’s broad sweep againstpeaceful political activists in Burma, the military government has beguntargeting activists’ lawyers. In October 2008, a judge charged SawKyaw Kyaw Min and Nyi Nyi Htwe, two of the lawyers representing the11 NLD activists (see above NLD), with contempt of court because they would notinstruct their clients to turn and face the judge. Both were sentenced to sixmonths in prison. Days later, two more lawyers, U Aung Thein and UKhin Maung Shein, asked to withdraw their representation because the trialswere unfair and they could not do their jobs properly. The judge charged themwith contempt and sentenced them to four-to-six months in prison.Saw Kyaw Kyaw Min learned of the charges in advance and wentunderground. He arrived in Thailand in mid-December 2008. Nyi Nyi Htwe wasreleased from prison in April 2009.In late January 2009, the SPDC issued arrest warrants forsix more lawyers representing NLD activists. Currently, 11 lawyers are inprison for their attempts to assist their clients.About Burmese NamesBurmese names can be difficult to pronounce for theuninitiated, but they are actually quite easy to understand. There are nofamily names in Burmese, a person’s name is just his or her name,although sometimes people adopt part of their parents’ name. The fatherof Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, was General Aung San, thehero of Burma’s Independence movement of the 1940s, and she incorporatedpart of his name into her own name from birth.Burmese is a tonal language with three possible tones,giving one word three slightly different pronunciations with often widelydifferent meanings. Pronouncing Burmese names is easy if you remember a fewbasic things. ‘Su’ is soo, ‘Kyi’ is pronounced chee,‘Aung’ is ong, Gyi is gee, ‘Kyaw’ is jaw,‘Eine’ is ine, ‘Phyo’ is pyo,‘Mie’ is me, and Htwe is tway (the ‘H’ isaspirated).Therefore, Aung San Suu Kyi is pronounced “ong sansoo chee,”and Kyaw Kyaw Htwe is pronounced “jaw jaw t-way.”Nicknames, or pen names, are often used, so it is notunlikely that someone you know by one name actually has another. Zargana, whichmeans “pliers,” or as some people say “tweezers,” isthe popular name for Maung Thura, the famous comedian. He is a trained dentist,so it is an apt stage name for his comedic endeavors. Monks and nuns often haveancient Pali names, religious order names the clergy and the lay communitycalls them, even though their family still calls them by their birth names.The Burmese language also has a straightforward category ofhonorifics, words you place before a person’s name to signify theirsocial standing. “U” (pronounced “Oo”) means uncle, aterm of respect for the elderly or someone who has achieved a position ofprominence or respect (like “sir”). “Daw” means aunt.Many people refer to Aung San Suu Kyi as “Daw Suu.”“Maung” means older brother, and “Ma” is older sister,as in Ma Su Su Nway, and “Ko”means younger brother.Names in other ethnic languages in Burma are generally easy to discern from Burmese, especially Kachin, Shan, Karen, Mon, and othermajor dialects.What can theinternational community do?International pressure can be extremely effective in securingthe release of political prisoners. It is crucial that Burma’s international partners use their influence to support human rights and make calls forthe release of wrongfully detained human rights defenders, journalists, andactivists.Concerned governments, regional bodies, and internationalinstitutions should press the Burmese authorities to immediately andunconditionally release all political prisoners. When visiting Burma, foreign officials should insist on meeting individually with Burmese politicalactivists in prison to solicit their views and show support for theircourageous and important work.The Burmese government needs to demonstrate a commitment tohuman rights by allowing civil society to function. In pursuing any dialoguewith the Burmese authorities, whether on post-cyclone relief assistance,humanitarian aid, political developments leading up to the 2010 elections, ormore generally on human rights, concerned governments, regional bodies, andinternational institutions should consult with civil society activists,particularly with Burmese human rights defenders, on a continual basis, toensure that policies reflect and address their concerns. The release ofpolitical prisoners should be a precondition to engaging with the SPDC on politicalreforms. Human Rights Watch strongly believes that the release of politicalprisoners should be a benchmark in the lifting of targeted financial sanctionsby countries against Burma. Advocacy with states that continue to engage withthe military government, including China, Russia, India, and the countries of Southeast Asia, is especially important if sanctions are to be effective.China, Russia, India, and the countries of Southeast Asiashould make clear to the Burmese military authorities that a genuine politicalreform process must include the active participation of broader society. Burma’s military rulers have been trying to stifle the activities of a whole range ofpeople: human rights defenders, independent journalists, members of the Buddhistclergy, humanitarian activists, and members of the political opposition.Release of political prisoners should be a core component of all bilateraldialogues, trade, and energy deals for any states dealing with the Burmesegovernment.What can you do?Human Rights Watch will never forget the thousands ofpolitical activists in Burma’s prisons and neither should you. Peoplearound the world can do their bit to secure the release of these brave andprincipled individuals by keeping them in the spotlight. Through spreadinginformation in your community you can help reach policymakers and influencethem to do the right thing. Some of the ways to do this is to:Give a face and name to people inside Burma’s prisons by making a prisoner’s case your cause. Some examples:Call on trade unions to use their influenceto publicize the plight of Burmese activists, especially labor activists likeSu Su Nway.Ask comedians to develop jokes andsketches honoring Burma’s imprisoned comedian, Zargana.Ask religious orders to raise the plight ofmonks like U Gambira and nuns imprisoned in Burma during religious ceremoniesand events.Askhigh school and university student groups on campus to organize events to raiseawareness about Burma’s political prisoners, especially former studentleaders like Min Ko Naing.Make local and national politicians aware of thefate of political prisoners. Write letters, emails, and petitions to governmentofficials and leaders of countries that support the Burmese military such as China, Russia, and India. Urge them to seek the release of all the political prisoners in Burma.Write to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, askinghim to pressure Burma’s military government on the release of all Burmesepolitical prisoners.Write opinion pieces for your local newspaper onthe plight of political prisoners in Burma and call up radio stations raisingthe plight of individual prisoners like Zargana, Su Su Nway, U Gambira, and MinKo Naing.Disseminate information and support human rights inBurma through social networking and online activism via social media such asAVAAZ, Twitter, and Facebook.Write to companies working in Burma, urging them to lobby the State Peace and Development Council in order to secure therelease of all Burmese political prisoners and an end to secret and unfairtrials.Publicize the plight of people jailed for theirpeaceful activities by speaking out at community events on the absence offreedom of expression in Burma.Distribute information brochures (like the oneyou’re reading now).Help the families of political prisoners bydonating to organizations that support them, such as the Assistance Associationfor Political Prisoners in Burma (AAPPB). Such organizations keep thousands ofpeople fed, housed, and at school. You can also help fund research on theplight of Burma’s prisoners by donating to Human Rights Watch.And best of all, inform yourself and others, evenjust a few.These simple but powerful acts are routinely denied thepeople of Burma. The people profiled in this report were imprisoned for tryingto do just that in their own country.For more information please visit:   http://www.hrw.org/free-burmas-prisoners.AcknowledgementsThis report was written by David Mathieson, researcher inthe Asia division, and edited by Brad Adams, Asia director; Elaine Pearson,deputy Asia director; James Ross, Legal and Policy director; and JosephSaunders, deputy director in the Program office of Human Rights Watch.Production assistance was provided by Dominique Chambless, consultant in the Asia division; Grace Choi, publications director; Fitzroy Hepkins, production manager; andAnna Lopriore, creative manager, who assisted with the design.Human Rights Watch is deeply grateful to the Assistance Association forPolitical Prisoners in Burma and the friends and relatives of politicalprisoners in Burma who helped make this report possible.Related ContentSeptember 16, 2009News ReleaseBurma: Surge in Political PrisonersPlanned 2010 Elections Not Credible if Opposition Remains in PrisonSeptember 16, 2009News ReleaseBurma: Surge in Political PrisonersRegion / CountryAsia Myanmar (Burma)Protecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch