Service for Life: State Repression and Indefinite Conscription in Eritrea | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportDownload this report with coverDownload the summary and recommendations in TigrinyaDonate NowDownloadsDownload this reportDownload this report with coverDownload the summary and recommendations in TigrinyaApril 16, 2009Service for LifeState Repression and Indefinite Conscription in EritreaEritrean soldiers march during the country's Independence Day in Asmara in this May 24, 2007 file photo. One of Africa's newest and smallest nations has one of the largest armies in the region. But this is due to national service that continues for many years, sometimes indefinitely for both men and women.© 2007 ReutersSummaryThere was jubilation amongEritreans when Eritrea formally gained its independence from Ethiopia in 1993after a bloody 30-year war. Sixteen years later the dreams that the independentstate would be democratic and rights-adhering lie in tatters. Eritrea hasbecome one of the most closed and repressive states in the world. Thousands ofpolitical prisoners are detained in prisons and underground cells; there is noindependent civil society; all independent media outlets have been shut down;the head of the Eritrean Orthodox Church is in incommunicado detention; andevangelical Christians are rounded up and tortured on a regular basis.President Isayas Afewerki,who led Eritrea through much of its extraordinary struggle for independence,now uses an unresolved border dispute with Ethiopia to keep Eritrea on apermanent war footing. For much of the adult male and female population, themandatory 18-month period of national service extends for years, with a largeproportion involuntarily serving in the Eritrean army. People under the age of50 can rarely obtain exit visas to leave the country. Those who try and fleewithout documentation run the risk of imprisonment and torture—or beingshot at the border. The Eritrean government collectively punishes the familiesof those who desert from national service with exorbitant fines orimprisonment. Despite these risks, Eritrea is now among the highest refugeeproducing nations in the world.This report documents theEritrean government’s responsibility for patterns of serious human rightsviolations: arbitrary arrest and detention, torture, forced labor, and inhumanconditions in detention; rigid restrictions on freedom of movement andexpression; and religious persecution. It also analyzes abuses related to thepractice of indefinite conscription into national and military service, thelack of any provision for conscientious objection, and the risks facingrefugees even after they flee.During the first few years ofindependence the outlook was not so bleak. Independent media flourished, the armybegan demobilizing some of those who had fought during the long war ofliberation from Ethiopia, and in 1997 the National Assembly ratified a newconstitution that enshrined democratic principles and fundamental human rights.Then in 1998 a border disputewith Ethiopia flared up into an extraordinarily bloody and costly two-year war.Elections were postponed, mass conscription was re-instated, and tens of thousandsdied before the internationally mediated Algiers Agreement brought hostilitiesto an end in 2000. This provided for the establishment of a neutralEritrea-Ethiopia Border Commission to determine the border by bindingarbitration.After the war, many expectedthe stalled democratic transition to revive. Instead, in September 2001,leading members of the government who publicly called for substantial reformsincluding “free and fair elections” were rounded up and detained.Mass arrests of journalists and perceived opponents of the regime occurredsimultaneously, along with the closure of all independent media organizations.As of March 2009, the whereabouts and condition of most of the individualsdetained in 2001 remain unknown.Since 2001 widespreadsystematic human rights violations have become routine, including arbitraryarrest and detention, torture, extrajudicial killings, and severe restrictionson freedom of expression, freedom of worship, and freedom of movement.In 2002, with theannouncement of the Warsai Yekalo Development Campaign (WDYC), a nationalsocial and economic development effort, the statutory national service of 18months was indefinitely extended so that all male and female adults must beavailable to work at the direction of the state in various capacities until theage of 40—now often 50 or 55 in practice.Indefinite national servicestarts with six months of military training followed by 12 months’deployment either in military service or working for some other governmentministry at the direction of the Ministry of Defense. Some are also drafted towork for the companies owned and operated by the military or ruling party elitesthat dominate the economy.National service conscriptsare paid a survival wage that is insufficient to meet the basic needs of thosewith families. Indefinite conscription is massively unpopular and therepressive apparatus required to enforce the policy is national in scope. Since2003 all secondary school students must complete their final 12thgrade year inside Sawa military camp, effectively starting their militarytraining.A national network of jailsand detention facilities holds those who try and avoid national servicealongside political prisoners and those imprisoned solely for their religious beliefs.Torture, cruel, and degrading treatment, and forced labor are routine. Detentionconditions are inhumane with detainees often held in underground cells or inshipping containers in dangerously high temperatures.Members of minority Christianchurches have faced particular persecution under the Eritrean government.Conscripts found reading the bible or praying in the training camps aredetained and often tortured. Police and military regularly round up suspectedChristians and raid prayer meetings in private homes. Thousands are now behindbars.Those who try and flee thecountry are imprisoned or risk being shot on sight at the border. Refugees whofled to Malta, Sudan, Egypt, Libya, and other countries and were forciblyrepatriated have faced detention and torture upon return to Eritrea. Given thepervasive human rights violations in Eritrea and the risk of torture faced bythose who are returned, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees(UNHCR) has advised against all deportations to Eritrea, including of rejectedasylum seekers. All refoulement of Eritrean refugees should end.Eritrea’s tenserelations with Ethiopia continue to be the dominant factor in Eritrean foreignpolicy and an important element in domestic dynamics. Although both governmentsagreed in advance to accept the decision of the border commission, Ethiopiareneged and failed to cede control over the village of Badme—awarded toEritrea in the commission’s final decision—or to allow physicaldemarcation of the border to proceed without further “dialogue.”Eritrea uses this unresolved dispute to try to justify the mass militarizationof society and the suspension of fundamental rights.Since independence Eritreahas had hostile relations and/or border disputes with all of itsneighbors—Djibouti, Ethiopia, Sudan, as well as Yemen across the Red Sea.It has regularly supported armed opposition against governments with whom ithas disputes, a common regional strategy also used by Ethiopia and Sudan.Eritrea and Ethiopia’s proxy war in neighboring Somalia has beenparticularly damaging. Eritrea’s support for the Islamic Courts Union(ICU) and Ethiopian rebel movements was one factor in Ethiopia’sintervention in Somalia in 2006 to oust the ICU and support the SomaliTransitional Federal Government. That intervention provoked an increasinglybrutal conflict in which thousands of civilians have been killed and more thana million people displaced from Mogadishu. Since the conflict escalated,numerous countries, including Eritrea and Ethiopia, have violated the UN armsembargo on Somalia. Eritrea has helped to strengthen armed groups who havecommitted serious abuses against civilians, including the militant Islamistal-Shabaab.With a new administrationestablishing itself in Washington, DC, and the European Union entering a newphase of development assistance, key governments have an important opportunityto try to resolve the downward spiral in the Horn of Africa. Eritrea plays acritical role in the region and. The United Nations, African Union members, theUnited States, and the EU should take urgent, coordinated action to defuseregional tensions including demanding meaningful steps towards the restorationof the rule of law in Eritrea and an end to the Eritrean government’sbrutal treatment of its own citizens.MethodologyThis report is based onresearch conducted between September 2008 and January 2009 by severalresearchers in the Africa division of Human Rights Watch.Due to severe restrictions onfreedom of movement and expression and the serious security risks individualscould face if they communicated with Human Rights Watch staff on the ground inEritrea, Human Rights Watch decided to conduct most of the research for thisreport outside Eritrea by interviewing refugees.Human Rights Watchresearchers interviewed 53 Eritrean refugees and asylum seekers in Italy, theUnited Kingdom, and Djibouti. All interviews with the exception of four werewith asylum seekers and refugees who had left Eritrea within the last 18 months,and therefore had the most up-to-date experience of conditions in the country.Most of the refugees were men aged 18 to 50; women constituted only a smallproportion of the refugees in Italy and Djibouti.In order to ensure theconfidentiality of the interviews and cross-check information, the interviewswere generally conducted in private in a separate room, with only theinterviewee, a Human Rights Watch researcher, and a translator present totranslate from Tigrinya into English—where translation was necessary.Some interviewees spoke sufficient English for Human Rights Watch to conductthe interview without translation. Human Rights Watch visited five differenttowns in Italy to interview different groups of refugees and worked withseveral different translators in an effort to ensure that the translation wasunbiased.Many of the refugees werefearful of describing their experiences in Eritrea because they were concernedthat doing so could result in repercussions for their families. After HumanRights Watch explained the confidential nature of the interviews, someinterviewees were chosen at random and other people volunteered to speak.Despite the wide variety of research locations, the interviews were consistentin describing patterns of abuses and conditions in various detentionfacilities. The accounts were also cross-checked with other independent sourcesto ensure their credibility. In some cases where specific incidents could notbe cross-checked with independent sources, we have included descriptions of theabuse if we identified the case as part of a broader pattern independentlydocumented by other credible sources.Although Human Rights Watchdid not conduct a formal fact-finding investigation in Eritrea due to the highrisk posed to interviewees, a researcher did visit the country informally tocross-check certain areas of information.Researchers also interviewedEritrean academics, NGO activists, and journalists in exile in Italy and the UKas well as seven non-Eritrean academics, journalists, and experts based inLondon and four diplomats and international officials who live and work inEritrea. Researchers also drew on medico-legal reports documenting evidence of torture in the cases of peoplefleeing to the UK prepared by the MedicalFoundation for Care of the Victims of Torture, based in the UK. Between 2007 and 2008 the Medical Foundationreceived more than 150 requests for help from Eritreans claiming to havesuffered torture and/or ill-treatment.Human Rights Watch also obtained documents from the Eritrean embassies inLondon and Washington, DC.Map of EritreaClick to expand ImageSource: US Central Intelligence Agency. The information onthis map, including the location of the Eritrea-Ethiopia border, should not beconsidered authoritative and does not imply endorsement by Human Rights Watch.RecommendationsTo the Government of Eritrea·Unconditionallyrelease, or charge and bring before a court of law all persons being detainedfor political reasons, including the members of the G-15 and imprisonedjournalists.·Issue clear,public orders to the security forces to cease the arbitrary arrest anddetention, and torture of people based on their religious beliefs.·Immediatelyallow independent monitors access to all known and secret Eritrean detentionfacilities. Notify family members of the whereabouts of detainees and restorevisiting rights, access to legal representation, and respect internationalstandards of law in the treatment of prisoners.·Investigateand prosecute all government officials, including military officers, suspectedof committing murder, rape, torture, or cruel and degrading treatment ofdetainees and national service conscripts.·Publiclyaffirm the rights to freedom of expression, opinion, religion, association, andmovement, and publicly state that no one may be imprisoned for exercising hisor her non-violent opinions or beliefs. Put an end to discrimination againstJehovah’s Witnesses.·Rescind thesuspension of the private press and permit the establishment of independentmedia outlets.·End thepractice of indefinite national service and begin a process of phaseddemobilization for those who have served for more than the statutory 18 months.·Cease usingnational service conscripts as forced labor for private enterprises.·End therequirement of exit visas and travel permits for travel outside and withinEritrea and allow full freedom of movement within Eritrea for Eritrean citizensand for those seeking to work in Eritrea, with due regard to reasonablenational security concerns.·Publiclyrescind the shoot-to-kill policy for those suspected of trying to crossEritrea’s borders without exit visas, and issue orders to military andother security forces to that effect.·Ceaserecruitment of any children under the age of 18 into military service andtraining.·Implement the1997 constitution, approve a political party law, and begin preparations fordemocratic elections with international monitoring throughout the process.·Inviteindependent and impartial humanitarian agencies seeking to provide assistanceto assess humanitarian needs and facilitate their unhindered access tocivilians in need.To theUnited States and the European Union·Insist thatEritrea implement the 1997 constitution, charge or release all politicalprisoners, end forced labor, and prepare for democratic elections.To Donors: the European Commission, the World Bank, and UNAgencies·Conditionfuture development cooperation with Eritrea on progress on fundamental humanrights issues such as the release of political prisoners, access by independentmonitors to detention facilities, and other benchmarks for progress on humanrights in line with article 96 of the European Commission’s Cotonouagreement.·Stipulatethat donor-funded projects should not be implemented by conscripts engaged inforced labor.To the African UnionCall for therecommendations of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’Rights, including the immediate release and compensation of the imprisonedmembers of the G-15, to be implemented. To Countries Hosting Eritrean Refugees and Asylum Seekers,in particular Egypt, Sudan, Libya, Malta, Israel, Turkey, Italy, Sweden, andthe UKImmediately cease anydeportations of Eritrean refugees to Eritrea, consistent with guidancefrom UNHCR, for those countries that do not have functioning asylumprocedures according to international standards. Permit UNHCR access toEritrean asylum seekers in order to screen them for refugee status. To the United Nations HighCommissioner for Refugees·Intervene ina timely fashion to prevent all instances of refoulement of refugees or asylumseekers to Eritrea and work with governments to find alternative solutions toreturn if those governments are unwilling to honor their internationalobligations. Publicly condemn any governments that commit refoulement ofEritrean refugees or asylum seekers.Part 1: BackgroundHistorical ContextEritrea, which occupies anarea of 120,000 square kilometers, borders Sudan, Ethiopia, and Djibouti. Itconsists of a high central plateau, lowlands in the west, and a long,strategically important coastline along the Red Sea. Eritrea’sapproximately 4 million people are roughly equally divided between Christians,mostly residents of the highlands, and Muslims, largely located in thelowlands. Most Eritreans belong to the Tigre and Tigrinya ethnic groups and arelinguistically divided among native Tigrinya and Arabic speakers, with smallersegments of the population speaking a variety of other languages.[1]Contemporary Eritrea had itsgenesis in 1890, when Italy consolidated land it had acquired along the Red SeaCoast from Egypt. Between 1900 and 1908, Italy and the Ethiopian Emperor,Menelik II, signed three treaties purporting to establish the boundary betweenthe Italian colony and Ethiopia. Italy’s oppressive colonial rule endedwith World War II, when the British assumed interim administration of Eritrea.Ignoring the pleas of manyEritreans for independence, in 1950 the United Nations General Assembly votedon a US-backed plan to merge Eritrea with Ethiopia as “an autonomous unitfederated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian crown.”[2]In 1951, a UN-appointedcommissioner oversaw the drafting of a constitution and the election of anEritrean Assembly. British rule ended in 1952, a few months after the EritreanNational Assembly adopted the constitution.Ethiopia, then ruled byEmperor Haile Selassie, soon encroached on Eritrea’s illusory autonomyand self-government.[3] By 1954 political parties were banned, the onlyindependent Eritrean newspaper was closed, and by the late 1950s the EritreanAssembly was forced to replace Tigrinya and Arabic, the official and mostcommonly spoken languages in Eritrea, with Amharic, the official language ofEthiopia.[4]A strike by Eritrean labor unionswas violently suppressed. The federation was officially abolished by imperialEthiopian decree on November 16, 1962.[5] The United Nations remained silent as Ethiopiaunilaterally repudiated the 1950 UN resolution.[6]Ethiopia’s repressivepolicies provoked a 30-year war of national liberation that continued afterHaile Selassie was ousted in 1974 by Mengistu Haile Miriam and his Marxistmilitary government, known as the Derg (“the committee” inAmharic). The conflict killed an estimated 65,000 Eritrean fighters and 40,000civilians, maimed many times more, and caused perhaps as many as 700,000Eritreans to flee to Sudan, the Middle East, and elsewhere around the world.[7]During the 1960s and early 1970s,an armed opposition movement called the Eritrean Liberation Front (ELF) led theinsurgency against Ethiopia.[8] The Ethiopian military responded with collectivepunishment of the rural population, including the use of food as a weapon ofwar, scorched earth campaigns, forced relocation, and mass arrests, torture,unfair trials, and summary executions.[9]By the 1970s a breakawayfaction of the ELF had emerged, splintering the insurgency along ethnic andideological lines. The breakaway faction became the Eritrean People’sLiberation Front (EPLF), led by Isayas Afewerki. Conflict between the ELF andEPLF inside Eritrea and in neighboring Sudan was at times intense between 1972and 1975, and sometimes had a brutal impact on civilians.[10]Unlike the original ELFleaders, who were mostly Muslims from the lowlands focused on independence, themainly Tigrinya-speaking Christian highlanders who began to join the insurgencyin the mid-1960s, and on a much larger scale in the 1970s, were largelysecular, better educated, and imbued with Maoist and Marxist-Leninist ideology,intent not only on obtaining independence but on transforming Eritrean society.[11] That was especially true after new members returnedfrom military and other training in Communist or Communist-aligned countries.[12]The EPLF could be ruthless indealing with dissenters. In 1974 it executed at least 11 dissidents. Thevictims, pejoratively known as the manqa (or menkaa) group,objected to the Soviet-style “democratic centralism” used by theleadership to impose policy decisions and to the use of force to suppresscriticism.[13]The leadership’s actions,according to one authority, “set the tone for the way in which Eritreansociety was mobilized by the leadership both during the armed struggle andafter liberation.”[14]In 1976, 150 EPLF membersheld an organizational meeting, at which Isayas Afewerki was chosen secretary-general.[15] As Dan Connell, a close observer of the EPLF hasnoted, a principal difference between the EPLF and its predecessors “wasits commitment to simultaneous social and political struggle.... [I]t worked totransform the society it fought to liberate.”[16]In the absence of any majoroutside assistance, “[t]hroughout, the watchword was self reliance: doingmore with less.”[17]The war in Eritreacontributed to the overthrow in 1974 of Ethiopia’s emperor, HaileSelassie. Mengistu’s Soviet-backed Derg rejected negotiations withthe EPLF and ELF and opted for continued warfare and internal repression. Butby the late 1970s the Eritrean rebel movements controlled almost 90 percent ofEritrea and an Ethiopian rebel movement called the Tigray People’s LiberationFront (TPLF) was gaining ground in Ethiopia’s own northern Tigray region.[18]The Derg launched massiveair and ground offensives in Tigray and Eritrea in response.[19] By 1982 the Derg had instituted tight controlsover the civilian population in Eritrea, as well as on Eritreans throughoutEthiopia, including dusk-to-dawn curfews and stringent travel controls.[20] The Derg also encouraged civilians to spy oneach other and placed those who made suggestions or protests at neighborhoodmeetings under surveillance or arrest, torture, or extrajudicial execution.In early 1988 the EPLF andthe TPLF, led by current Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, agreed tocoordinate operations in a tactical alliance in spite of ongoing tensionsbetween the two groups. Although the Derg tried to crush the EPLF andTPLF with saturation bombing, massive manpower, and severe famine,[21] by early 1991 the EPLF had defeated the Ethiopianarmy, which had been dislodged almost everywhere in Eritrea except Asmara. Withthe defeat of the Derg in May 1991, an EPLF TransitionalGovernment was formed in Eritrea and a provisional government established inAddis Ababa by a coalition of Ethiopian armed movements called the EthiopianPeople’s Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), led by Meles Zenawi,agreed to hold a referendum on Eritrea’s future within two years, by1993.The first years ofindependenceIn April 1993 Eritreansliving in the country as well as those dispersed in 40 other countries votedoverwhelmingly for independence from Ethiopia in a vote certified by both theUN and the Ethiopian government as free and fair.[22] In 1994 the EPLF dissolved itself, voting totransform itself into a mass political party—the People’s Front forDemocracy and Justice (PFDJ).[23] There were high hopes in Eritrea and abroad thatindependence would bring freedom and true self-governance.In 1994 the Front establisheda transitional 150-member National Assembly to govern pending adoption of aconstitution and elections. The Assembly’s membership was very narrowlybased. Half consisted of the PFDJ central committee and the other half of PFDJmembers selected by party leaders. The Assembly immediately chose the formerEPLF leader and interim President Isayas Afeweki, now the PFDJ’ssecretary-general, as Eritrea’s president.[24]Alarmingly, arbitrarydetentions, allegations of summary executions, “disappearances,”and suspicious deaths continued, marring the period between 1991 and 1998.Monitoring groups reported that over 100 political prisoners were detained in1991 and subsequent years and held without charge or trial.[25]Some died in captivity and somedisappeared—presumed to have been executed.[26] In addition, the government revoked the citizenshiprights of Jehovah’s Witnesses because they allegedly refused toparticipate in the liberation struggle and the 1993 referendum, and refusedcompulsory national military service (see below).[27]Jehovah’s Witnesses weredenied business and drivers licenses, passports, marriage certificates, andnational identity cards essential for travel within Eritrea.[28]Three Jehovah’s Witnessesarrested in September 1994 for refusing military service remain inincommunicado detention without charge or trial more than 14 years later.[29]Also alarming was thepractice of secret administrative “trials” of opponents and thecreation in 1996 of “special courts” outside the normal judicialsystem.[30] These extrajudicial bodies, staffed largely bymilitary officers untrained in law, meet in secret, have authority to retrycases from civilian courts, are not limited by procedural rules, and issuejudgments reviewable only by the president.By contrast, a promisingearly development was the country-wide consultation and adoption of aconstitution for a multi-party democratic system containing a robust list ofhuman rights.[31] Although the interim National Assembly adopted theconstitution in 1997, it has never been promulgated and implemented. On thecontrary, in subsequent years, the government systematically denied Eritreancitizens the freedoms and rights embodied in the document. The governmentclaims the border problems with Ethiopia and external interference,particularly from the United States, as the main impediments to politicalprogress.[32]The government relies on similarjustifications for never having held multi-party elections initially scheduledfor 1997.[33]The 1998-2000 borderwar with EthiopiaEritrea’s relationswith Ethiopia remained relatively close for the first few years afterindependence. But by 1997 there were increasing tensions over economic andcurrency issues and disputed pockets of the un-demarcated border. According toa Claims Commission established by treaty at the end of the war, the immediatecause of the intense two-year conflict was a May 12, 1998 attack by two brigadesof Eritrean regular troops, supported by tanks and artillery, on the smallborder town of Badme and nearby areas under Ethiopian administration.[34] Eritrea claimed that its attack was prompted by anearlier attack by Ethiopian Tigrayan militia on an Eritrean border patrol. TheClaims Commission held these “minor incidents,” if they occurred asEritrea claimed, did not justify Eritrea’s full-scale attack.[35]During the war, Ethiopiaexpelled most Eritrean residents who had voted in the 1993 referendum and confiscatedtheir property. In turn Eritrea detained thousands of Ethiopians still livingin the country in harsh conditions before expelling them.[36]Fighting was deadly butinconclusive until June 2000 when the two governments agreed to a ceasefireafter international—particularly US—pressure on Meles Zenawi.[37] On December 12, 2000, Eritrea and Ethiopia signed anOrganisation of African Unity-sponsored peace agreement in Algiers.[38]Among its provisions was thecreation of a neutral five-person international boundary commission “tolimit and demarcate” the border in accordance with colonial-era maps andtreaties.[39]Both governments agreed in advancethat the Commission’s conclusions would be final and binding, but whenthe Commission concluded in April 2002 that Badme would fall on the Eritreanside of the border,[40] Ethiopia reneged and refused to permit demarcation inthat sector without prior direct talks between the two governments. Eritreainsisted on implementation of the judgment, including demarcation in the Badmesector, and refused to engage in any further discussion with Ethiopia.[41]After a four-year impasse,the Commission announced that the boundary would automatically be deemeddemarcated by map coordinates as of November 26, 2007.[42] After persistent interference and obstruction fromEritrea,[43] including arrests and harassment of UN staff, aUnited Nations peacekeeping force (UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, UNMEE),deployed to patrol a buffer zone along the disputed border in 2000, wasterminated by the UN Security Council in July 2008.[44]Today, tens of thousands ofheavily armed Ethiopian and Eritrean troops are still deployed within meters ofeach other.[45]Even as each government publiclyclaims it has no intention to reignite the war, fighting could easily resumethrough accident or design. Neither side shows any sign of compromise on thepositions they have taken: Ethiopia insists on further dialogue beforedemarcation of the border; Eritrea demands that the Commission’s judgmentbe implemented through demarcation before it will agree to talks with Ethiopia.[46]Crackdown on internal dissent since 2001Even as President Isayas insists on scrupulous adherence to law withregard to the border dispute, he has systematically quashed opposition andindependent civil society and denied the rule of law within the country. Noelections have been held since independence, the interim National Assembly hasnot been convened since January 2002, and the judicial system has atrophied. Asone observer puts it, the formal structures of government and the single rulingparty “are window-dressing for a system of carefully circumscribedone-man rule.”[47]The result has beenincreasingly oppressive rule unfettered by law or other restraints. In May2001, 15 members of the 75-member PFDJ central council, including one formerminister and one former vice-president, issued an open letter criticizingseveral of Isayas’s actions as “illegal andunconstitutional.” The “Group of 15” (G-15) letter demandedthat the president convene the PFDJ’s governing bodies. He refused.[48]The government beganlarge-scale arrests of critics in July 2001 with the arrest of University ofAsmara student union president Semere Kesete for protesting management of theuniversity’s mandatory summer work program. When other students protestedSemere’s arrest, the government rounded up about 400 students, beat them,and trucked them to a work camp in Wi’a, west of Massawa. Another 1,700university students soon joined them there. Wi’a’s summer daytimetemperatures exceed 104°F (40°C) and the camp is a favored place ofpunishment. Two of the arrested students are reported to have died of heatstroke.[49]On September 18 and 19, 2001,as the world was preoccupied with the September 11 attacks in the UnitedStates, the government arrested 11 of the G-15.[50]On September 19, the second day ofthe G-15 arrests, the government withdrew the licenses of all of thecountry’s eight independent newspapers and arrested 10 journalists(others had been warned of the crackdown and managed to escape the country).[51] The government claimed that the newspapers hadviolated the 1996 press proclamation and had undermined national unity.[52]Although the government announcedthat it would soon resume licensing of private newspapers, it has neveraccepted applications and it currently controls all domestic media.The G-15 members,journalists, and dozens of others arrested in September 2001 remainincarcerated, incommunicado and without charge or trial as of March 2009. Therehave been detailed but unconfirmed reports that the original group of 31 peoplewas held in isolation cells in a remote jail called Eiraeiro, located northwestof the town of Ghatielay, and built expressly to hold them.[53] At least one of the 31 detainees is believed to have diedin captivity as a result of harsh conditions, deliberate ill-treatment, anddenial of medical treatment.[54]One of the journalistsdetained—Dawit Isaak—was reported to have been moved to a hospitalin February 2009 due to serious illness.[55]The arrests of the G-15members and journalists triggered a wave of mass arrests of suspected criticsthat has continued until the time of writing. Eritreans from all walks of lifehave been affected, including government officials, leaders ofgovernment-sponsored labor unions, businessmen, and government journalists. Fewhave been freed—and usually only when extremely ill and likely to die:otherwise they are incarcerated indefinitely with little prospect of release.Estimates of the number of Eritreans who currently languish in jail withoutcharge or trial are difficult to confirm but range from 5,000 to 10,000,excluding national service deserters, who may number in the tens of thousands.[56]Among those especiallyvulnerable to arbitrary arrest and detention are Eritreans attempting topractice their religion. In 2002 the government ordered all religious bodiesother than those affiliated with the official Eritrean religions—Islam,Eritrean Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Lutheran Christian churches—toclose. Evangelical Christians are regularly rounded up and imprisoned andtortured. And in 2006 the then-septuagenarian Orthodox patriarch had hislifetime appointment rescinded for protesting the arrest of priests belongingto a reformist wing of the Church. He has been detained ever since and hiswhereabouts are unknown; the priests remain imprisoned.Eritrea’s Regional RoleThe Eritrean governmentclaims that the unresolved border dispute with Ethiopia justifies maintainingthe country on a war footing. But in its short history as a state, Eritrea hashad tense relations with most of its regional neighbors.[57]The continuing border dispute andresulting state of no-war-no-peace with Ethiopia dominate Eritrea’sdomestic and foreign policy.[58] Eritrea does have identifiable security concerns,particularly given that Ethiopia supports Eritrean oppositiongroups—albeit weak and fractured ones—against the government, butat home President Isayas uses the unresolved border dispute to keep Eritrea ona war footing and justify indefinite mass mobilization and repression.Eritrea also supports avariety of longstanding Ethiopian armed opposition groups, such as the OromoLiberation Front (OLF) and the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF), againstthe Ethiopian government, and generally seeks to undermine Ethiopian influencewherever it can in the region. In Somalia, Eritrea has trained, armed, andfinanced militias opposed to the Ethiopian-allied Transitional FederalGovernment. The reports of the UN Monitoring Group on Somalia’s armsembargo consistently list Eritrea (as well as Ethiopia and many other states)among the significant violators of the arms embargo on Somalia.[59]This style of tit-for-tat foreignpolicy is not new. For years Eritrea’s relations with Sudan were alsostrained by mutual support for each other’s opposition groups, butrelations normalized in 2006.Ethiopian reliance on theport of Djibouti is one reason why Eritrea and Djibouti engaged in a war ofwords over their common border in 1996. Friction increased again in 2008 whenEritrea began digging trenches on Ras Doumeira mountain on Djibouti’sside of the border.[60]On June 10, 2008, Eritrean forcesclashed with Djiboutian troops while apparently in pursuit of militarydeserters.[61] The United Nations Security Council issued apresidential statement on June 12, 2008, calling on both sides to commit to aceasefire and to withdraw troops to the status quo ante. Eritrean troopsnonetheless continue to occupy the invaded Djiboutian territory.In January 2009 the UN SecurityCouncil adopted a unanimous resolution demanding that Eritrea withdraw withinfive weeks and that it attempt to resolve the border issue by diplomatic means.[62]Eritrea immediately rejected thedemand, claiming the invaded territory is Eritrean soil and that it thereforecannot accept a resolution demanding “withdrawal of its forces from itsown territory.”[63]The HumanitarianSituationBoth Ethiopia and Eritreasuffered an enormous economic, political, and human toll from their border warand are paying a significant price for the continued deployment of tens ofthousands of troops along the border. Along with the rest of the Horn ofAfrica, famine and drought pose major challenges for Eritrea. Anecdotalevidence suggests that hunger and malnutrition are on the rise.[64] However, little reliable data is available andEritrea refuses to permit surveys needed to independently assess needs. Thereare restrictions on the movement of foreigners, making independent monitoringof conditions in the country very difficult.[65]In a recent visit to thecountry, members of the European Parliament noted that there is no precise dataabout the levels of food insecurity in Eritrea.[66]The World Food Program (WFP)suspended food distribution programs after a policy clash: the governmentmonetized all food aid and seized WFP stocks in 2006, stating that it wasimplementing a cash-for-work program in lieu of food aid distribution.[67]The Eritrean government hasalso placed extensive restrictions on the operations of international nongovernmentalaid organizations (NGOs). In 2005 it adopted new registration requirements thatrequired international organizations to have US$2 million in capital inEritrea, imposed taxes on all imports including food, among other provisions,[68] and in 2006 expelled a number of international nongovernmentalorganizations working in the country.[69] Currently there is only one national nongovernmentalorganization registered under the 2005 NGO proclamation and the work of thenine remaining international NGOs is extremely circumscribed.[70] The EU report concluded that:While there are noindependent verifications for reports about ‘silent famine’ andextreme malnutrition, several indicators suggest the risk of a humanitariancrisis as in other Horn of Africa countries. Food subsistence has been downfrom about 70-75 percent in 2007 to 30-35 percent this year due to the drought.Given the high food and fuel prices (Eritrea being 100 percent dependent on oilimports) and the weakness of the economy, it is unclear how additional foodimports can be financed. After 60 days of overdue payment of debt obligations,the World Bank had to suspend the payment of new credits end of October 2008for the first time.[71]In its Humanitarian AidDecision of February 2008, the European Commission warned of “adeteriorating humanitarian situation” and “worrying humanitarianindicators” in Eritrea, namely, a Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM) ratefor under five children of over 15 percent in some areas of Eritrea, a rate“far above any emergency threshold,” and malnutrition amongpregnant women of 35 to 54 percent.[72] In particular, the Commission warned, “withvery little food aid being imported, due to the current Government monetizationpolicy, the already fragile food security situation could deterioratedramatically.”[73]Part 2: Human Rights ViolationsOverviewEritrea is one of theworld’s youngest countries and has rapidly become one of the mostrepressive. There is no freedom of speech, no freedom of movement, no freedomof worship, and much of the adult male and female population is conscriptedinto indefinite national service where they receive a token wage. Dissent isnot tolerated. Any criticism or questioning of government policy is ruthlesslypunished. Detention, torture, and forced labor await anyone who disagrees withthe government, anyone who attempts to avoid military service or flee thecountry without permission, and anyone found practicing or suspected ofpracticing faiths the government does not sanction. A scholar, friend to andclose observer of Eritrea over many years said, “Eritrea is now a verygrim place. This is a government that doesn’t trust anybody, least of allits own people.”[74]Some of the roots of thishuman rights catastrophe are to be found in the strict discipline of theindependence struggle, Eritrea’s fragile regional security situation, andthe government’s paranoid and totalitarian response to the situation. Thegovernment of Eritrea claims that Eritrea is a victim of international interferenceand that this explains the suspension of human rights and democratic proceduresand the mass militarization of society. In reality most observers think this isPresident Isayas’s justification for a mode of governance characterizedby mistrust, brutality, and presidential whim, in other words, a dictatorshipbased on denial of basic human rights. Dan Connell, a former supporter of theEPLF, noted, “With no public space for political discussion, let aloneprotest, and severe constraints on the organizational expression of the mostbenign social or economic interests—that is, the blanket suppression ofcivil society—the possibility to contest the PFDJ’s grip on poweris nonexistent.”[75]Like its predecessor theEPLF, the ruling PFDJ party is intensely disciplined and driven by theself-reliance and nationalism forged in the 30-year struggle for independencefrom Ethiopia, a struggle that succeeded against tremendous odds and withlittle support from the outside world. The common pattern in thegovernment’s persecution is the perceived threat the victims pose to thePFDJ vision of national unity and national security. Thus, deserters andrefugees are particularly singled out as “traitors” or spies, astoo are journalists, academics, opposition politicians, and anyone who voicesan opinion at variance with accepted propaganda. The regime’spreoccupation with non-traditional Christians, even though they are notpolitically significant, and increasingly many believers in other organizedreligions, appears to be rooted in a broader concern over institutions andmovements that are potentially uncontrolled—or led by individuals who arenot controlled—by the state.There are also historicaldimensions to the regime’s targeting of particular groups. Individualswho are particularly vulnerable include those perceived to be sympathetic toEthiopia or supportive of the ELF—the rival independence movement crushedby Isayas’s EPLF in the 1970s. This perception on the part of the regimemeans that people living in the lowlands who originally provided support to theELF—including Muslims and the Kunama ethnic group, among others—areseen as unreliable and are especially vulnerable to arbitrary arrest anddetention, and other abuses.Unlike earlier militarymobilizations for the war of independence and the 1998-2000 war with Ethiopia,the current mass and indefinite mobilization of the population into nationalservice—ostensibly in readiness for a potential Ethiopianinvasion—is increasingly unpopular. The repressive apparatus required tokeep so many unwilling people conscripted and mobilized is extensive: summaryexecutions, brutal punishments, reprisals against families, and a huge prisoninfrastructure outside the rule of law in which acts of torture and crueltreatment are commonplace and committed with impunity. National serviceconscripts serve in the army, work on national development projects, or areloaned to private firms controlled by army officers and government allies fortheir gain. Compensation is minimal and non-compliance is not an option.As a result of themulti-faceted repression, Eritreans are increasingly fleeing their country. Itshould be pointed out that most Eritreans leave with regret the very countrythat they fought for so long to liberate. Many do so with a deep sense of shameand guilt—some even blame themselves and suggested to Human Rights Watchthat talking about human rights in Eritrea to a foreign organization wastantamount to treason. But as one elderly man who fought for the EPLF in thestruggle said: “I sacrificed my life for the prosperity, development andfreedom of my country but the reverse is true... we did not spend 65,000martyrs for this!”[76]Arbitrary Arrest, Detentions, and“Disappearances”Eritrea routinely arbitrarilydetains people who criticize the president, the government, and the military,those who try and evade national service or desert from the army, and those whopractice or are perceived to be members of unregistered Christian religions.Once arrested, many detainees “disappear”—their families areunable to ascertain their whereabouts and are only occasionally informed if theindividuals die in custody.[77]Political detentionsThe most famous cases ofenforced disappearances are the members of the PFDJ ruling council who were arrestedon September 18, 2001—the so-called G-15—and the hundreds of othergovernment officials and journalists who were detained alongside them. Elevenof the G-15 are still in incommunicado detention.[78]Dozens more have been detainedsince.[79]The level of paranoia on the partof the government has reached such a level that, according to one diplomat inAsmara, “people who present no risk to the security of the state areregularly persecuted.”[80]Those perceived to be athreat to the regime are picked up in house-to-house searches, often at night.Two young refugees described to Human Rights Watch their experience seeingtheir parents arrested at home during the night by soldiers without anyapparent reason.[81]A 26-year-old, serving in themilitary, having been conscripted at the age of 16, returned home on leave tofind that his father had been arrested and taken away by military personnelduring the night, apparently for asking questions about the G-15. His fatherwas a leader from the lowlands, near the border with Ethiopia, and had not fledwhen the Ethiopians controlled his area during the 1998-2000 war. When hehimself persisted in questioning his father’s whereabouts, he was jailedin 2005.[82]In another case, a young mansaw his father, a former ELF military leader, taken from their home at night in2005 by two policemen. He told Human Rights Watch, “After two weeks mymum and I went to the police. They told us, ‘It is not your goddamnbusiness,’ not in a polite way. My father was always disagreeing with[the government] in meetings.”[83]Two months later hisfather’s body was returned. “They said he had been sick in prison.My mother knows the officers; she was asking among them how he died. I thinkshe asked too many questions because then they came back and arrested me and mymum at night.” He added, “Until now I don’t know where theytook my mum. After five months in jail I went to the military prison in Sawa, 6thcamp.”Detention of nationaland military service conscriptsDeserting from the army oreven expressing dissent over the indefinite military service is viewed as apolitical issue by the government. Therefore, most prisoners held for politicalreasons are detained without charge or trial for refusing or questioningnational service or for offences punishable under military law. Even wheredetainees may have committed a potential crime under military law, numerousformer detainees told Human Rights Watch that there was no system of militaryjustice, that they were simply imprisoned on the orders of their commanderswithout any courts-martial or other procedure.[84]Human Rights Watch spoke toover 40 deserters from the national service and the military who had fled thecountry, all of whom had been thrown in jail multiple times without dueprocess.[85] Their alleged offences ranged from questioning theeducational curriculum to being caught in prayer meetings to being suspected oftrying to leave national service.An officer in charge of amilitary prison who subsequently fled to Djibouti explained that sentencing wascompletely arbitrary and commanders decide how long people remain in jail.Whether or not the sick are given access to medical treatment is left to thecaprice of their superior officers: “There were no rules from Asmara onhow long prisoners stay in jail, it depends on individual commanders. Prisonerscan be detained up to two years. If someone is sick they usually don’tbelieve him, he might be trying to escape or does not want to bepunished.”[86]One teacher at Mai Nehfitechnical institute said he was jailed for three months because his militarysupervisors suspected him of trying to flee the country. He described how hewas detained and tortured, repeatedly asked questions about who hiscollaborators were, even though he did not in fact plan on escaping. He laterescaped after serving a longer period in jail for having signed a petitioncomplaining about the treatment of higher education students.[87]A young man who could nottake the punishing regime of training and forced labor at Sawa camp tried tokill himself by throwing himself under a water truck. For that, he wasimprisoned for six months.[88]A military driver who wasdetained multiple times said, “I was detained so many times because I waslate coming back from vacation, sometimes I refused when they ordered me totransport something in a bad place... prison, punishment, this is the life ofthe military.”[89]Another national service soldierwas jailed because he too refused to do his job and spent eight months in jailwithout a hearing as a result:There’s no trial inEritrea. There’s no trial, there’s not even any court.... Imagine,14 years of national service... first they put me in prison without asking anyquestions. After six months they said ‘Start your work’ and Irefused. The response is to send me back to prison. [On release] they gave me apiece of paper and I went to my camp freely. I was tired. They said, rest forthree or four days and then start your work. I said ‘No’ and theyput me inside for [another] two months.[90]Detention of conscripts whotry to practice unregistered religions is common. Several people who escapedfrom their military service told Human Rights Watch that they were arbitrarilythrown in jail for secretly reading the Bible in Sawa camp or being caught in prayermeetings.[91] A female conscript, jailed at least three times, washeld in a shipping container for three months in 2007 for reading the Bible.[92]Another conscript, a man who wasput in jail after a prayer meeting, was just as suddenly released: “Afterfive months and three weeks they just dropped me, with no procedure ordecision, on the streets of Asmara, at midnight.”[93]Because of the secrecy inwhich political detainees are held—incommunicado, in secret locations,without the right to representation or visits, and without any kind ofindependent monitoring—they are in effect, “disappeared” andare at high risk of torture or extrajudicial execution.Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading TreatmentThe internationally accepteddefinition of torture includes any act that involves the intentional inflictionof severe mental or physical pain or suffering for such purposes as theextraction of information or a confession or as intimidation or punishment.[94]Torture is routine in Eritrea,both for those detained in prisons and as punishment for those in militaryservice.Political prisoners,including journalists or teachers, interviewed by Human Rights Watch describedtorture in custody to force them to disclose collaborators, whilst thosepunished for their religious beliefs described being tortured in order torenounce their faith. In many cases former detainees were beaten or tortured inorder to extract information, but in other situations they were simply beaten,tied up, or left to suffer in the sun without any obvious intention to gatherinformation, simply as punishment.According to eyewitnessaccounts gathered by Human Rights Watch, torture and cruel, inhuman, anddegrading treatment or punishment by military officers and commanders aresystematic and “normal.”[95] While some form of discipline or punishment forinsubordination or for military crimes such as desertion is usual in a militarycontext, torture is unlawful in any circumstance. In Eritrea, deaths in custodyare common as a result of ill-treatment, torture, and denial of medicaltreatment (see below section “Deaths in Custody”). Some deathsappear to be deliberate killings.Torture methodsSome of the torture methodsare inherited from the Italian period, whilst others are the methods used bysuccessive Ethiopian governments against suspected Eritrean liberation fightersduring the struggle. All of the torture methods described in this report aredrawn from victim and eyewitness accounts gathered by Human Rights Watch in2008, from individuals who were interviewed independently in differentlocations, and with different translators. The methods described belowcorrespond closely to the findings of Amnesty International in 2004 but this isnot a comprehensive list.[96]“Helicopter”: the victim’s hands and feet are tied togetherbehind the back, sometimes opposite limbs, i.e. left hand to right foot, andthe victim is left face down, often outside in the hot sun. Detainees describedseeing this procedure in most of the prisons mentioned in this report, inparticular in Alla prison.[97]“Otto” oreight: Otto, meaning eight in Italian, is a punishment where thehands are tied together behind the back and victims must lie on their stomachs.This was the most common torture method noted by former conscripts anddetainees, practiced in all the prisons and in Wi’a and Sawa militarycamps.One man interviewed by HumanRights Watch said he was tied for two weeks in the otto position, evenwhen he slept, because he tried to escape from Wi’a training camp.[98] A soldier deployed to Assab on the coast refused anorder and was tortured by being tied in the otto position: “Myleader ordered me to go into the sea and I refused because I have problems inmy left ear. I was punished with otto for four hours. Four hours of ottoin Assab is very bad because it’s so hot,” he said.[99]“Ferro”: Ferro is anItalian word for iron. The method is similar to otto described aboveexcept that the wrists are bound with handcuffs. The prisoner may also be leftin the sun.According to a former armyofficer detained in Alla, ferro was often the punishment for thosesuspected of trying to escape from the army. “If someone is suspected ofescaping then they are tied up—just hands or hands and feet, or ferro,he said. “Individuals decide what kind of punishment is given,there’s no law. They do not have any crimes but [people are punishedbecause] they hate the military or hate to be a soldier. That is the mainreason. Because everyone in Eritrea hates to be in the army.”[100]“Jesus Christ”:As the name suggests, the victim iscrucified by being tied with rope to a tree or a cross and then left to hang,and sometimes beaten while hung.A conscript who answered backand then struck his commanding officer described being punished in this way:My leader [of the unit]ordered me to make charcoal that he wanted to take home to his family. But Itold him, I am in training, this is not my job, so I told him ‘No.’He hit me. I said he cannot hit me so I hit him also...That captain togetherwith other leaders beat me. I still have the scars on my head [he has visiblewide scars on his head and neck]. They tied me in a crucifix style to a tree,with my hands behind me, for two hours at a stretch, off the ground. We call ita cross—the hands are tied to wood and you are hanging in the air. Theyleft me to sleep outside [on the ground] while tied up. It was hot. I got onecup of water for half a day and bread. They asked me no questions duringpunishment, there were many other people punished at the same time. Every daypeople were getting different punishments. In front of everyone, with them allwatching.[101]“Goma”: Goma is amethod involving a radial truck tire. The victim is forced to double up insidea tire for long periods of time.A conscript who was caughtfleeing towards the border in 2005 and imprisoned in Prima military camp wassuspected of links to the Ethiopian-backed opposition to the Eritreangovernment because his mother was Ethiopian. He suffered this form of torture:...[T]he worst is when theyput you inside a tire [goma]. You are tied inside the circle of the tireand they [beat you with a stick and] ask who is supporting you [in Asmara], whoguided you, what kind of program did you have in Ethiopia... Another way tomake you suffer is to tie the hands behind your back, sometimes the legs aswell. This is called otto, then you are tied to a tree and punished byhanging from a tree. There are those who died from punishment but I wasfortunate. Twice they punished me by goma. They use a Ural truck tire. Iwas rolled in the tire for six hours... Luckily I am not fat. The fat mansuffers even more.[102]Mock drowning: Called by many different names around the world, inEritrea this method of torture involves submerging a person’s head in waterso that s/he believes s/he will drown and was originally used by the Dergin Eritrea.A man described to HumanRights Watch his experience in Alla military prison of being put in a barrelhead first, upside down and forced to answer questions after he had tried torun away from the army four times:They hit me everywhere inevery prison—on the head, on the feet—sometimes the body swelled.The first time they hit you is when they catch you—they hit me—andafter two months my body became weak. They put me in a barrel of water, withthe head under water and the legs out. They beat people with electric wire inthe barrel of water. After three days when the inspector came and if youdidn’t accept or respond to his questions then you’d be punishedlike this. I was interrogated with questions like: ‘Who is helpingyou?’; ‘How did you get around without permission?’;‘How did you reach the border?’; ‘Who had the masterplan?’; ‘Who was your guide?’; ‘Are you asoldier?’ I was in the barrel five times.[103]Beating: Beating is commonplace to the point of“normality” and is often preceded or followed by other torturemethods. Nearly every former detainee interviewed by Human Rights Watchdescribed regular beatings, often daily, severe, and resulting in lastingphysical damage.Helen Berhane, a famousEritrean Christian gospel singer was beaten whilst in detention and warned torenounce her faith. She was eventually released and sought asylum in Denmarkbut her legs were severely injured as a result of the beatings.[104]Another conscript who triedto escape described being beaten by intelligence officials: “When I wascaptured they beat me badly. After three months of beatings they startedasking: ‘Whose idea was it to go?’ That was the main reason for thebeating. When they are beating people they divide you into three groups: thosethey believe, those they don’t believe, those they are preparing tobeat.”[105]Another former conscript anddetainee told Human Rights Watch he now has problems with incontinence as aresult of the beating he received in detention. He said, “Beatings werelike food in prison—every day.”[106]There are myriad ways inwhich military superiors torture subordinates or try and scare them fromescaping military service. One of the most egregious accounts gathered by HumanRights Watch concerned unsuccessful deserters from Sawa camp being tied to acorpse. A witness said: “One had been shot running away, the other twohad their hands tied to the feet of the dead person. They were paraded roundthe camp in the back of a Toyota pick-up truck. The intention was for everyoneto see.”[107]Many political prisoners havesuffered the full gamut of torture methods. One government journalist who wasarrested and detained in 2004 because of an article he had written raisingquestions of government policy was punished first in a police station in Asmarabefore being sent to Dahlak prison—a facility on an island in the Red Seaexclusively for political prisoners (see Prison Conditions below).I was questioned in policestation 6 in Asmara. There are different types of interrogation: physical andpsychological. The first step is asking questions if I had a hand in the G-15.Then they change methods, try to get the truth by force. There is a big fencein the back of the 6th police station, with a tree—they tieyou up, then throw you down on the ground, again and again. They tie you up inthe number eight position. Everybody will taste these kinds of punishment, itis normal, like flu... Before I went to Dahlak I was hung up like Christ for 24hours. Then after 24 hours I was thrown on the ground and they put milk andsugar on your face and the flies come and eat your face.[108]Prison ConditionsThe prison infrastructureThe total number of prisonsin Eritrea is a mystery. Eritrea has a formidable network of detentionfacilities, some of which are well known, and others secret, some authorized,and others not. Many, if not most political prisoners and those detained fortrying to flee the country or for practicing “illegal” religionsare held incommunicado in appalling conditions, often underground or in metalshipping containers (see below).Keeping track of all thedetention facilities is extremely difficult because each town andadministrative district in Eritrea has a jail; wherever there is a police postis a cell; and each military division has its own prison. In addition, thereare secret facilities about which many rumors exist, such as Eiraeiro, wheremembers of the G-15 are thought to be held.There is a distinction betweenthe kind of treatment in civilian and military prisons, with the latterreported to be worse than the former. As a former officer in charge of amilitary facility explained, in the military:Each operation has its ownprisons and security and each level of operations has its own prisons.There’s the headquarters prison at operational level, then a divisioncentral prison, brigade prisons, battalion prisons...for nine divisions theremay be more than 50 prisons. Inside Moasher [military intelligence] there aremany prisons. The officer training center has its own prison. When travellingfrom town to town there are ID checks called kella. Three quarters ofthese checkpoints also have prisons underground.... For civilians,there’s a high court and ministry of justice in every town. There is ajustice and law for civilians. Political prisoners tend to be held at [...]Dahlak, Nakhura Island, and Alla.[109]One of the most notoriousprisons is on Dahlak Kebir island in the Red Sea—a huge jail of ironsheet buildings and shipping containers holding refugees returned from Malta in2002, journalists, army deserters, and opposition members.Other prisons frequentlymentioned by former detainees were underground military facilities at Track B(also sometimes called Tract B), a former US storage facility near Asmaraairport, Adderser, Haddis Ma’asker near Sawa and the Sudanese border inwestern Eritrea, Mai Serwa, and Enda Shadushay (6th camp), locatedinside Camp Sawa. All of these hold a similar mix of army deserters,Evangelical Christians, and other political prisoners.Many former detaineesmentioned passing through Adi Abeto—one of the main prisons outsideAsmara—on their way to other places. They stated that sometimes there areover 1,000 prisoners detained there.[110]Other prisons are builtspecifically next to construction sites to house prisoners who are used forforced labor. Detainees described building prisons and then building militaryfacilities or properties for military leaders at Gedem on the coast, HaddisMa’askar, and Me’eter.[111]There are also special placesfor interrogation such as Alla 17, mentioned by the former intelligenceofficial, and 6th police station in Asmara where severalinterviewees described being interrogated and tortured.[112]A list of detentionfacilities known to Human Rights Watch is included in Annex 1 on page 94.Conditions in detentionApart from torture androutine punishment, detainees in Eritrea’s huge network of prisons endureterrible conditions, forced labor, and lethal starvation. With the exception ofEthiopian prisoners of war, the International Committee of the Red Cross is notpermitted to visit Eritrea’s military or civilian detention facilities.The government appears completely unconcerned about detention conditions andthe fate of the people in its custody. Deaths in custody are common. Prisonguards are often demoralized and appalled by what they are asked todo—some of them reportedly escape along with the inmates.Horrendous descriptions ofconditions in many of Eritrea’s different prisons have been widelydocumented by various nongovernmental organizations in recent years.[113]Many detainees are kept in metalshipping containers or in underground pits in overcrowded and dangerously hotconditions for months at a time.[114]Dahlak prison, located onDahlak Kebir island in the Red Sea, is one of the most infamous detentionfacilities in the country, thought to be one of the primary places forlong-term detention of political prisoners including those involuntarily repatriatedto Eritrea by other countries. Human Rights Watch spoke to several people whohad spent more than two years there. Hundreds of prisoners are kept in cellsmade of zinc sheeting or underground, among them those who had been forcefullyreturned from Malta in 2002.[115] In either place they described temperatures regularlyover 104°F (40°C), and were provided with only 750 milliliters of watera day.[116]As with all Eritrean prisons,the detention is arbitrary: “In Dahlak there is no time limit,” aformer detainee told Human Rights Watch. “You are waiting for two things:either someone is coming to transfer you or to kill you.”[117] This political prisoner, who was eventually released,recalled, “When I left Dahlak I was 44 kilograms. My hemoglobin wasnothing. I needed a stick to walk. We were living underground, the temperaturewas 44°C; it was unbelievable. There is no word to expressthe inhumanity.”[118]A man detained in a facilitycalled Halhalas, a sub-provincial prison 45 kilometers from Asmara, said,“How can I describe...it is so bad. We got 300 grams of bread per day,one bread per mealtime, there was no washing. We were taken to the river maybeonce a month, surrounded by military, for five minutes in the river.”Compared to reports from Alla prison, where former inmates said they were givenone piece of bread per day, this was good.[119]Detainees described poor nutritionand starvation rations in most facilities. A man detained in Asmara’sTrack B prison for a day before he was transferred said he received a singlebiscuit.[120] Others told Human Rights Watch they received one cupof water a day despite hot and overcrowded conditions.[121]Everyone interviewed by HumanRights Watch who had spent time in detention in Eritrea’s prisonscomplained of overcrowding. It is such that there is a name for the style ofsleeping in detention. “‘Cortielo’ means we weresleeping on our sides—you couldn’t move or change sides or youwould wake up your neighbors,” said one former detainee.[122]Similar conditions were reportedin Alla and in Prima military camp.[123] A former prisoner described the zinc cell where hewas held in Sawa camp as two meters by three meters with 25 to 30 people in it.Later he was moved to Me’eter, another military prison, because the newmilitary camp there needed lots of labor. There, he said, “We were forcedto build bridges and a military compound.”[124]A man held in HaddisMa’asker said, “It was very crowded with no place to sleep.You’re always breathing the smell of other people and most people aresweating because it’s hot. The smell becomes toxic.”[125]UndergroundDetaining people undergroundappears to be a typical practice of the Eritrean government—much of theliberation struggle was fought from underground bunkers, some of which, itappears, have now become jails for the some of the very people who fought forfreedom. Underground facilities were reported at Sawa, Track B, Mai Serwa,Haddis Ma’asker, Aderser, Alla, and Dahlak, among others. There aremultiple prisons in Camp Sawa, including several underground cells. One formerinmate described “a big hole with trees across the top and then earth ontop. They don’t allow you to come out—even for six months. Peoplegot those allergies and became sick. I was okay. But some were scratching theirskin and bleeding.”[126]One young conscript who wasdetained in an underground prison near Wi’a camp met around 30 members ofthe former Ethiopian Derg regime there who had been held since the warof liberation against Ethiopia ended in 1991—up to 17 years. They had noidea how long they had been there, they had no idea if their children werealive and grown up or dead. The first thing they asked the new arrival waswhether he had a razor blade so they could kill themselves. “Their crimewas to be in the Derg,” said the young conscript.[127]Shipping ContainersAccording to formerdetainees, shipping containers are frequently used as detention facilities inSawa, Mai Serwa, Dahlak, and Klima, near Assab. Shipping containers wereapparently first used to incarcerate people because of a shortage of detentionfacilities.[128]Several national serviceconscripts interviewed by Human Rights Watch described being held in metalshipping containers in Sawa camp. One of them who was taken there after bothhis parents had been arbitrarily detained (they were former ELF leaders who hadthen joined the EPLF) recalled: “There were seven or eight containers,you know for bringing goods from outside. They had cut doors in them made ofsteel. They put me there because they called me a political prisoner because ofmy parents. The conditions were cruel, they beat you with a flex, a wire, theybeat everyone, every night. They want to make us afraid, just enough beatingnot to die and not to live.”[129]One female soldier was heldwith 14 other women for 24 hours a day, some of whom had refused to have sexualrelations with their commanding officers. The only time they were allowedoutside was to go to the toilet, “They can hold them there as long asthey want, there’s no fixed time,” she said.[130]Helen Berhane, the gospel singer,was held with up to 24 other women in a shipping container for part of the twoyears she spent in detention in Mai Serwa prison, in unbearable heat.[131]Extrajudicial Killingsand Deaths in CustodyDiaspora websites are full oflong lists of “disappeared” individuals, some of whom are believedto have died or been extrajudicially killed in government custody.[132]The accounts of those who havefled the country or escaped from detention are replete with descriptions ofpeople shot whilst trying to escape from national service or whilst trying tocross the border and others who have died in custody from the terribleconditions.[133]Shot while trying to escapeDozens of refugees who hadescaped from prison or from military service described being shot at withoutwarning while fleeing.[134] In many of these cases the prisoners were clearlyunarmed and posed little or no threat to their guards. One man interviewed byHuman Rights Watch described how he and his fellow inmates in a container inSawa camp escaped: “We ran in all directions. After you jump the wallthere is barbed wire, more than six feet high. I pulled the wire apart and somesoldiers opened fire. I saw three people shot, two on the left and one on theright. I could not help them because the situation does not allow you to helpyour friend.”[135]One witness saw two men shotdead trying to escape from Me’eter prison in 2006.[136]Another escaped when all of thepeople in his work gang decided to run from their armed guards at the sametime. “We used to go out to work, loading and unloading grain and othergoods, salt, sugar... We broke out of prison when we went out for work. Wefigured we might get shot at but some would escape.”[137]Shot for trying to flee EritreaHuman Rights Watch were toldby a number of sources that there is an official “shoot-to-kill”policy in operation against all those trying to cross the border. A formerofficer in exile told Human Rights Watch that such an order was in effect:“Now the law is killing people for crossing the border. The law changedone year ago.”[138] Another more senior officer, specified: “Therewas a circular. There has been such a large number of people [crossing] thatthere was an announcement that anyone who crosses the border will be shot.Whoever tries to cross will be killed immediately and repeat offenders are alsokilled... those who escape again and again will be shot [even if they are nottrying to cross borders]. This was issued by the Ministry of Defense in April200[7].”[139]A former intelligence officerdescribed to Human Rights Watch the execution of two men, a soldier and auniversity student, who he stated were detained and then shot at Alla 17 prisonfor intending to flee the country.[140]Deaths in custodySurvivors told Human RightsWatch that many people died in custody from sickness, heat stroke, or frombeatings. According to Reporters sans frontières, three of thejournalists arrested in the crackdown in 2001 died in custody between 2005 and2006, a fourth died in January 2007.[141]The survivors of Dahlakconsider themselves to be lucky. As one former inmate said, “In Dahlak,every day someone died. The food was very little and there was no medicalattention. No one cares for prisoners. While I was there about 25 percent diedfrom lack of medication and the bad conditions.”[142]Another man imprisoned inDahlak said, “People were dying and getting sick and crazy. My group wasdetained the longest but there were others there who had been returned fromMalta, Libya. In 2005 many prisoners were dying because of the heat andovercrowding, so they transferred some of us to Gedem. It was the hot seasonand we were dying of hunger, plus the brutal beating of the guards was causingmany people to die. There were 10 dead in my block.”[143]In Addenafas prison, nearAssab, one witness told of two inmates who died in a cell holding 13Christians. Two of them became ill but “there were no medical facilitiesand the nutrition was bad. This was 2006, the deaths.”[144]At the military camp inMe’eter, “the sleeping was better but there was another problembecause we were forced to urinate in corner of the cell, where we weresleeping. Many people got cholera, two in my cell died.”[145] And in the container in Sawa camp, “there are20 people in a container, it is very hot. One died of heat, one died ofsickness in my container.”[146]In one military camp, Prima,an inmate was detained alongside three people accused of co-operating with theDemocracy Movement of Eritrea (DemHaE )[147]who he described as dying as aresult of torture in custody: Asmourom Kifle, Tama Kefelay, and Awat Habtezgee.He described seeing Awat, “bleeding from the nose and mouth. Every timethey were being hit and finally they died. I was listening to the sound but Ididn’t see it... It was hard hitting with a stick or wire on the head andeverywhere. They sent Awat to the hospital and he died there.”[148]A sergeant who had fled toDjibouti and formerly had responsibility for supervising a prison, told HumanRights Watch, “They don’t inform families directly or indirectly ifa soldier dies in prison. It doesn’t matter if the death is from diseaseor hitting, [the soldier is] still a “martyr.” No investigation ismade, or questions asked.”[149]Indefinite ForcedConscriptionEnforced indefinite nationalservice is an increasingly important element of Eritrea’s human rightscrisis. Conscripts undergo military training, in itself not illegal. However,they are subjected to cruel military punishments and torture, already describedabove. Many may be deployed in what constitutes illegal forced labor. Those whotry and evade national service are treated cruelly. Evaders are detained interrible conditions, and heavy penalties are imposed on the families of thosewho evade service or flee the country.Eritrea’s success inits 30-year armed struggle for independence from Ethiopia was due in somemeasure to extraordinary discipline on the part of the Eritrean People’sLiberation Front (EPLF) and the effective mobilization of the whole adultpopulation in the service of the liberation war effort.[150] Since the border war with Ethiopia ended in 2000,however, increasing numbers of Eritreans—especially youth—voicefrustration with the continuing military mobilization and the fact that thedemocratic transition has been shelved, along with the population’s humanrights.An officer who fled thecountry told Human Rights Watch: “In the first war the Eritrean peoplewere coming by themselves [volunteering] to the army and the hope then was toreturn quickly to civilian life. Then the Ethiopian offensive into Eritrea madeall the Eritrean people rise up. But now the reality has changed... Everyone isin national service.”[151]One young man who had recentlyfled Eritrea told Human Right Watch, “It’s okay to do nationalservice, it’s fair to serve one’s country but not always.It’s not fair when it’s indefinite.”[152]After peace in 1991 andindependence in 1993, the new government formalized its commitment to nationalservice in a 1995 proclamation.[153]According to that proclamation,the objectives of national service are:The establishment of astrong defence force based on the people to ensure a free and sovereignEritrea;To preserve and entrustfuture generations [with] the courage, resoluteness [and] heroic episodes shownby our people in the past thirty years;Create a new generationcharacterized by love of work, discipline, ready to participate and serve inthe reconstruction of the nation;To develop and enforce theeconomy of the nation by investing in development work our people as a potentialwealth;To develop professionalcapacity and physical fitness by giving regular military training andcontinuous practice to participants in Training Centers;To foster national unityamong our people by eliminating sub-national feelings.[154]The law states that allEritrean citizens, men and women between the ages of 18 and 50, have theobligation to perform national service. In normal circumstances, nationalservice is supposed to last 18 months (article 8). This consists of six monthsmilitary training and 12 months deployment either on military duties or someother national development project. However, article 13 (2) states that evenafter completing the compulsory 18 months, national service can be extendeduntil 50 years of age “under mobilization or emergency situationdirectives given by the government.”[155]During the first four roundsof the national service, those who were called up were demobilized after 18months, but after war broke out with Ethiopia in 1998, everything changed.Former fighters were called up again, reservists who had been demobilized wereconscripted, and all national service recruits were retained under emergencydirectives.Although the war withEthiopia ended in 2000, in May 2002 the government introduced the Warsai YekaloDevelopment Campaign (WYDC), a proclamation that indefinitely extended nationalservice. The government had promised to demobilize thousands of conscriptsafter the war, and did demobilize some, but by 2007 it reportedly suspended thedemobilization program.[156]The WYDC was a national effort inwhich the generation that had fought for independence would join with newrecruits to build the nation. In effect, it meant the forced conscription ofevery adult male up to the age of 50, although some refugees claim 55 is nowthe upper limit, with other sources claiming up to 57 for men and 47 for women.[157]Not all national service ismilitary service, since many conscripts are not deployed in the army but oncivilian development projects, or are assigned to commercial enterprises withtheir salary paid to the Ministry of Defense.[158] However, the Ministry of Defense is in control of thenational service program and if someone working on a construction project wereto abscond they are still be regarded as a deserter under military law.[159]Refugees interviewed by HumanRights Watch emphasized that there was no difference between military andcivilian national service—conscripts are equally at the mercy of thestate.[160] One Eritrean academic notes that, “What peopledo not realise is that in Eritrea, there is no military service. There is only HagerawiAgelglot (National Service) which is much more ambitious and broader thancommon Military Service.”[161] Military duties are only one of a number of differentassignments that conscripts can be tasked with, although it is the most common.At the time of writing, mostof the able-bodied adult population is on active, indefinite, compulsorynational service or on reserve duty. The only exceptions are on health grounds,or, for women, pregnancy.[162] In discussions with visiting members of the EuropeanParliament, Eritrean government officials, “admitted that militaryservice, although formally to last 18 months, often extends over decades,reducing both the active workforce and the individual freedom and choices ofthe citizens.”[163]Eritrea has also used itsconscription policy to harass and detain UN and NGO staff, purportedly on thegrounds that they have not fulfilled their national service obligations.[164] In 2005, seven Eritrean UNMEE staff were under arrest[165] and the number rose to 27 in early 2006,[166] some of whom were later released.[167]For a country to enforceconscription laws may not be a violation of human rights. However, the way thisis done in Eritrea—the violent methods used, the lack of any right toconscientious objection, and the lack of any mechanism to enable a challenge tothe arbitrary enforcement of conscription constitutes abuse. Furthermore,although national service and conscription at times of genuine nationalemergency may be permitted as a limited exception to the prohibition on forcedlabor, the indefinite nature of national service in Eritrea, the threat ofpenalty (and collective punishment of families of those who desert), the use ofrecruits for forced labor, and the abuses associated with punishing those whodo not participate violate Eritreans’ basic human rights, variousprovisions of the Eritrean constitution, and international human rights law.[168]The consequences for Eritreaare disastrous in that the more the government seeks to compel the population,the more people flee the country. Eritrea is now in the grip of a refugeecrisis with thousands of people fleeing or attempting to flee every month (seebelow, “The Experience of Refugees.”)[169] And since everyone must serve, no family in Eritreais unaffected by the consequences of the national service policy.Collective punishmentof deserters’ familiesThere are strict penaltiesfor those who try and escape national service as well as for any Eritreans wholeave the country without government authorization. Families are collectivelypunished if their relatives flee national service, usually by being jailed orforced to pay fines. An officer formerly responsible for chasing down desertersexplained how if the soldier could not be found then the family was arbitrarilydetained instead:If one of the men escapes,you have to go to his home and find him. If you don’t find him you haveto capture his family and take them to prison. Since 1998, it’s standardto collect a family member if someone flees. The Administration gives the orderto take family members if the national service member is not around. If youdisappear inside Eritrea then the family is put in prison for some time andoften then the child will return. If you cross the border, then [your family]pays 50,000 Nakfa [about US$3,050]. If there’s no money then it can be along time in prison. I know people who are in prison for six months.[170]All of the desertersinterviewed by Human Rights Watch were fearful for the safety of their familiesand anxious that they would face the crippling 50,000 Nakfa fines, detention,or some other retribution such as the denial of business permits or theforfeiting of land in lieu of a cash fine.[171]Three former conscripts said theirmothers had been imprisoned for four months, two months, and two weeksrespectively because they could not afford to pay the 50,000 Nakfa fine.[172] One man, now in Italy, heard that his family’sfarm had been taken because he had fled the army:All the families of thosewho fled had to pay 50,000 or have their land taken away. This happened to alot of people I knew. About half of the town suffered this. The area is usuallya vegetable-growing area—tomatoes and spinach. When people lose theirland they depend on God. If they pay 50,000 they get their land back. The memehidar[local administration] of the town demands the land. Sometimes securityofficials also take matters into their own hands.[173]Abuse of femaleconscriptsRefugees told Human RightsWatch that women are conscripted less now than previously.[174]However, those who are recruitedare more at risk of rights violations, rape, and sexual harassment inparticular. As one female recruit who served as a conscript for 10 yearsexplained, “First you do your military training then they hold youforever without your rights. The military leaders can ask you for anything andif you refuse their demands then you can be punished. Almost every woman in themilitary experiences this kind of problem.”[175] When she was approached by a commanding officer hepunished her when she refused his advances:The officer who asked me[for sex] was married. I said, ‘You are married,’ and he gave memilitary punishment and made me work without any break. I was tied in ottofor three hours in the sun... this disturbed my mind. He was the commander of100 [a company]. His official rank is marehai. After he untied me heasked, ‘Do you know this is your fault?’ I said, ‘This is notmy fault.’ That’s when he made me work.[176]No right of conscientious objectionThe National ServiceProclamation of 1995 makes no provision for conscientious objection to militaryservice. Exemptions are provided for disability (article 15), and thoseconsidered unfit for military training must serve “in any public andgovernment organ according to their profession.”[177] But in reality, as one Eritrean refugee said,“the only people who don’t go to military service are blind ormissing their trigger fingers.”[178]Human Rights Watch takes noposition on conscription; indeed in many countries it is legal andwell-regulated. However, the right of conscientious objection to militaryservice has become an established international norm—a legitimateexercise of the right of freedom of thought, conscience, and religion, as laiddown in article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 18of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.[179] It is possible, acceptable, and, in most othercountries, normal, for individuals to undertake non-military forms of nationalservice, such as community work, construction, or service in the health andeducation sectors. Many national service conscripts go on to do this kind ofservice in Eritrea, however their national service begins with a mandatory sixmonths military training.Jehovah’s Witnesses areparticularly affected by the lack of a right to conscientious objection becausetheir faith forbids them to bear arms. Since independence adherents of thisfaith have been systematically persecuted for what the authorities have treatedas their questionable commitment to the national struggle.[180]Some unlucky youths areviewed by the government as, literally, born to fight. During the war forindependence, children born to EPLF fighters were given over to the movement tobe raised in communal crèches while the parents fought in the army.These children, called “red flowers” or keyahti embaba inTigrinya, are not only expected to participate in national service, but areapparently given no choice but to join the military in their parents’footsteps. One man born during the struggle fled Eritrea because he had nofuture there except as a soldier: “The government says that the childrenof yekalo [independence fighters] must join the military; they have tofollow their fathers.... I told them I don’t want to be a soldier. Theytold me I must be because my parents died in the war.”[181]“Psychologicalderangement” (article 14, 5.1) is also a ground for exemption frommilitary service, and this appears to be a popular way to try and evadeservice. Recruits who have recently been in Sawa describe a dramatic increasein the number of people in the camp showing signs of severe mental illness.Recruits describe a new disease that has sprung up among young women draftedinto Sawa and Wi’a training camps, called “lewt,” andonly known in the camps. One male draftee explained: “In every cohort atleast 10 girls die. The girls cannot handle the pressure and the punishment.The symptoms are a bent back, walking backwards, and some of them shake andfall down. They become like zombies, they just stare at you.”[182]But as one said, “I’mnot sure if they are genuinely crazy or if they are just pretending to be crazyin order to be demobilized.”[183]“Giffa”:press-ganging conscriptsConscription is generallymanaged by local councils, the smallest units of local administration,sometimes referred to as kebelle, sometimes as memehidar, ageneral word meaning “administration.” These council officialsmaintain detailed records on the individual families in their area and ensurethat those of age are conscripted. But in larger towns, the police or militaryalso try to capture evaders or deserters through ad hoc round-ups. Round-ups ofthe population in towns and villages—known as giffa inTigrinya— are common and constitute a kind of modern press-ganging.Anyone of age found without the relevant documents exempting them from nationalservice is taken to the military camps of Sawa and Wi’a for training.[184]Even aside from evaders anddeserters, any civilian who forgets their identification or travel documents isat particular risk of being rounded up in a giffa and arbitrarilydetained. As a young student who was put in Adi Abeto prison for 22 daysdescribed: “It was a Saturday and I was having coffee with friends. Thepolice came and asked for papers, I said I would return to Mai Nehfi to getthem but instead they took me to prison.”[185]Human Rights Watch spoke tomany men who had been apprehended by police or military through giffas.[186]A man who was conscripted in 1998said he had asked dozens of times to be demobilized. “I have not seen thesituation change for 10 years. I asked to leave the military but they tell you,‘we are at war, you cannot leave.’”[187] He did not return after a scheduled vacation but wascaught in a giffa and jailed in Aderser prison.One young man had abscondedfrom training at Sawa camp but was picked up again during a giffa in AdiKeyh town during 2007:I remember the day becauseit was a Saturday, a market day. The soldiers surrounded the town the eveningbefore and on Saturday people came to the market for shopping, around 11 a.m.Many people were caught. They ask you for ID card. I tried to escape butbecause of the crowd I couldn’t get away. They beat me and put me in amilitary vehicle. Soldiers don’t have any education, they have norespect, they simply take you away. We waited an hour or so in the truck whilethe soldiers were catching other people. People were crying.After an hour or two we weretaken to Track B [prison] in Asmara. We spent one day there without food exceptfor a single biscuit. Then [we were] taken to Sawa, about 320 of us, almost allmen except two or three women. In Sawa, men and women were divided, we weremade to kneel down when we got out of the bus, you do it otherwise you willhave the stick.[188]Conscription fromschoolThe preferred method of the Eritrean government is to conscript studentsinto national service straight from school, unless they are continuing highereducation. To this end, the final year of secondary school was moved to Sawamilitary camp in 2003. This 12th grade takes place only in Sawa,under military authority, and incorporating military training. Although many 12thgrade students are 18 years old, or less, some are older because they takelonger to finish high school.[189] Each round or intake of students incorporates 8,000to 9,000 students.[190]Once they are in the camp,however, military service effectively starts then and there. A teacher whosenational service involved teaching in Sawa told Human Rights Watch, “Thestudents could not study. They were always being forced to leave the class forsome kind of military service.”[191] A former student said he did not even enter 12thgrade but was ordered straight into national service in July 2007 even thoughhe was less than 18 years old.[192]National service is deeplyunpopular, especially because new recruits know that there is no prospect of itending. Students have started escaping from Sawa camp during their 12thgrade year without completing school.[193] Escape is no mean feat, because, as described above,Sawa is in effect a huge prison. Those who made it described braving machinegun fire, barbed wire fences, and several days of walking through the desertwithout food and water.[194]Some students, aware of theirfate once they reach 12th grade have begun to deliberately failclasses so that they can remain in the lower grades.[195] Government awareness of this practice has been tosimply pull anyone of military age—18 and above—out of schoolaltogether, even though it is normal for some students to take extra years tofinish school because they are poor or work on family farms. Several studentsdescribed being taken to a military camp under false pretences.[196] One of them explained:I was a student in Adi Keyhin 10th grade. The government told me I was overage and I was forcedto leave the school in January 2006. They took 200 of us on a bus toWi’a, telling us that we would continue our education there. They tookeveryone from all schools, not just those in secondary school but also thosefrom junior and elementary school, everyone above 19 years. But in fact it wasmilitary training. The director of the school had told us that we would begoing to school in Wi’a. We were surprised, we did not believe that wewould be schooling in Wi’a, in the hot desert. When we got there to thecamp, everyone was sad. It was very hot, people were dying from the sun, weburied about five. After four months I was deployed near Assab, a place calledKlima. It was very hot too and people were dying there. I was given a vacationand then I escaped.[197]Wi’a is reportedly thecamp where the “not so clever” students go. If it appears that astudent will not graduate high school anyway, then the government will send himto Wi’a even before he has finished. One former student who was sent toSawa explained, “In school, if you are absent more than two weeks, youget sent to Wi’a—for whatever reason. Sawa is supposed to be foreducated people. If you get kicked out of school, you are not fit for educationanyway, so you go to Wi’a.”[198]Forced LaborAfter six months ofcompulsory military training, national service conscripts are deployedindefinitely in one of several possible activities. Many conscripts are simplydrafted into military service and are deployed in regular military units.[199]One refugee interviewed by HumanRights Watch was sent to work as a clerk in a court in Asmara, another was sentto work as a mechanic in a civilian garage repairing trucks in Asmara.[200] Others described working on farms or mines owned bythe state or the PFDJ ruling party, or building roads and bridges. Regularmilitary units, conscripted military personnel, and prisoners are all alsoengaged in similar activities—building, mining, and farming.[201]According to escapedconscripts, the normal “allowance” during training is 50 EritreanNakfa per month (about US$3).[202] After 18 months training while on national service,this is increased to 150 Nakfa a month ($9).[203]This is the same amount paid toformer soldiers recalled for service during the 1998-2000 war and stillmobilized as well as for the over-50s who have been mobilized to serve in areserve militia. Some of those conscripted prior to 1998 appear to have beenincorporated into the regular army and receive salaries accordingly. Regularsoldiers are paid a salary of 330 to 3,000 Nakfa ($20 to $183) depending onrank.[204]All walks of life have beentransformed into national service, so that, in essence, an Eritrean isconscripted, subjected to military training for six months, then assigned toany job by the state. As one young man said, “The government is trying todo every single business in the country. National service people are employedin government enterprises, and every person below 40 is a member of nationalservice. So if I’m assigned to work in a shop, then I’ll be workingin a shop and serving my country.”[205]In another example, aprofessional footballer was told to report for national service. When hefinished six months of military training he was assigned to play footballagain, but as part of his national service. Before military training he wasearning 3,600 Nakfa a month ($220). Afterwards, as part of national service, hewas paid an allowance of 400 Nakfa a month ($24).[206] He said, “I kept playing because if Ididn’t I would have been taken to the military again.”[207]For regular recruits onnational service, 150 Nakfa does not constitute a living wage, nor is theirlabor given freely. Refugees interviewed by Human Rights Watch refused to referto the money they were paid as a salary, preferring instead to call it“pocket money.”[208] All complained that it was insufficient to live onand completely inadequate to feed a family. Western diplomats and UN officialsconfirmed that making ends meet on such amounts was impossible in Eritrea.[209] Nevertheless, an official with an agency thatprovides significant development assistance to Eritrea argued that nationalservice labor is not necessarily forced labor, but “mobilizing people ina low wage environment.”[210]Under internationallaw—the Forced Labour Conventions and ILO Convention 29—the keypoints when considering the definition of forced labor are the extent to which:“(i) the works or services are exacted involuntarily; (ii) the exactionof labor or services takes place under the menace of penalty; and (iii) theseare used as a means of political coercion, education or as a method ofmobilising and using labor for purposes of economic development, as well asmeans of labor discipline.”[211]This is most certainly the case inEritrea, and it would thus appear that forced labor on the Eritrean scale andfor indefinite periods is a gross human rights violation.[212]Human Rights Watch spoke todozens of men and one woman who described being forced to do back-breaking workand who were punished when they refused.[213] One man conscripted at the age of 16 in 1996described doing many different jobs in the military until he fled at thebeginning of 2008. After the 1998-2000 war, “when the fighting stopped Idid different jobs in the army, planting, agriculture... after that we werecollecting stones to build the Asmara-Assab road.”[214]Another conscript finishedhis training at Sawa camp and was then deployed in Dekemhare on a constructionsite building houses for military leaders: “We were paid very little,whereas as a civilian builder you can earn. Some other soldiers refused to workand were jailed. If you don’t work you go to prison. You lose yourvacation time and your pay—150 Nakfa—is stopped. If you refuse theysee it as a political problem.”[215]In its report of a mission toEritrea, the European Parliament noted, “Via the ‘Cash for WorkProgramme,’ citizens contribute to the public works—such as thebuilding of dams—against payments from the government. While this schemewas described as being voluntary, there is a risk of people being forced towork for the government in order to ensure they can earn their living.”[216] Most conscripts don’t openly refuse to work butthey vote with their feet, either escaping from the military camps or waitinguntil their annual leave and then fleeing the country instead of reporting forduty once more.Forced labor forprivate gainThe projects on whichconscripts are deployed are not just public works for the national good. Theyare often sent to work on private construction projects, building houses formilitary leaders, and working on private farms. Human Rights Watch and AmnestyInternational have both previously documented the use of conscript labor forthe benefit of ranking members of the military and the government.[217]Diplomats admitted that aidprojects are implemented by national service labor working for privateconstruction firms with good connections to the government.[218] “All companies are owned by the military or theparty,” said one diplomat, and another complained that aid projects,“are meant to be allocated through an open bidding process, but inreality only those using conscript labor stand a chance.”[219] Several scholars concurred with this analysis.[220]As one wrote:Since April 2006, only PFDJconstruction firms are allowed to engage in construction activities afterprivate firms and individual entrepreneurs were banned from the constructionindustry as part of the government’s crackdown on the private sector. On3 April 2006, the government issued a directive ordering all“contractors, consultants, practicing professionals and studiooperators” to submit to the Technical Office of the Central Region: theiroriginal licenses, detailed accounts, addresses, types and sizes of theirprojects, owners’ names, estimated total costs, on the day after (4 April2006) the directive was issued. On 7 April 2006, the government also orderedall of them to cease their activities within ten days. The prohibition is stillin force. The major beneficiaries of the ban are the ruling party’s morethan forty enterprises which dominate every aspect of the country’seconomy, the enterprises of the PFDJ’s mass organizations and themushrooming construction firms belonging to the Ministry of Defence.[221]One former EPLF fighter whowas in the military administration told Human Rights Watch, “the seniorofficers have their own capital like shops, bars; they run businesses and theworkers are the national service. The conscripts are working for the benefit ofthe higher ranks: Colonel, Brigadier, Major-General.”[222] A scholar who has conducted research in Eritrea overmany years noted, “there is a whole class of people whose wealth rests onNational Service labor.”[223]Dozens of former prisonerswho had escaped and fled the country described being put to work on militaryconstruction projects; some built military installations such as barracks andports, others built properties owned by military leaders.[224] The conscripts deployed to work on commercial farms,mines, or construction projects were often housed in appalling conditions withbad nutrition and minimal pay. One national service soldier who had requestedto be demobilized many times since independence in 1993 was deployed in a minefor two months. He explained:Bad things happened. I hadto do work on the houses of the leadership, had to collect sand crystals [somekind of crystalline sand], inside the earth. You use a stick to push the earth...Thecrystal sand is sharp and when you dig it out of the soil it creates infectionin the fingers. When I complained that the fingers were injured they said,‘you have to take punishment for that.’ At one point when I wastired and my fingers were bleeding I stood up and said I couldn’t domore. They asked why I was standing, and took me away. After beating me theyasked me ‘Why don’t you work?’ I said, I came hereaccidentally because I didn’t have my ID card and I can’t do morework because my fingers are injured. At last when I said I had been a fighter,[in the liberation war] they stopped the punishment.[225]It is not just conscripts whoare providing cheap labor for the benefit of military leaders. Prisoners areregularly employed and school children are made to work during their schoolholidays. The national program for school children is called Mahtot. Fortwo months during the break, children in 9th grade and above mustreport to work camps where they, “plant trees, clean houses, pick cottonand help with other agricultural projects,” in the words of one student.[226]Normally the children stay inschools in the area. During the two months their compensation is 150 Nakfa ($9)for their family; the fee is euphemistically called “soap money.”[227]Restrictions on the Freedoms of Expression,Conscience, and MovementFreedom of expressionSince 2001 Eritrea has beenin the grip of a media blackout. All independent newspapers, radio, andtelevision outlets have been shut down. Eritrea is the only country in Africawithout an independent media outlet. Many journalists were arrested as part ofa general clampdown on dissent in September 2001. Since then, many others havebeen arbitrarily arrested and detained, the whereabouts of most are unknown andReporters sans frontières (RSF) believes that at least four have died incustody.[228]The Committee to ProtectJournalists believes that as many as 14 journalists and editors are heldincommunicado in secret locations; Eritrea is one of four countries in theworld which together account for three quarters of all journalists indetention.[229] In its 2008 press freedom index RSF ranked Eritrealast, 173rd, behind North Korea, Turkmenistan, Burma, Cuba, Vietnam,China, and Iran.[230]In 2006 and 2007, evenjournalists who worked for the state-run media agency were arrested anddetained because some of their colleagues had decided to flee the countryrather than continue working for the government.[231]They were suspected of wishing toflee themselves. Paulos Kidane, a popular figure on state television, was amongthose arrested in 2006. He was detained again in 2007 after he had escaped fromjail and was trying to cross the border. He was reportedly arrested at theborder and his family was subsequently informed by the authorities that he had“died accidentally.”[232]In February 2009 RSF reporteda new crackdown in which the entire staff of Radio Bana, which produceseducational programs for the Ministry of Education, was arrested. Although mostwere released, a few staff remain in custody.[233]One journalist who had fledthe country told Human Rights Watch how he was arrested and sent to Dahlakprison, then later made to work for the military and after that the statetelevision agency. He fled in 2007, and said, “I was a toy for thegovernment.”[234]One of the few permanentforeign journalists in Eritrea, the BBC’s Jonah Fisher, was expelled in2004 following a broadcast on Amnesty International’s last report onhuman rights conditions in the country.[235]In an interview with Fisher,Eritrean President Isaias Afewerki said, “What is free press? There is nofree press anywhere.”[236] A freelance successor, Peter Martell, was also thrownout in March 2008 after he refused to disclose to the government the names ofhis sources for a report on veterans’ disillusionment with thegovernment.[237]In 1996 the Eritreangovernment passed a law governing the press which both guarantees press freedomand also provides for censorship if “the country, or part of it, is facedwith a danger threatening public order, security and general peace caused bywar, armed rebellion or public disorder or where a natural disasterensues.”[238]The government has used thestandoff with Ethiopia over the border issue as a catch-all justification forrestrictions of rights and freedoms in all areas of freedom of expression.It is not only the press thathas been the subject of restrictions on free speech. Soldiers within themilitary told how they were detained and tortured for questioning the policiesof the government in regimental meetings. One man was imprisoned indefinitelyfor denouncing the government in a military meeting: “In 2001 I told anassembly in the military that the government was illegal. I was sent to prisonin Alla for two years. After two years there they transferred me toDahlak.”[239]Dozens of former conscriptstold Human Rights Watch how they were detained for asking questions about thefate of political prisoners or expressing concern about the policy ofindefinite military service.[240]Teachers and universitystudents who asked questions about the curriculum or who questioned why theauthorities were withholding their graduation certificates also faced tortureand jail. “Seventy to 80 percent of university students are trying toleave because they feel politically marginalized and they can’t speakfreely. If you do they kill or imprison you,” said one teacher, agraduate of Mai Nehfi technical institute.[241]When he questioned the curriculumthat he was asked to teach secondary school children in 12th gradein Sawa camp, he was warned by the head of the camp: “You are a teacher.We taught you. You are in the university because we helped you. Now you try togo against our curriculum. If you go on you will be in prison, even you will bekilled.”[242] He told Human Rights Watch that the director of Sawahimself, the man in charge of administration for the camp, had made thesethreats.In 2007 graduates of MaiNehfi institute organized a petition calling on the Ministry of Education toissue graduates their degree certificates and for the college to beinternationally recognized as the University of Asmara had been. The Ministrywithholds certificates as an incentive for graduates to remain in the country,and refuses to give Mai Nehfi international status for the same reason. Eighthundred students reportedly signed the petition.[243]One man who was among 50teachers that presented the petition to Dr. Debrabrehane, administrator of MaiNehfi college, in early 2007 was arrested by the military in the middle of thenight, three days later. He spent five months in a military prison:[There were] no questionsjust beating...they used to be beat me in the jail, morning and evening, likemeals... They were telling us that we are traitors, that we are not ready tohelp and train the youth throughout the country. They insulted us and told uswe were not educated. My family did not know where I was.... I later heard thatfour or five days later my mum was imprisoned for two weeks, in a civilianprison in Asmara. They asked her for 50,000 Nakfa because she had before signedmy wahis [guarantor of good conduct] while I was a teacher. If I makeany mistake then she will answer for my conduct.[244]In December 2008, an Eritreandiaspora website reported that intelligence officers had raided an internetcafé in Asmara and arrested youth for accessing opposition websites. Thearticle also said that government officials had summoned internet serviceproviders and warned them not to allow customers to access such websites.[245]Restrictions onreligious freedomIn 2002, in a widelydocumented crackdown, the Eritrean government banned unregistered religiousactivity, essentially making it illegal for anyone to practice worship of anybut four recognized faiths (Catholic, Lutheran, Eritrean Orthodox, and Islam).[246]The unrecognized churches wererequired to register with a new Department of Religious Affairs, and severalreportedly attempted to do so but no registration permits have been authorized.[247]Since then, Evangelical andPentecostal Christians have continued to be the object of repression andsecurity forces have broken into homes and churches, rounded people up,detained, and tortured them. Admitting to being a Pentecostal Christian orbeing caught in possession of a Bible is enough to land oneself in jail, besubjected to torture, or denied the right to travel abroad.[248] In 2004, the United States designated Eritrea acountry of particular concern because of its repression of freedom of religion.[249]As mentioned above,Jehovah’s Witnesses have been singled out as a target for repression.After failing to vote in the 1993 referendum on independence and refusing tobear arms during national service they were in effect stripped of theircitizenship.[250]Jehovah’s Witnesses cannotaccess public services or obtain official ID cards or commercial licenses.[251]Human Rights Watchinterviewed 13 Evangelical Christian refugees, all of whom had beenimprisoned—and some tortured—for their faith. EvangelicalChristians wishing to practice their faith must do so clandestinely. Even thenthey are not safe from government abuse. Several Christians described holding prayermeetings in private houses during 2006 and 2007 in Asmara, Tesseny, and Senafe.Police or military, possibly acting on information given by informers,disrupted the meetings and arrested those present.[252] One elderly woman who has been a Pentecostal Christianfor over 40 years said that because of the threat of informers she has taken topraying with different people, in different places, and different times.[253]Helen Berhane, a well-knowngospel singer, has described publicly several times how she was tortured torenounce her faith while in detention.[254] While holding a Bible-study class for other youth ina secret church outside Asmara, she was arrested and sent to Mai Serwa militaryprison where she was tortured, beaten, and held in a metal shipping containerfor over two years.[255] Her experience was typical of many others who havebeen routinely rounded up since 2002.[256]According to ChristianSolidarity Worldwide (CSW) by June 2007 over 2,000 Christians were in detentionin Eritrea.[257] In late 2008, CSW reported house to house searchesand a wave of arrests in numerous Eritrean towns, including Asmara. Accordingto the organization 100 people were arrested in the period leading up toDecember 12, 2008, and detained in military facilities, some of them dying incustody.[258] Compass Direct, a Christian rights organization,estimated that by late 2008 nearly 3,000 Christians were in detention.[259]Compass Direct reported that threeChristians had died in custody in the latter part of 2008, and that in Juneeight others were transferred to medical facilities because they had beentortured in custody.[260]Persecution ofreligious conscriptsMany of those in detention inmilitary prisons are there for practicing their faith whilst on nationalservice. One young Pentecostal man who was arrested while praying with 13others in Sawa military camp in 2006 told Human Rights Watch that he was lockedup along with 20 others in an underground prison measuring four square meters.He was let out twice a day to go to the toilet. He said, “The soldierstold us to quit that religion or else we would be in prison our entirelife.”[261]A military policeman in Sawacamp told Human Rights Watch how he was punished for his faith during hislunch-breaks and then ordered back to work. Previously during training fornational service, “They punished me for being a Pentecostal Christian:they beat me, handcuffed my hands and feet together, threw water on me... theyburned my Bible,” he said. “Every time they saw me reading it, theywould beat me, punish me. There were so many people there, not just me, for twoweeks, with a policeman guarding you, lying in the sun.”[262]A young Christian who wascaught praying in Sawa camp was put in jail for one year. He was held with 20others in an underground cell and let out twice a day to go to the toilet.[263]Dozens of Christian refugeesdescribed similar experiences. One woman who was caught with a Bible wasarrested and tied with her hands and feet tied to opposite limbs behind theback. Her captors told her, “Jesus will save you now.”[264]In January 2007 a woman onnational service in Sawa camp was jailed in a shipping container for threemonths along with several others for reading the Bible together. She had servedin the military for 10 years. She said that, “When I left prison theyasked me to sign a paper saying ‘We caught you preaching,’ and Isigned it.”[265]But it is not justEvangelical Christian worshippers who face restrictions in the military.Adherents of all faiths face problems. As one female Christian jailed forreading the Bible in Sawa camp said, “Everyone, even the Orthodox and theMuslims, are not allowed to worship. Only politics is allowed.”[266] A soldier also claimed that no praying of any kindwas permitted in the military—whether one was a follower of a Christianfaith or Muslim.[267]Freedom of movementThe Eritreangovernment’s oppressive behavior and compulsory national service hasspawned other restrictions and human rights violations. Severe restrictions onfreedom of movement are in place. As more and more of its citizens leave thecountry, the government’s methods to try and stem the exodus have becomemore brutal. As described above, a “shoot-to-kill” policy appliedto anyone crossing the border without permission is clearly intended to determovement outside the country. Within Eritrea, movement is equally circumscribedthrough a variety of mechanisms.Local government authoritiesat the village or neighborhood level maintain detailed records of localpopulations. “They know the exact population, how many children are inthe army and so on.”[268]Each zone is controlled by asubcommittee drawn from the local population—in essence civilians areemployed to keep an eye on each other.A visitor to Eritrea in late2008 described buses being frequently stopped and searched and passengers askedfor ID cards: some possessed laminated cards showing that they had completednational service, others had letters authorizing travel to a specific place andfor a limited period of time.[269] This echoes the stories told to Human Rights Watch byindividuals who were frequently detained for not possessing the relevantpapers.[270] As one refugee said, “you cannot walk threehours without being asked for a permit.”[271]All roads in and out of Asmara andthe major cities have checkpoints where military stop and check the documentsof passengers.[272]Escaping conscripts describedwalking around checkpoints in order to avoid detection on their way to theborder.[273] A couple told Human Rights Watch, “we weremoving during the night because to travel without a permit is difficult. Duringthe day we stayed hidden under trees. We traveled at night because if we werecaught then it would be dangerous, five years in prison or they can kill you,especially if you are a soldier or a university student.”[274] One woman who escaped told how she was smuggled overthe Sudanese border by a businessman with a permit to travel along theTesseney-Asmara road.[275]Denial of exit visasDue to the large number ofpeople fleeing or refusing to return after being allowed to leave, exit visasare routinely denied for young people who are eligible for national service.Children from the age of 14 are usually denied exit visas but the US StateDepartment has reported exit visas refused for children as young as five.[276] One older woman who had managed to travel to visither children abroad described the signs in the Foreign Ministry as saying thatonly men over the age of 54 and women over 47 are eligible for exit visas, shesaid, “only the old can travel.”[277]Part 3: The Experience of Eritrean RefugeesEritrea is currently amongthe top refugee-producing nations in the world. Fleeing the country is truly alast resort because the conditions facing refugees abroad are appalling and thepunishments inflicted on asylum seekers who are forcibly returned are terrible,including torture and death. The Eritrean government considers leaving thecountry without a valid exit visa a crime, and absconding from national serviceis viewed as tantamount to treason.Leaving Eritrea is not aneasy undertaking. As described above, heavily patrolled borders, mine-fields,and a shoot-to-kill policy make escape from Eritrea difficult. Despite this,thousands of people are leaving the country. The majority of refugees end up inEthiopia and Sudan in overcrowded refugee camps. An increasing number try tomake it to Europe via Sudan and Libya. They face difficult conditions crossingthe Sahara and risk detention and extortion at the hands of Libyan and Sudanesepolice. Those who elect to take another route to Israel or Egypt run the riskof being forcibly returned without having their asylum claims assessed, as arecent 2008 wave of returns from Israel to Egypt and Egypt to Eritrea hasdemonstrated (see below).[278] Many others have risked hazardous crossings of theRed Sea to get to Yemen.[279]The scale of the Eritreanoutflux is increasing. In 2007 the US Committee for Refugees and Immigrantsestimated around 600 Eritreans were crossing into Ethiopia every month.[280] In January 2009 the Ethiopian government claimed thenumber had grown to 900 a month.[281]In 2007 the UN said that at least10,000 Eritrean refugees arrived in Sudan and by 2008 this had apparentlyincreased to at least 13,000 known new arrivals, likely a conservative estimategiven that many of them do not apply for refugee status and remain in Sudanillegally, in transit for Libya.[282] According to UNHCR, in 2008 more than 3,000 Eritreansentered Italy, the main entry point for Eritrean asylum-seekers to the EuropeanUnion, an increase of 50 percent over the 2,000 Eritreans who arrived in 2007.[283]Lack of Protection and Forced Return of RefugeesThe problems facing those whodecide to flee Eritrea do not end when they cross the border. Indeed, theirproblems are only beginning. Despite the terrible human rights record of theEritrean government, Eritrean refugees are often forcibly returned withoutregard to their rights under international refugee law and in spite of standingUNCHR guidance that even rejected Eritrean asylum seekers should be providedwith some form of alternative protection instead of being forced to returnhome.[284]SudanAfter more than a decade oftensions, Eritrea and Sudan normalized diplomatic relations in 2005.[285]The Sudanese government currentlyhas a functional relationship with Asmara and from time to time has forciblyreturned refugees to Eritrea.Sudan has hosted hundreds ofthousands of Eritreans over the years, particularly during the 1970s and 1980swhen Sudanese relations with Ethiopia were at their most difficult and Eritreansfled Ethiopian government attacks.[286] Although thousands of Eritreans returned to Eritreavoluntarily after independence in 1993, many refugees remained in Sudan,some—such as former ELF members—because they feared persecutiondespite the amnesty extended to individuals.These refugees were augmentedby new arrivals fleeing the border war with Ethiopia after 1998. In 2002 theUNHCR invoked the “cessation clause”—the end of refugeestatus—for those Eritrean refugees who had fled to Sudan during theindependence struggle and those who had fled the border conflict more recently.UNHCR facilitated a controversial repatriation of tens of thousands of the300,000 Eritreans then residing in Sudan.[287]Over the past five years theincreasingly cordial relations between the Sudanese and Eritrean governmentshave resulted in increasing pressure from Sudanese authorities on Eritreanrefugees to return to Eritrea, contrary to the longstanding Sudanese receptionof Eritrean refugees over the previous decades. According to AmnestyInternational, some of those returned by Egypt to Eritrea in June 2008 (seebelow) had previously fled Sudan because they feared being returned to Eritreaby the Sudanese authorities.[288]Currently most refugees whoflee Eritrea to Sudan either settle in refugee camps in eastern Sudan ortransit onward within the country or to other countries in search of a saferand more stable existence. Those not in camps in Sudan are extremely vulnerableto abuse, in particular extortion and forcible return by the Sudaneseauthorities—Sudanese security services have links to Eritrean securityagents. One woman who escaped to Libya and then Italy had been detained inSudan in 2004 when she was caught without papers; she described house-to-houseround-ups in Khartoum by Sudanese police.[289]In Sudan, there are nearly100,000 Eritreans living in open camps at Kassala, al-Gedaref, Gezira, andSinar. About 30,000 are said to live in towns in these areas and at leastanother 30,000 or more are estimated to be living in Khartoum.[290] At least 10,000 new arrivals arrived during 2007.[291] According to a Sudanese official, 13,000 Eritreansarrived in Sudan in 2008. The government says it cannot cope and has asked theUN for help.[292]Even getting to Sudan ishazardous for Eritreans. Asylum seekers are reportedly robbed and extorted bycriminals near the border, as well as by the Sudanese police.[293]Several refugees who had passedthrough Sudan on their way to Italy told Human Rights Watch that they had beenimprisoned upon arrival in Sudan and forced to pay bribes to be released.[294]EgyptEgypt has in recent yearsbecome a serial offender when it comes to violating the rights of asylumseekers.[295]In June 2008 Egypt returnedto Eritrea up to 1,200 Eritreans who had crossed into Egypt from Sudan. As oflate 2008, at least 740 of those returnees were still imprisoned in Wi’a,the military detention facility in Eritrea.[296]In December 2008 and January2009 the Egyptian authorities deported dozens more Eritreans who had beendetained in the Nakhl detention center in North Sinai and police stations inthe nearby city of al-Arish. Around 100 of the Eritreans detained in Nakhl hadearlier been returned to Egypt by Israel. While detained in Nakhl the Eritreanswere visited and registered by officials from the Eritrean embassy, but UNHCRwas denied access to the facility. Groups of Eritrean men, women, and childrenwere then deported on several flights from Cairo to Asmara in late December andearly January. At least 74 Eritreans, including 12 women and two children, areknown to have been returned to Eritrea on flights from Cairo on December 19,23, and 28 and January 6, and 11, and January 18. The true number of peopledeported may be higher.[297]Under international humanrights and refugee law, Egypt is obligated not to return any person to acountry where they face the risk of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment, orpersecution and should give migrants an opportunity to seek protection. Under a1954 memorandum of understanding, Egypt devolved responsibility to UNHCR toassess refugee claims.[298]To fulfill that mandate, UNHCRneeds access to and information about asylum seekers, however, Egypt has deniedUNHCR access to Eritreans in detention since February 2008. An exception was agroup of 142 who were subsequently granted refugee status after significantpressure.[299]UNHCR remains concerned buthas been unable to have an impact on Egyptian policy. A UNHCR spokesman toldReuters: “We are concerned because there are serious human rightsviolations in Eritrea and ... when people are forcibly returned they facedetention for long, long periods of time. Months, if not years. And they facetorture.”[300]In addition, Eritreans andother migrants face possible death and mistreatment at the hands of Egyptianborder forces when they try to enter Israel. From July 2007 to October 2008,Egyptian border forces killed 34 African migrants and refugees attempting tocross into Israel, including Eritreans.[301]IsraelIncreasing numbers ofEritreans have arrived in Israel in recent years. Israel has provided many ofthe Eritrean asylum seekers who successfully entered the country with renewablework visas, but does not grant these individuals formal refugee status.Eritreans are also among the dozens of asylum-seekers who have tried to enterIsrael from Egypt but have been stopped, temporarily detained at the border,and then forcibly returned to Egypt by the Israeli Defense Forces.[302]Israeli security forces returnedhundreds to Egypt in such fashion during 2008 without assessing their claimsfor protection.[303]Some of the Eritreans refusedentry by Israel in 2008 were among those subsequently detained in the Sinai byEgyptian police and then forcibly deported to Eritrea.[304]LibyaLibya has a well-documented history of abuses against migrants includingforcefully returning people to Eritrea. Conditions in detention are terrible,with detainees often subjected to beatings and other abuse and denied access tomedical treatment or to the UNHCR.[305] In one well-publicized incident on August 27, 2004, agroup of 75 Eritreans hijacked the plane returning them to Eritrea, forcing itto land in Sudan, where 60 of the passengers sought asylum. UNHCR subsequentlyrecognized all 60 as refugees. The attempt to return them took place following amass deportation of 109 Eritreans several weeks previously.[306]In July 2008, Libya madeplans to return 230 Eritreans, prompting Amnesty International to warn againsttheir deportation.[307]Amnesty reported that up to 700Eritreans were being held in Misrata prison and were at risk of deportation. Inlate 2008 refugees who had spent time in Misrata before arriving in Italy toldHuman Rights Watch researchers of similar numbers of people in detention inMisrata in appalling conditions.[308]They also said that Libya isholding hundreds of Eritrean and other asylum seekers in other locations forextended periods of time.[309]One such place was adetention facility at Tripoli airport. An Eritrean detained there in 2007 saidthat Libyan police were holding migrants for ransom. He told Human Rights Watchthat after paying US$500, he was dropped by a police car in Tripoli. He had thetelephone number of the policeman and said he had helped secure the release ofother Eritreans in detention by contacting their relatives to arrange bribes,collecting money wired from Eritrea, and paying off the Libyan police.[310]Like many others, he hadendured terrible ordeals just to get to Libya from Sudan, only to find thatLibya is even less hospitable to asylum seekers than Sudan. One woman describedher journey to Libya from Sudan:I walked to Libya afterbeing dropped in the desert. I saw the bodies of Eritreans and their ID cardsthere in the desert—two ladies and a boy who looked Eritrean. It took 24days to get through the desert. You go in an old model Toyota Land Cruiser andnormally they put gas or benzene in the water so you don’t drink toomuch. You get out and walk up the hills when it’s too sandy. There werearmed people in the desert [bandits] asking for money. In Darfur they asked forone million Sudanese pounds [more than $1,000 at that time].[311]In Libya she was moved fromplace to place by traffickers until she was arrested in Tripoli without an IDcard and was taken to Felah prison. Later she was transferred to Misrata prison.She continued:Torture was normal,slapping, kicking. One woman had her arm broken by the Libyan police... AtFelah we were separated from the men but not at Misrata. All of the women hadproblems from the police. The police came at night and chose ladies to violate.There was no treatment for prisoners, no medical attention. Some went mad, somehad babies in jail; everyone was suffering from allergies.[312]Eventually she was resettledin Italy as part of a UNHCR program for women who had been abused in Libyanjails; she had been in detention for over two years.[313]MaltaA Mediterranean island on theperiphery of the European Union, Malta is one of the first countries in Europereached by migrants from Eritrea who make the trip across Sudan and Libya and thenpay smugglers to take them on the boat voyage.Malta has a bad record ofabuses against asylum seekers and of returning people to Eritrea, so it is nota destination of choice for those fleeing repression. In 2002 Malta returned232 Eritreans who were imprisoned upon their return, and many of them tortured.In 2004 Amnesty International reported that some of them had died in custody.[314]Former detainees from severaldifferent prisons, including the prison on Dahlak island, told Human RightsWatch that they had been held, punished, and tortured alongside people who hadbeen returned from Malta in 2002. They said that the group from Malta was thebiggest group of detainees in Dahlak.[315]Since 2002 there have been noreports of Malta returning any other Eritreans. However, according to an aidofficial, asylum seekers who arrive in Malta, including Eritreans, are detainedfor long periods in sub-standard conditions.[316] The UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention visitedMalta in January 2009 and raised concerns about Malta’s automaticdetention of immigrants, including asylum seekers, for long periods withoutrecourse to a court of law. “We consider that the detention regimeapplied to them is not in line with international human rights law,” saidthe Working Group’s Chairperson, Manuela Carmena Castrillo.[317]ItalyIn 2008 a record number of33,000 asylum seekers arrived in Italy, triple the number of arrivals in 2006.[318] This is up from 20,000 in 2007 and 10,000 in 2006.Many of the new arrivals are from Somalia, Eritrea, and Ethiopia. Conflict andserious abuses in the Horn of Africa are clearly driving increasing numbers ofpeople to make the long, arduous, and expensive journey to try to reach Europe.A large proportion of those coming to Italy, just under 20 percent, are fromEritrea.[319]Eritrean asylum seekers toldHuman Rights Watch they had survived terrifying ordeals involving treks thoughthe desert with no water, bandits in Darfur, unscrupulous Libyan traffickersand policemen, detention in Tripoli, and dangerous sea crossings to reach theItalian island of Lampedusa, off the coast of Sicily, all at a cost of up to$3,000 each paid to people smugglers.[320]In Italy, asylum seekers areregistered with UNHCR and the Italian authorities and are fed and housed in governmentreception centers or—due to the massive influx—temporarily inschools and churches while they await the determination of their status. Whilethey await determination they receive food and shelter. Ninety-nine percent ofall Eritreans are granted the right to remain and work in Italy. A smallpercentage of those—around two percent—are granted asylum under the1951 refugee convention and are given refugee travel documents and can applyfor visas to travel outside Italy. However the vast majority are granted“humanitarian” or “subsidiary” protection for a finiteperiod of time, usually one year. The latter do not necessarily receive traveldocuments.[321]Many Eritrean refugees inItaly complained to Human Rights Watch that once they receive their subsidiaryprotection documents, they are forced to leave the temporary reception centersand many become destitute. They told Human Rights Watch that they had no money,nowhere to go, and no means of getting any money in the difficult labor market.Human Rights Watch visited amakeshift camp in an olive grove housing about a dozen Eritrean men thatoffered a stark picture of the plight of some Eritreans in Italy. The men, whohad already received refugee status or subsidiary protection documents, toldhow new arrivals were smuggling food out of the reception centers to give tothem. Others were begging in the small seaside towns of southern Sicily, one ofEurope’s poorest regions.[322]They had no shelter and no foodand believed they had no recourse to aid from the Italian state.Some of the individualsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch wanted to travel to northernEurope—Sweden, Britain, and Germany. Others hoped simply for a“helping hand” of some social assistance to get them back on theirfeet, while others hoped to study.[323]Under European law EUcountries (except Denmark) are required to “ensure that beneficiaries ofrefugee status [or subsidiary protection]...receive...the necessary socialassistance, as provided to nationals of that Member State.”[324] This is in line with the Refugee Convention whichstates that “refugees lawfully staying in their territory [should beaccorded] the same treatment with respect to public relief and assistance as isaccorded to their nationals.”[325]Other European Unioncountries (Germany, the UK, and Sweden)Despite a relatively positiverecord on accepting Eritrean refugees, some European countries have at timesignored the advice of UNHCR and forcibly returned people to Eritrea whomAmnesty International and other human rights groups, including Human RightsWatch, fear to be at risk of persecution and torture.For example in May 2008,Germany deported two Eritrean men whom Amnesty now believes are being detainedincommunicado.[326] The UK deported Miskir Sermerab Goitom, a 21-year-oldwoman in October 2007; Amnesty believes she is being held in Adi Abeto militaryprison and is at risk of torture.[327] Sweden threatened to return an Eritrean asylum seekerin November 2008 but dropped the action after a request from a representativeof the UN Committee against Torture.[328]Coercion of Eritreans in ExileThe tragic reality forEritreans who flee the country is that once they have escaped, they—andparticularly their families—are still not entirely safe from repressiveactions by the Eritrean government. In a small country with a relatively smallpopulation (4 million), the local administrations in towns and rural areasusually have a clear idea of who is where. And as described, the government hasmade it clear that it considers every Eritrean who leaves the country illegallyto be a traitor to the nation. Once a person leaves the country they are, ineffect, treated as fugitives by the government and if returned are treated ascriminals who will face detention, torture, and sometimes death.There are a variety of waysin which the Eritrean government exerts pressure on exiles for both financialand political reasons. The government expects all Eritreans in the diaspora topay a two percent tax on income. While taxing expatriates may be a legitimatestate function, the manner in which the Eritrean government coerces individualsinto paying this income presents serious human rights concerns. If refugees orother Eritrean expatriates do not pay the two percent tax then the governmenttypically punishes family members in Eritrea by arbitrarily detaining them,extorting fines, and denying them the right to do business by revoking licensesor confiscating land.The two percent tax is notonly a financial mechanism, however. The government also uses it to consolidateits control over the diaspora population by denying politically suspectindividuals essential documents such as passports and requiring those who livein Eritrea to provide ‘clearance’ documents for their relatives wholive abroad—essentially coercion to ensure that their relatives have paidthe two percent expatriate income tax demanded by the government.[329]The two percent taxAs well as being a uniquemethod of social control, the expatriate fund-raising operations are a crucialsource of revenue for the Eritrean government. In two months in 2003 theEritrean Embassy in London reported US$3.2 million profit resulting from‘second round distribution of land’ collected and remitted toAsmara.[330]According to the documents, theannual income of the Embassy in 2003 was $6.2 million. Of this only $74,282 wasderived from visa fees while the rest is described as ‘Contribution todraught affected (sic),’ ‘Contribution to ReliefRehabilitation,’ ‘Contribution to National Defence,’Contribution for Martyrs Children and Disabled,’ Contribution forRehabilitation of ex-fighters,’ ‘Contribution to RecoveryTax.’[331]Supporting documents showedpayments from Eritreans into a UK bank account held by the Embassy.During the liberationstruggle, most Eritreans in exile willingly contributed portions of theirincome to the EPLF.[332] After independence, the government continued thepractice in the name of national development. It is nominally a voluntarycontribution. However, as many Eritreans living abroad in Europe and NorthAmerica explained to Human Rights Watch, payment or non-payment carriesconsequences for themselves and crucially, for their families who are still inEritrea.[333]One man living in the UK, aknown critic of the government, said that his family had been denied land thatthey had applied for in Eritrea, because of his refusal to pay the tax.“My mum begged me to pay the two percent, she was crying on thephone.”[334] Clearance is a process whereby an embassy charges afee to certify that Eritreans living abroad have paid their dues and are up todate with the two percent tax. The accounts of the embassy in London for 2004to 2005 are peppered with references to two percent as well as‘clearance’, for which Eritreans must usually pay UK£30($44).[335] A woman living in Eritrea described how several ofher neighbors had had their business licenses revoked because their children,residents in the United States, had not paid the two percent and they could notprovide clearance certificates.[336]Embassies have particularleverage over many Eritrean immigrants and refugees who do not have traveldocuments, and those whose passports require renewing. A refugee living in Romehad his application for a new passport refused. “When I went back theysaid they had sent my passport to Eritrea, [and I would not get it back]. WhenI asked why, they said ‘because you are not a good citizen, you do notpay two percent, you do not complete your national obligations.’”[337]He remains without traveldocuments to date. “If you don’t pay they don’t renew yourpassport, with no passport, you have no permit to stay in Italy... so directlyor indirectly you are obligated to pay.”[338]Those individuals grantedasylum under the 1951 Refugee Convention are generally provided with theirtravel documents by the host country, but in Italy, for instance, the majorityof Eritrean refugees are granted “humanitarian” or“subsidiary” protection, a lesser status usually requiring renewalon an annual basis. This does not automatically provide travel documentation,and so persons in that category need passports. “Those with humanitarianprotection, they are vulnerable, many of them go back to the embassy to seekpassports...the Eritrean government is a big mafia.”[339]Even once a refugee makes adecision to approach the embassy and request official assistance for whateverreason, the state requires those who have fled the country illegally orabsconded from national service to sign a ‘confession’ admitting totreason and failing to fulfill one’s national duty.[340]One former political prisonerwho had fled the country after he had been released from Dahlak jail, is stuckin Italy with expired documents but refuses to go to the Eritrean embassy,“If I seek a passport from the Eritrean embassy you have to sign a paper sayingyou are a criminal, I don’t want to do that.”[341]Refugees in London spoke ofsimilar procedures at the London embassy.[342]Part 4: Eritrea’s Legal ObligationsEritrean Laws and ConstitutionThe constitution prepared andapproved by the National Assembly after independence—but neverimplemented—was to be the “supreme law of the country” and“the source of government legitimacy and guarantor for the protection ofthe rights, freedoms and dignity of citizens and just administration.”[343]The document contains a listing of“Fundamental Rights [and] Freedoms” patterned after the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights.The list of fundamentalrights included in the Eritrean constitution is standard: no deprivation oflife or liberty is permitted without due process of law.[344] Torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment orpunishment is prohibited.[345] Arrests and detentions must be according to law; nodetentions may extend beyond 48 hours without a court order,[346] and the right to petition for a writ of habeas corpusis guaranteed.[347]The presumption of innocenceapplies and trials must be fair and (normally) public.[348]The constitution recognizes theright to freedom of expression including freedom of the press and other media.[349]Eritreans are given freedom topractice religion and also the right to “manifest such practice,”[350]and they have the right to travel within and outsidethe country.[351]The approved constitutionallows limitations on most rights to preserve security and public order butlaws limiting rights may “not negate the essential content of the rightor freedom in question.”[352] The rights to religious freedom and practice may notbe abridged under any circumstances.[353]The constitution was ratifiedin May 1997 by the Constituent Assembly consisting of the interim NationalAssembly, members of the six regional assemblies, and diaspora representatives.The democratic provisions it envisaged have not been realized; multi-partyelections were postponed because of the war against Ethiopia in 1998 and havenot been held since. Other Eritrean laws also safeguard human rights but are inpractice ignored. The Press Proclamation purportedly guarantees freedom ofexpression and the freedom of the press,[354]while according to the US StateDepartment the Eritrean penal code limits pre-charge detention to 30 days.[355]Eritrea’s International ObligationsIn addition to violating theEritrean constitution and other laws, the conduct of the Eritrean governmentalso violates the established norms of international human rights law, theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights and several international treaties andconventions signed or ratified by the government of Eritrea, including theInternational Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the AfricanCharter on Human and Peoples’ Rights.[356]Arbitrary arrest, torture,incommunicado detention and the mistreatment of prisoners in Eritrea areviolations of the ICCPR and the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment ofAll Prisoners.[357] The government, although signing and ratifying somehuman rights treaties, has generally failed to comply with the obligations thatensue. Eritrea has met few of the reporting requirements arising from itstreaty obligations.[358]Two formal complaints of arange of human rights violations by the government—arbitrary arrest anddetention, the right to freedom of expression, and cruel or degradingpunishment—have been made to the African Commission on Human andPeoples’ Rights, to which Eritrea is a state party. In landmarkdecisions, the African Commission decided that Eritrea was in violation of theAfrican Charter and called for the immediate release of political prisoners.The first decision involvedthe G-15 prisoners. The government of Eritrea participated only to the extentof challenging the Commission’s jurisdiction on the grounds that the G-15group had not exhausted Eritrean remedies. The Commission rejected thatargument (as it did in the second decision, below) on the ground thatEritrea’s remedies were not “accessible, effective, or possible.”[359]On the merits, the Commissionheld that prolonged incommunicado detention is “a form of cruel, inhumanor degrading punishment and treatment.”[360] Courts must determine whether there is a basis forholding someone in custody, not the executive, and that holding the G-15members in secret detention without access to family, lawyers, or courts is a“blatant violation of their rights to liberty and recourse to fairtrial.”[361]Although the Eritreangovernment said that it would bring them before a court as soon as possible,the Commission said it had received no substantiation that they were being heldin “appropriate detention facilities.”[362]Finally, the Commission seemed toaccept the complainants’ contention that the 11 had been arrested onlybecause they criticized the government’s policies, their arrest anddetention therefore interfered with “the 11 persons’ right to freeexpression.”[363]The Commission found Eritrea to beviolating Charter Articles 2, 6, 7(1) & 9(2). It urged immediate releaseand compensation.The second African Commissiondecision was brought by Article 19, an international nongovernmentalorganization monitoring and promoting freedom of expression, on behalf of 18 ofthe jailed journalists. In a decision adopted in May 2007,[364] the Commission held that the detentions constitutednumerous violations of the African Charter on Peoples and Human Rights, namelyarbitrary arrest and detention (Article 6), incommunicado detention (Article7), cruel and degrading punishment (Article 5), and the freedom of the press(Articles 9).The Commission called forrelease or trial of the prisoners, access to them by families and legalrepresentatives, compensation for violation of their rights, and for thelifting of the ban on the private press.[365]To date the Eritreangovernment has refused to implement either judgment.[366]Eritrea acceded to theOptional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on theinvolvement of children in armed conflict on February 16, 2005 and has declaredthat 18 is the national minimum age for recruitment into the military.[367]Forced LaborNational service, asdiscussed above, is practiced in many countries. However, the indefiniteextension of national service for all adults, the lack of adequateremuneration, and the threat of penalty mean that the way national service iscurrently practiced by the Eritrean government is a violation of internationallaw.Eritrea ratifiedthe Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) and the Abolition of Forced LabourConvention, 1957 (No. 105) on 22 February 2000.[368]Prohibitions on forcedand compulsory labor are now a norm in customary international human rightslaw,[369] as well as in the ICCPR (art 5). The 1930Convention on Forced Labour defines forced or compulsory labor as:...all work or servicewhich is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for whichthe said person has not offered himself voluntarily. The involuntary nature oflabour and the threat of penalty are the two crucial elements in the definitionof forced labour. The 1930 Convention limits the conditions under which forcedlabour may be exacted from individuals, and commits state parties to abolishits practice within their territories; states should “undertake[s] tosuppress the use of forced or compulsory labour in all its forms within theshortest possible period.[370]More recentinternational law in this area has been concerned with outlawing forced laboraltogether. The Convention Concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour (1957)requires state parties to “suppress and not to make use of any form offorced or compulsory labour: (a) as a means of political coercion or education...(b) as a method of mobilizing and using labour for purposes of economicdevelopment; as a means of labour discipline....”[371]The ICCPR, in art 8(c) allowslimited exceptions to the prohibition on forced or compulsory labor, butrestricts these to hard labor as part of a punishment for a crime, and:(i) Any work or service ...normally required of a person who is under detention in consequence of a lawfulorder of a court, or of a person during conditional release from suchdetention;(ii) Any service of amilitary character and, in countries where conscientious objection isrecognized, any national service required by law of conscientious objectors;(iii) Any service exacted incases of emergency or calamity threatening the life or well-being of thecommunity;(iv) Any work or servicewhich forms part of normal civil obligations.According to theInternational Labour Organization, the exception for military service is basedon the necessity for national defense; it is not intended for public worksprojects. The exception for emergencies is intended to apply to genuineemergencies and not to public works projects and further, the nature andduration of the compulsory labor must have a direct correlation to the natureof the event and be limited to what is strictly required by the situation andthat minor communal services...must be of direct interest to the community andnot relate to the execution of works intended to benefit a specific group.[372]The United States StateDepartment Human Rights Report for 2007 on Eritrea, in its section concerningprohibitions on forced labor, describes the implementation of national servicein this way:The law prohibits forced orcompulsory labor, including by children; however, there were unconfirmedreports that it occurred during the year. The government required all menbetween the ages of 18 and 54 and women between the ages of 18 and 47 to participatein the national service program, which included military training and civilianwork programs. Some citizens were reportedly enlisted in the national servicefor many years with no prospective end date. The government justifies itsopen-ended draft on the basis of the undemarcated border with Ethiopia. Somenational service members were assigned to return to their civilian jobs whilenominally kept in the military because their skills were deemed critical to thefunctioning of the government or the economy. These individuals continued toreceive only their national service salary. The government required them toforfeit to the government any money they earned above and beyond that salary.Government employees generally were unable to leave their jobs or take newemployment. Draft evaders often were used as laborers on government developmentprojects.[373]The scale offorced labor in Eritrea has contributed to the rising number of refugeesfleeing Eritrea. Therefore the national service policy in Eritrea has directconsequences for the countries hosting asylum seekers from that country.Part 5: Responding to Eritrea’s CrisisEritrea’s occasionallyisolationist but always independent behavior is rooted in the history of theEPLF and the independence struggle. The Eritrean people achieved independenceagainst all expectations, defeating a country with a much larger army, whichreceived, at different stages, massive amounts of US and Soviet militaryassistance.Since 1962, when the UNfailed to condemn Ethiopia’s dissolution of the Eritrean federation, thehistory of the struggle for Eritrean independence is a singular story ofhardship and discipline in the face of international indifference. This historyhas left a strong attitude of self-reliance which has increasingly led Eritreato isolate itself from what it views—rightly or wrongly—as aninternational community tainted by pro-Ethiopian bias. As this attitude deepensin the context of the ‘no war no peace’ stand-off with Ethiopia, itis not just Eritreans but the entire region that suffers.Eritrean Foreign PolicyEritrea’s mostimportant relationship is clearly with Ethiopia. For better or for worse, itshapes Eritrea’s policies regionally and beyond. The border war betweenEritrea and Ethiopia and the subsequent impasse has not only had seriousdomestic effects in each country, it has complicated the security situation inthe entire region. The search for a solution to the conflict in Somalia ishampered by the way Eritrea and Ethiopia have supported opposing sides in aform of proxy war. In addition, over the past years, Eritrea’s governmenthas had military confrontations with all of its neighbors—not justEthiopia, but also Yemen, Sudan, and most recently, Djibouti.Eritrean forces continue to occupyDjiboutian border posts in defiance of a January 2009 UN Security Councilresolution calling on the Eritrean troops to withdraw. Tensions are high, andsince Eritrea withdrew from the regional Intergovernmental Authority onDevelopment (IGAD), there is no regional forum in which these differences canbe articulated. Eritrea suspended its membership of IGAD in April 2007 becauseof its perceived bias in favor of Ethiopia and its intervention in Somalia tosupport the TFG—Eritrea had been arming the Islamist groups opposing theTFG, as well as Ethiopian armed opposition groups.[374]Similarly, Eritrea has hadtensions with the African Union because of its perceived support of Ethiopia.Isolated from its neighbors and deeply mistrustful of the US, Eritrea hascultivated other international relationships in recent years, notably with China,Libya, Iran, and Qatar. Qatar is reportedly financing a major resort in theDahlak Islands.There is no obvious regionalleader whom the Eritrean government views as sufficiently impartial to broker apeace with Djibouti or Ethiopia and articulate what regional cooperation mightlook like. As long as Ethiopia and Eritrea seek to exploit the instability inSomalia rather than reduce or solve it, the whole region—and internationalshipping—suffers, both in terms of regional security threats fromterrorism and piracy but also massive displacement of population, famine, andhumanitarian crises all exacerbated by regional mistrust and the proxy warbetween Ethiopia and Eritrea. As long as the standoff continues, there islittle opening to engage with the Eritrean government on human rights issues,since the regime justifies its mass mobilization and repression in terms ofnational security and emergency.The US, European Union, theAU, and the UN working together in a coordinated fashion could and should playa role in reducing regional tensions, but doing so will require a marked shiftin policy (see below).The United StatesRelations between the US andEritrea were good during the 1990s, with military cooperation stemming from USinterest in using the Red Sea ports of Assab and Massawa. But relations have souredsince the border war of 1998-2000, and particularly since the US and theinternational community more broadly—including the UN SecurityCouncil—failed to force Ethiopia to accept the decision of the bordercommission. After the US chose Djibouti for the site of its Combined Joint TaskForce Headquarters, relations went from bad to worse, even as the US wasdeveloping closer cooperation with Ethiopia on security matters in the Horn ofAfrica.[375]Relations with the US werepushed further towards an impasse when during the G-15 crackdown in 2001Eritrea arrested two US embassy employees whom it accused of spying. The twoEritrean staff remain in detention up to now. In 2005 Eritrea stopped all USAIDprograms and arrested two more Eritrean staff of the US embassy, this time onallegations of human trafficking.[376]In response, the US imposedrestrictions on Eritrean diplomatic staff in the US and forced the closure ofEritrea’s only consulate in Oakland, California.[377] In a gradually rising tide of insults, relations withEritrea have steadily deteriorated. The normalization of diplomatic relationsis conditioned on the release of the four US employees.In the meantime Eritreacontinues to support armed opposition groups in Ethiopia, eastern and westernSudan; and anti-Ethiopian forces in Somalia. As a result of its funding andarming of Somali opposition forces, particularly the al-Shabaab, in 2007 the USthreatened to put Eritrea on its list of state sponsors of terrorism althoughit has yet to do so.[378]Instead, in May 2008 the US statedthat Eritrea was “not co-operating fully” in the war on terror.[379]Eritrea, for its part, claims theCIA is trying to undermine it and even blamed the US for “meddling”when Eritrean forces attacked Djibouti.[380]Despite Eritrea’sapparently hostile rhetoric, the US remains a critical player in the Horn ofAfrica. For years US policy in the Horn of Africa has prioritizedsecurity—and particularly its counterterrorism partnership withEthiopia—above all other concerns. In order for human rights anddemocratization to gain ground in Eritrea, it is important that policy fromWashington becomes more nuanced and balanced, particularly vis-à-vis itsrelationship with Ethiopia. Unwillingness to criticize Ethiopia over its humanrights record or its failure to allow demarcation of the border will undermineUS credibility with Eritrea. The very serious human rights human rightsconcerns in both Eritrea and Ethiopia are linked and should be placed at theforefront of US policy in the Horn.The European UnionAt first sight the EU appears to be in a stronger position to engage withthe government of Eritrea on human rights and democracy. The EU recentlyallocated €122 million of development funds for Eritrea under the 10thEuropean Development Fund (EDF) which spans the period 2008-2013.[381]At the time of writing, however, the funds have yet tobe disbursed because of lingering questions from the European Parliament aboutEritrea’s human rights record and lack of progress in establishing ademocratic framework.Under the Cotonou Agreement,funds disbursed as part of the EDF are subject to strict human rights clauses.This does not include humanitarian aid which comes from a different budget.Title II of the agreement deals with what is called the “politicaldimension” of the development partnership between the EU and the African,Caribbean, and Pacific countries that have signed the agreement. Article 8under this title commits both parties to a “political dialogue”which states, inter alia: “The dialogue shall also encompass aregular assessment of the developments concerning the respect for human rights,democratic principles, the rule of law and good governance.”[382] Article 9 states, “Respect for human rights,democratic principles and the rule of law, which underpin the ACP-EUPartnership, shall underpin the domestic and international policies of theParties and constitute the essential elements of this Agreement .... ThePartnership shall actively support the promotion of human rights, processes ofdemocratization and good governance.”[383]According to the Commission,the money for 2008-2013 has been allocated but will only be disbursed accordingto negotiated agreements with the Eritrean government, part of which shouldinvolve dialogue on human rights as above.[384] However, spending the money is unlikely to be easy.Only 25 percent of the last tranche of assistance has been paid. The EuropeanCommission in its Humanitarian Aid Decision of February 2008 notes that:Since the interruption ofthe democratisation process in 2001, EC cooperation with Eritrea has beenconfronted with major political and technical difficulties. Cooperation wasfrozen for several years in reaction to the expulsion of the ItalianAmbassador, which led to a certain backlog with the 9th EDF funds. Technicalhurdles include the limited number of private enterprises able to participatein tenders, restricted access for consultants and even EC staff to projects,and bureaucratic delays. As of 25 September 2008, only half of the 9th EDF hadbeen contracted and 25 percent had been paid.[385]The response of theCommission to intransigence from the Eritreans was to“reinvigorate” development cooperation and to begin a round ofpolitical dialogue to be evaluated at the end of 2008.[386] Diplomats at the European Commission claim that themonthly dialogue on political issues is going well and are reluctant to suspendassistance on human rights grounds.[387] The difficulty in the EU’s relationship withEritrea is that the Cotonou Agreement envisages teleological progress towardsmore democracy and stronger respect for human rights, not less.The human rights environmentis deteriorating rapidly in Eritrea, not moving in the other direction. TheEuropean Parliament, for its part, has noticed this and has sounded anincreasingly critical note on Eritrea’s human rights record. In thereport of its mission to Eritrea in 2008 the Parliament said:As it could be argued forother countries in the Horn, in Eritrea, the current situation is not inconformity with the essential elements of cooperation stated in Article 9 ofthe Cotonou agreement. Tangible progress in the near future in the field ofhuman rights is critical for the European Parliament, which will follow closelythe political dialogue and the process towards adoption of the Country StrategyPaper. As a first step, the Eritrean authorities should enhance transparency aboutthe prison system and allow independent humanitarian organisations, such as theICRC, to regularly visit all prisoners, including the so-called G11 and thegroup of journalists arrested in September 2001. Access to families, lawyersand medical treatment must equally be granted in accordance with internationalhuman rights standards. Where no charges have been brought against prisoners ina reasonable period of time, they should be unconditionally released. Thosewith specific charges against them should be brought to a speedy and fairtrial. Bodies of prisoners who died in detention should be handed over to theirfamilies.”[388]It is ambitious of theEU—to say the least—to forge ahead with negotiations for furtherassistance with a country so obviously uninterested in the principles of theAgreement. However, the economy of Eritrea is very weak. The country cannotafford food imports. It defaulted on World Bank credits in October 2008.[389] The cost of massive mobilization and repression istaking its toll on the productive capacity of the nation, not to mention thefact that the manpower is leaving in droves. At such a time, the EU has anopportunity to strengthen its commitment to human rights in Eritrea byconditioning future development assistance on human rights benchmarks. Tocontinue in the current vein, characterized by intransigence and non-cooperationfrom the Eritrean government, and when it is impossible to tell where EU moneyis going, is unsustainable. The mere existence of a dialogue is not evidence ofconcrete improvements in human rights.Eritrea consistentlymaintains that the massive mobilization measures and suspension of freedoms aresomehow justified by the frozen border dispute with Ethiopia. As a majordevelopment partner of both Ethiopia and Eritrea, together with pushing for aresolution of the demarcation standoff, the EU needs to vigorously press forprogress on human rights as a basic first step to improving the lives ofEritreans.[390]Forced labor fordevelopmentTestimony from refugees, UNofficials and others working in Eritrea suggests that all governmentdevelopment projects are implemented by national service recruits, whose laboris by definition, forced and, often, essentially unpaid.[391] In some cases, professionals with expertise may bedeployed to work for other agencies and their salaries paid to the Ministry ofDefense, in others prisoners or conscripts are made to do the work and the NGOor UN agency is billed for the labor cost at commercial prices.[392]Under the second United NationsDevelopment Assistant Framework (2007-2011), the following agencies are activein Eritrea: UNDP, UNICEF, WHO, FAO, UNHCR, UNFPA, ILO, UNIFEM, UNESCO, as wellas IFAD.[393] However, a former UN official told Human RightsWatch, “the national service and prison labor are used to implementconstruction projects. What we [the UN] are interested in is that the projectis implemented, we turn a blind eye to how it is done. UN agencies understandthat the Eritreans use national service but we don’t care... We give themmoney, they do the labor, we don’t pay salaries, they ask for a lump sumfor each project... the labor cost will be calculated, receipts issued... wedon’t go into too much detail otherwise they will kick us out of thecountry.”[394]It appears that developmentprojects funded by the European Union are implemented in the same way, withconscript labor organized through the government. The EU has complained aboutthe lack of access to monitor its projects—to check that the money isbeing spent as agreed.[395] In such circumstances it is impossible for the EU tobe able to verify whether its projects are being implemented at all, let aloneto see whether forced labor is being used.In interviews with HumanRights Watch, diplomats in Asmara and at the European Commission in Brusselswere open about the use of national service labor in implementing assistanceprojects, saying that the main concern was the amount people were paid, not thefact that they might face punishment if they did not work. At the Commission,an official acknowledged that conscript labor was used by companies with tiesto the military and the party who were tendering for Commission projects, butthat the relevant European regulation being violated was one of “faircompetition” because low labor costs meant that such companies couldundercut others.[396] Forced labor should be on the EU’s agenda fordialogue on human rights, not just fair competition.An EU spokesman claimed in anarticle that the Eritrean government does not receive aid directly from the EU.[397] This is a disingenuous claim given that there are sofew NGOs and monitoring projects and distribution aid to appropriate standardsis impossible. There are no independent private companies in Eritrea thereforeany company receiving EU money has ties to the regime and may use forced labor.It is impossible to argue that supporting the military and party elites withina system that impoverishes its own citizens is not supporting the government.As Glenys Kinnock MEP has noted with regard to EU development assistance,“There are no NGOs in Eritrea. So who is distributing the aid? Who isensuring that it doesn’t go into the wrong hands?”[398]Monitoring to check where EUmoney is ending up and to ensure that forced labor is not used to implement EUand UN funded projects should be a priority and a matter of urgency.The United NationsThe UN was forced toterminate the United Nations Mission to Eritrea and Ethiopia (UNMEE) after itsoperations were continually frustrated by the Eritrean government (in responseto Ethiopia’s adamant refusal to comply with United Nations demands thatit permit demarcation of the border in accordance with the Algiers Agreement).The final report of UNMEE was forwarded to the Security Council on October 15,2008.The UN agencies working inEritrea should demand much higher levels of accountability on human rightsstandards from the Eritrean government. Moreover, the United Nations has a roleto play along with the AU, EU, and US in shaping the regional security environmentwithin which human rights can be addressed. This is particularly importantgiven the humanitarian consequences of the border stand-off and Eritrea’sunwillingness to co-operate with independent agencies on emergency relief.AcknowledgementsThis report was researchedand written by the Horn of Africa research team in the Africa division of HumanRights Watch. The report was edited by Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor, andAndrew Mawson, deputy director of the Program office of Human Rights Watch.Bill Frelick, Refugee Policy director, and Heba Morayef, researcher in theMiddle East and North Africa division, reviewed sections of the report.Production assistance wasprovided by McKenzie Price, associate in the Africa division. Anna Lopriorecoordinated photo preparation and Grace Choi prepared the report forpublication.Human Rights Watch would liketo thank Dr. Martin Hill for his helpful comments on a draft of the report. Weare also grateful to additional experts who requested anonymity but madeessential contributions at the research and writing stages.Above all, we would like toextend our deep gratitude to all of the Eritrean refugees who agreed to beinterviewed or otherwise shared their experiences with us in Djibouti, Italy,and elsewhere, sometimes in very difficult circumstances. We recognize just howfearful many of you were about speaking and we hope this report contributes toraising awareness of and alleviating your plight, wherever you are.Annex: A List of Known Detention Facilities in EritreaThe following are knowndetention facilities in Eritrea that have been mentioned in reports about thecountry and in interviews with Human Rights Watch. This list is not a completeor comprehensive list of Eritrean detention facilities.Note:Each army division andsub-unit has its own prison i.e. division, brigade, and battalion-levelprisons.Each town has variouspolice stations with detention/interrogation facilities i.e. 1stand 2nd police station in Massawa, and stations 1 to 5 (atleast) in Asmara.Names are transliterationsfrom the original Tigrinya and Arabic. Transliterations can varyconsiderably. We use the more common forms.NAME(alternative spelling)LOCATIONTYPEOF FACILITYCOMMENTSSOURCEAderserIn/nearAdderser:“HadishuMa’asker” or “new camp”25kilometers from Sawa camp, (see below)Militarycamp/training centerundergroundUSState Dept. Report 2005, HRW interviewsAdiAbeto (Adi-Abieto)10to 15 kilometers northeast of Asmara off the road to KerenMainprison for Asmara; also used as processing center to send prisoners elsewhereHRWinterviews, Amnesty International 2004, US State Dept. Report 2004AdiNefasAssabMilitarydetention centreAdiQala (Adi Quala or Adi Kwala)40kilometers north of Ethiopian border, off main road from Asmara throughMendeferaMilitaryprisonHRWinterviewsAgipAsmaraPolice-runfacilityHRWinterviews, Reporters sans frontièresAlla(Ala)40kilometers from Asmara, near Dekemhare townOldprison from Italian daysHRWinterviews, Amnesty International, 2004AssabFront prisonalsoknown as “Gimbar”AssabMilitaryprisonHRWinterviewsBahariaNaval BaseMassawaMilitaryfacilityHRWinterviewsBarentuBarentutownCivilianprisonHRWinterviewsDahlakKebirDahlakarchipelago, islands in the Red SeaMaximumsecuritySpecificallyfor “political” prisoners, including those returned from Maltaand EgyptHRWinterviews, Amnesty International, 2004DuarwaSouthof Asmara on the road to Adi Quala before Adi UgriHRWinterviewsEraEiro (Eiraeiro)Filfil-Selomunaarea north of the Asmara-Massawa roadSecretjail, not acknowledged by the governmentSomeof the G15 were reportedly held thereHRWinterviews, awate.comGedemGedem,40 kilometers south of MassawaThesite of forced prison labor for the construction of a naval baseHRWinterviews, awate.comGhatelay(Ghatielay)About40 to 45 kilometers northwest of Asmara off main road to MassawaMilitaryForcedlabor camp to build a military base thereHRWinterviewsHalhalasSub-provincialprison 45 kilometers from Asmara (possibly part of Alla)Specificallyfor those caught trying to cross the borderHRWinterviewsKamboNdafurstaleInSanafe townMilitaryjailHRWinterviewsKlimaNearAssabHRWinterviewsMaiDaga45kilometers south of Asmara (near Decamhare)HRWinterviews, Amnesty International, 2004MaiDuma/Dima/DymaSouthof Asmara off Mendefera Barentu road about 10 kilometers. West of Areza.MilitaryHRWinterviewsMaiSrwaOutsideAsmaraPoliticalprisoners and Pentecostal pastorsShippingcontainers reportedHRWinterviews, Amnesty International, 2005/6MaiTemeneiMilitaryprisonAmnestyInternational, 2004MetkelabetBetweenMassawa and AsmaraMilitaryprison belonging to the 32nd divisionHRWinterviewsMe’eterBetweenNakfa and the coastHRWinterviewsNakhuraIslandPartof the Dahlak complex of prisonsMaximumsecurityFirstestablished as colonial prison in 19th century to incarcerateEritrean objectors to Italian ruleHRWinterviewsPrima1+2MilitaryprisonHRWinterviewsCampSawaIn/nearSawa:6thcamp or “EndaShadushay” and Abi MaskerAlongSawa river, in far western Eritrea near the border with Sudan, about 10kilometers south of road midway between Sebderat and HawashaytMilitarycamp/training centerDraftevaders, Pentecostal conscripts, and those trying to flee the countryHRWinterviews, Amnesty International 2004, awate.comSembelAsmarasuburbPossiblythe normal prison of Sembel town, but also mentioned as a place for politicalprisonersInmatesmixed: civilians, military, and EthiopiansHRWinterviews, farajat.comTehadassoMilitaryShippingcontainers reportedAmnestyInternational, 2004TesseneiTesseneiMilitaryAmnestyInternational 2004‘TractB’AsmaraMilitaryAformer US storage facility near Asmara airportHRWinterviews, Amnesty International, 2004TsereratAsmaraMilitaryMainlyfor EPLF veterans, underground cellsAmnestyInternational, 2004Wi’ya/Wi’a/WiehIncludinga particular unit called “Enda commando”RedSea Coast, about 40 kilometers southeast of Massawa, off road to AssabMilitarycamp/training centerEndaCommando is a zinc unit above groundHRWinterviews, Amnesty International, US State Dept. Report 2005[1]Otherlanguages include Afar, Kunama, and Tigre. CIA World Factbook,https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/er.html. Seealso David Pool, From Guerillas to Government: The Eritrean People’sLiberation Front (Oxford: James Currey; and Athens, Ohio: Ohio UniversityPress, 2001), pp. 7-11.[2]Res. 390(v), UN Gen.Assembly, 5th Session at (1950), p. 20. For further details on the history ofUS policy, and particularly its resistance to Eritrean independence see DanConnell, Against All Odds: A Chronicle of the Eritrean Revolution (RedSea Press, 1997).[3]AfricaWatch (now Human Rights Watch/Africa), Evil Days: 30 Years of War and Faminein Ethiopia (New York: Human Rights Watch, 1991), pp. 39-40.[4]Michela Wrong, I Didn’tDo It For You: How the world betrayed a small African nation, (4th Estate,2005) p. 181.[5]Wrong,I Didn’t Do It For You, p. 183, pp. 192-193.[6]AfricaWatch, Evil Days, pp. 42-46.[7]David Pool, From Guerillas to Government, p.157. See also Dan Connell, Conversations with Eritrean Political Prisoners(Trenton, NJ: Red Sea Press, 2005) p. 156. The estimate of 700,000 refugees,which is on the high end, comes from Kidane Mengisteab and Okbazghi Yohannes, Anatomyof an African Tragedy: Political, Economic and Foreign Policy Crisis inPost-Independence Eritrea (Trenton, NJ: Red Sea Press, 2005), p. 71. Poolestimates that 50,000 to 60,000 Ethiopian troops were killed and wounded inEritrea but notes the numbers have not been verified, Pool, p. 146.[8]DanConnell, Against All Odds.[9]Africa Watch, Evil Days, pp.38–53.[10]Africa Watch, Evil Days, pp. 47-48. Seealso Pool, From Guerrillas to Government, pp. 70-71.[11]Pool, From Guerrillas to Government,pp. 47-56.[12]See Connell, Against All Odds, and Conversations,p. 141.[13]Pool, From Guerrillas to Government, pp. 76-79; Kidane & Okbazghi, Anatomyof an African Tragedy, pp. 45-50. Manqa is the Tigrinya word for batand was given to the group by the EPLF leadership because of the group’snighttime efforts to recruit followers.[14]Pool, From Guerrillas to Government, p. 77.[15]Connell, Conversations,p. 150.17 Connell, Conversations, p. 140.[17]See Connell, Against All Odds, and Conversations,p. 155.[18]Africa Watch, Evil Days, pp. 113-115.[19]Africa Watch, Evil Days, pp. 113-118.[20]“Those wishing to travel needed toproduce an ID card, an-up-to-date rent book, tax clearance, proof of futurereturn, and (in the case of skilled people) a signed statement by a guarantorwho provided a [substantial monetary] bond . . ..” Africa Watch, EvilDays, p. 119.[21]Human Rights Watch wrote in 1991, “[The]last three years of the war in Eritrea saw no respite from mass abuses of humanrights by the Ethiopian army.” Africa Watch, Evil Days, p. 237.For further details, see pp. 237-249.[22]A 1992 Eritrean Nationality Proclamation, no.21/1992, defined as Eritrean “any person born to a parent of Eritreanorigin in Eritrea or abroad.” The proclamation defined as a person“of Eritrean origin” anyone who was a resident of Eritrea in 1933.[23]Althoughthe EPLF did not reconcile with the rival ELF and other factions, the newgovernment offered an amnesty to individuals belonging to those groups, whichwere not allowed to form inside Eritrea.[24]Eritreansoften have three names but are usually known by their first name, the name theyare given at birth. The second name is generally the name of the father and thethird name is their grandfather’s. In this report Human Rights Watch uses“Isayas” to identify President Isayas Afewerki.[25]See,Amnesty International, 1997 Annual Report for Eritrea, available athttp://www.amnestyusa.org/annualreport.php?id=E9D2FF21FC6AB47C80256A0F005BEB98&c=ERI(accessed December 19, 2008); United States Department of State Eritrea HumanRights Practices, 1995, available at http://dosfan.lib.uic.edu/ERC/democracy/1995_hrp_report/95hrp_report_africa/Eritrea.html(accessed December 19, 2008). Among those arrested before 2001 were at leastthree journalists,detained for theirreporting (Ruth Simon, Zemenfes Haile, and Gebrehiwot Keleta). Zemenfes andGebrehiwot have never been released.[26]Ibid. There is circumstantial evidence of executions ofmen considered collaborators with alleged Islamic jihadist groups on June 18,1997, “The ‘Executed’: No Smoking Gun, but Plenty ofCircumstantial Evidence,” Gedab News, March 13, 2003,http://www.awate.com/artman/publish/printer_1090.shtml (accessed January 15,2009).[27]Eritrean Ministry of Internal Affairs, March 4, 1995,available at http://www.awate.com/portal/index2.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1345&pop=1&page=0&Itemid=11(accessed December 19, 2008).[28]Jehovah’s Witnesses Office of Public Information,Jehovah’s Witnesses in Eritrea (Oct. 2008) 5, available athttp://www.jw-media.org/region/africa_middle_east/eritrea/english/human_rights/eri_e081021_list.htm(accessed December 19, 2008).[29]Ibid, p. 6 and p. 9.[30]Proclamation85/96 (Apr. 1996); see also Amnesty International, Arbitrary Detention ofGovernment Critics and Journalists, September 18, 2002, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR64/008/2002(accessed February 26, 2009). See alsoLyda Favali & Roy Pateman, Blood,Land, and Sex: Legal and Political Pluralism in Eritrea (Indiana U. Press,2003), pp. 65-66.[31]Constitution, art. 2, §§ 1-2, http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/cafrad/unpan004654.pdf(accessed December 11, 2008).[32]In an interview with Le Monde in May 2008,Isayas blamed the “interruption of the [Eritrean] political process”on the “abnormal situation” Eritrea has been in for the past 10years, as well as the interference of the United States. He also accused theinternational media of “suffocating freedom of expression” inAfrica. “President Isayas Afewerki’s Interview with Reuters and LeMonde,” May 13, 2008, http://www.eastafro.com/Post/2008/05/15/eritrea-president-isaias-afwerkis-interview-with-reuters-may-13-2008/(accessed February 26, 2009).[33]Ibid.[34]Eritrea-Ethiopia Claims Commission, Partial Award, Jus Ad Bellum,Ethiopian Claims 1-8 (2005), http://www.pca-cpa.org/upload/files/FINAL%20ET%20JAB.pdf(accessed December 19, 2008), pp. 3-4, 9-12.[35]Ibid.[36]Human Rights Watch, The Horn of Africa War:Mass Expulsions and the Nationality Issue June 1998 – April 2002(2003), pp. 18-30.[37]Therewere tens of thousands of casualties during the conflict, mostly troops on bothsides. Human Rights Watch, The Horn of Africa War.[38]AlgiersAgreement, available at http://www.pca-cpa.org/upload/files/Algiers%20Agreement(1).pdf(accessed December 19, 2008).[39]Algiers Agreement, art. 4,15.[40]Available at http://www.un.org/NewLinks/eebcarbitration/EEBC-Decision.pdf (accessed December 19, 2008).[41]Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, Statement by theCommission (11/27/06), p. 4-7, 9-12, available at http://www.pca-cpa.org/upload/files/Statement%20271106.pdf (accessed December 19, 2008).[42]Ibid, pp. 9-10.[43]“United Nations Staff Union Demands Halt to Continued Harassment of UNMEEStaff by Eritrea,” United Nations press release, September 8, 2006, http://www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2006/org1473.doc.htm(accessed March 3, 2009).[44]UN Security Council Resolution 1827 (2008), July 30, 2008.[45]Some sources estimate that Eritreaand Ethiopia respectively maintain 124,000 and 100,000 troops along the border.Report of the fact-finding mission of a Delegation of the Development Committeeof the European Parliament to the Horn of Africa (Eritrea, Djibouti, Ethiopia)(25 October-2 November 2008), p. 2.</Titre>[46]Ibid.,p. 2.[47]Connell,Conversations, p. 2.[48]Thecorrespondence and chronology of events are set out in Connell, Conversations,pp. 20-22, 171-198.[49]“Studentsdie in Eritrea detention camp,” BBC news online, August 20, 2001, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/1501092.stm(accessed February 26, 2009).[50]Theincarcerated 11 are Petros Solomon, Ogbe Abraha, Haile Woldetensae, MahmudAhmed Sheriffo, Berhane Ghebre Eghzabiher, Astier Feshatsion, Saleh Kekya,Hamid Himid, Estifanos Seyoum, Germano Nati, and Beraki Ghebre Selassie. Threeavoided arrest by being abroad and one retracted his signature.[51]Committee to Protect Journalists, AnnualPrison Census 2008 (Eritrea), http://cpj.org/imprisoned/2008.php#erit (accessedDecember 23, 2008). Those arrested in September and the names of theirrespective publications are: Amanuel Asrat, Zemen; Medhanie Haile, KesteDebena; Yusuf Mohamed Ali, Tsigenay; Mattewos Habteab, Meqaleh;Temesken Ghebreyesus, Keste Debena; Said Abdelkader, Admas; DawitIsaak, Setit; Seyoum Fsehaye, freelance; Dawit Habtemichael, Meqaleh;Fesshaye “Joshua” Yohannes, Setit. By 2002, 25 journalistswere reportedly jailed or missing. See Kidane & Okbazghi, Anatamy of anAfrican Tragedy, p. 94.[52]Theproclamation empowered the government to punish any publication that“insults, abuses, defames, or slanders the government” or anygovernmental authority. Proclamation no. 90/1996 (June 10, 1996), http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/publisher,NATLEGBOD,,ERI,48512e992,0.html(accessed December 19, 2008).[53]“Newrevelations about Eiraeiro prison camp,” Reporters sans frontièrespress release, January 30, 2008, http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=25251(accessed December 23, 2008).[54]“In Eritrea a Prominent Journalist Diesin a Government Prison,” Committee to Protect Journalists press release,February 7, 2007, http://cpj.org/2007/02/in-eritrea-a-prominent-journalist-dies-in-a-secret.php(accessed March 3, 2009). See also US Department of State, Country Reports onHuman Rights Practices (Eritrea) – 2007 (March 2008)http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2007/100480.htm (accessed December 19,2008), p. 1.[55] “Journalist DawitIsaak held without trial for almost eight years, believed to be seriously ill,”International Federation of Journalists press release, Brussels, February 2009,http://www.protectionline.org/Journalist-Dawit-Isaak-held,7868.html (accessedMarch 2, 2009).[56]TheUS State Department’s annual survey of religious freedom cites NGOreports claiming that 3,225 Christians from unregistered religions arecurrently detained. US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, andLabor, “International Religious Freedom Report – 2008:Eritrea,” September 19, 2008,http://2001-2009.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2008/108367.htm (accessed February 27,2009). An independent academic who is an authority on Ethiopia and Eritreaestimated that 5,000-10,000 people are detained for political and religiousreasons, excluding national service deserters. Human Rights Watch interview,London, January 11, 2009. See also Christian Solidarity Worldwide, Briefing:Eritrea, June 2007, on file with Human Rights Watch, which claims that up to40,000 people are in detention, including religious prisoners, journalists,politicians, and national service deserters.[57]The1998-2000 war with Ethiopia is not the Eritrean government’s only attemptto resolve border disputes by force. In 1996, Eritrea attacked Yemeni troops onGreater Hanish Island, part of the Hanish archipelago in the Red Sea that bothcountries claimed. After deaths on both sides, the two countries referred thedispute to the Permanent Court of Arbitration. In 1998 the court awarded Yemenownership of the larger islands including Greater Hanish and recognized Eritrea’ssovereignty over islets to the south of the main Hanish group. Permanent Courtof Arbitration, Eritrea-Yemen Arbitration Award chap. IX, (October 1998),http://library2.lawschool.cornell.edu/pca/ER-YEchap11.htm (accessed December19, 2008).[58]SeeInternational Crisis Group, “Beyond the Fragile Peace Between Ethiopiaand Eritrea: Averting New War,” Africa Report No. 141, June 17, 2008.[59]Report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia pursuant toSecurity Council Resolution 1811 (2008), p. 24. The Monitoring Group estimatedthat the Eritrean government was providing around half a million US dollars amonth to militias in Somalia during 2008, and that this was not simply rogue elementswithin the military but an established policy of the government:“The Monitoring Group believes that Eritreanarms embargo violations take place with the knowledge and authorization ofsenior officials within the Eritrean Government and the ruling People’sFront for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ). Operational responsibility, however,lies with the Eritrean intelligence services. According to multiple oppositionand Government sources, the senior figure is Colonel Te’ame Goitom. TheMonitoring Group is continuing to investigate the alleged involvement of atleast five other Eritrean Government officials.”[60]Thereis speculation that the Eritrean government chose this location because it isstrategically important. It the highest point overlooking the Bab el Mandebstrait, the narrowest point between the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden, and a keyshipping passage. Human Rights Watch interview with western diplomats,Djibouti, September 2008.[61]OmarHassan, “Two dead in Djibouti, Eritrea border clash,” Reuters, June11, 2008.Fighting resulted in 35 deathsand dozens of wounded according to a UN fact-finding mission. The mission,banned by President Isayas from access to Eritrea, concluded that Eritrea hadbeen the aggressor. Report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on theDjibouti Eritrea Crisis, Jul 28 – Aug6 2008 (S/2008/602), http://www.securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B-6D27-4E9C-8CD3-CF6E4FF96FF9%7D/Erit%20Djibou%20S%202008%20294.pdf(accessed December 23, 2008). See also: Institute for Security Studies,Situation Report, 15 September 2008,http://www.issafrica.org/index.php?link_id=3&slink_id=122&link_type=12&slink_type=12&tmpl_id=3(accessed January 26, 2009).[62]UNSecurity Council, S/Res/1862 (2009).[63]Eritrean Ministry of Foreign Affairs, pressstatement, January 15, 2009, http://www.shabait.com/staging/publish/article_009305.html(accessed Jan. 15, 2009).[64]HumanRights Watch telephone interviews with diplomats and former UNICEF official,December and January 2009.[65]US State Department, Bureau of Democracy,Human Rights, and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices– 2007: Eritrea,” March 11, 2008, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2007/100480.htm(accessed January 5, 2009).[66]Report of the fact-finding mission of a Delegation of the Development Committeeof the European Parliament to the Horn of Africa (Eritrea, Djibouti, Ethiopia)(25 October-2 November 2008).[67]The Eritrea country page of the World Food Program website states that “[…]the Government announced in September 2005 a policyshift away from free food distributions in favor of food-for-work. Pending itsproposed shift to food-for-work as opposed to free food hand-outs, theGovernment suspended general feeding operations in September 2005 except forrecently resettled IDPs and IDPs in camps. In April 2006 after WFP attempted toamend its work plan to accommodate the change in policy, the governmentannounced a new policy involving exclusively cash-for-work (participants wouldbe paid a salary in cash for their work to be financed through food-aidmonetization).” World Food Program, Eritrea country page, http://www.wfp.org/countries/eritrea (accessed March 3, 2009).[68]Proclamation No. 145/2005, A Proclamation toDetermine the Administration of Non-governmental Organizations [Eritrea]. No. 145/2005. May 11, 2005,available online in UNHCR Refworld at:http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/493507c92.html (accessed March 3, 2009).[69]Ed Harris, “Eritrea expels six Italian NGOs, aid workers say,”Reuters, February 17, 2006. Eritrea expelled further NGOs, including theInternational Rescue Committee, in November 2006. See “Expelled NGO SeeksReconsideration,” IRIN news, November 7, 2006, http://www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?reportid=61499(accessed March 3, 2009).[70]Report of the fact-finding mission of a Delegation of the Development Committeeof the European Parliament to the Horn of Africa (Eritrea, Djibouti, Ethiopia)(25 October-2 November 2008), p. 6.[71]Ibid.,p. 6.[72]European Commission, Directorate General forHumanitarian Aid – ECHO, Humanitarian Aid Decision 23 02 01,ECHO/ERI/BUD/2008/0100, February 26, 2008.[73]Ibid., p. 9.[74]HumanRights Watch interview with academic, January 11, 2009.[75]DanConnell, “Eritrea and the United States: the ‘war on terror’and the Horn of Africa,” in Richard Reid, ed., Eritrea’sExternal Relations: Understanding its regional role and foreign policy(Chatham House, 2009), p. 207.[76]HumanRights Watch interview with former EPLF fighter, now refugee, Sicily, Italy,October 24, 2008.[77]The UN Declaration on Enforced Disappearances defines “disappeared”persons as those who are “arrested, detained, or abducted against theirwill or otherwise deprived of liberty by government officials, or by organizedgroups or private individuals acting on behalf of, or with the direct orindirect support, consent, or acquiescence of the government, followed by arefusal to disclose the fate or whereabouts of the persons concerned or by arefusal to acknowledge the deprivation of their liberty, which places suchpersons outside the protection of the law.” United Nations Declaration onthe Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (Convention againstEnforced Disappearances), adopted December 18, 1992, G.A. res. 47/133, 47 UNGAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 207, UN Doc. A/47/49 (1992), art. 7. In Eritrea, familymembers do not always enquire after the whereabouts of their relatives due topervasive fear, and in some cases, first-hand experience that they will bearrested in turn if they make such inquiries. Nonetheless, while technicallythese cases may not constitute “disappearances,” in most of thecases documented by Human Rights Watch the “disappeared”individuals were last seen when arrested by Eritrean security forces,and the practice of arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention bythe government are widely known by the Eritrean public. Human Rights Watchtherefore views these cases as “disappearances.”[78]See US State Department, Bureau of Democracy,Human Rights, and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices– 2008: Eritrea,” February 25, 2009, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2008/af/119000.htm (accessed February 27, 2009). See also AmnestyInternational, “Prisoners of Conscience Remembered on 7th Anniversary ofMass Detentions,” September 18, 2008,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/AFR64/007/2008/en/2eacb4cf-8593-11dd-8e5e-43ea85d15a69/afr640072008en.html(accessed December 17, 2008).[79]Reporterssans frontières, World Report, 2008 http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=25386(accessed December 15, 2008).[80]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withdiplomat, January 13, 2009.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with former conscripts, Sicily, Italy, October 26,2008.[82]He has not seen his father since and was jailed for a year. Human Rights Watchinterview with former conscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with formerprisoner, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[84]Human Rights Watch interviews with former military officers, Djibouti,September 16 and 17, 2008.[85]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Sicily, Italy, and London, UK, October and November 2008.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with formerofficer, Djibouti, September 17, 2008.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with nationalservice teacher, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[88]HumanRights Watch interview with former conscript, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with former military driver, Sicily, Italy, October28, 2008.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with former conscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26,2008.[91]HumanRights Watch interview with former conscripts, Sicily, Italy, October 2008.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with female former conscript, Sicily, Italy,October 26, 2008.93 HumanRights Watch interview with Pentecostal pastor, Sicily, Italy, October 26,2008.[94]See the Convention against Torture and OtherCruel Inhuman or Degrading Punishment or Treatment, art. 1, http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/h_cat39.htm(accessed January 28, 2009). Ethiopia acceded to the Convention against Tortureon April 13, 1994.[95]Human Rights Watch interviews with survivorsof Sawa and Wi’a camps, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[96]See Amnesty International, Eritrea: 'Youhave no right to ask' - Government resists scrutiny on human rights, AIIndex: AFR 64/003/2004, May 18, 2004,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR64/003/2004 (accessed February 18,2009).[97]Human Rights Watch interview with formerinmate of Alla, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript in Wi’a camp, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with formerofficer, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Sicily, Italy, October 28, 2008.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Djibouti, September 16, 2008.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Djibouti, September 17, 2008.[104]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withHelene Berhane, December 19, 2008.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Djibouti, September 16, 2008.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Djibouti, September 17, 2008.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with formerstudent, London, November 13, 2008.[108]HumanRights Watch interview with former journalist, Italy, October 30, 2008.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with formerofficer, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[110]Ibid and Human Rights Watch interviews withformer detainees, Djibouti and Italy, September and November 2008.[111]Human Rights Watch interviews with formerdetainees, Djibouti and Italy, September and October 2008.[112]Human Rights Watch interviews with formerpolitical prisoners, Sicily, Italy, October 26 and 30, 2008.[113]See US State Department, Bureau of Democracy,Human Rights, and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices– 2008: Eritrea,” February 25, 2009, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2008/af/119000.htm (accessed February 27, 2009). See also AmnestyInternational, You have no right to ask, reports by Christian SolidarityWorldwide available at www.csw.org.uk, and accounts on www.awate.com and www.delina.org.See also Helen Berhane (former political prisoner, now a refugee in Denmark)interview with BBC World Service, October 24, 2008 http://blip.tv/file/443487(accessed December 24, 2008).[114]Human Rights Watch interviews Djibouti andItaly, September and October 2008, and Amnesty International, You have noright to ask.[115]Human Rights Watch interviewed formerdetainees in Dahlak who said that they had been detained alongside returneesfrom Malta.[116]Human Right Watch interviews with formerconscript and journalist, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with former political prisoner, Sicily, Italy,October 30, 2008.[118]HumanRights Watch interview with former journalist, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with formerinmate, Alla prison, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[120]Human Rights Watch interview, Sicily, October 24, 2008.[121]Human Rights Watch interviews, Sicily, September 24-30, 2008.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[123]Human Rights Watch interviews with formerdetainees, Djibouti and Italy, September and October 2008.[124]Ibid.[125]Human Rights Watch interview, Sicily, October 28, 2008.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Djibouti, September 16, 2008.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with former officer, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[128]Amnesty, You have no right to ask, pp. 20-21.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with formerprisoner, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with femaleconscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[131]Interview with Helen Berhane, by phone,December 19, 2008.132.See, for example, www.awate.com, www.delina.org, andwww.ehrea.org. A defunct website called www.farajat.com had alist of over 800 people who had disappeared at the hands of the EPLF and thePFDJ; the list is on file with Human Rights Watch. A site calledwww.farajat.net exists but does not have the list posted.[133]HumanRights Watch interviews, Djibouti and Italy, September and October 2008. Seealso, Amnesty International, You have no right to ask; Reporters sansfrontières, www.rsf.org; and Christian Solidarity Worldwide,www.csw.org.uk.[134]Human Rights Watch interviews, Sicily, Italy,October 24-30, 2008.[135]HumanRights Watch interview with former prisoner, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[136]HumanRights Watch interview with former prisoner, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[137]HumanRights Watch interview with former prisoner, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[138]HumanRights Watch interview with former officer, Djibouti, September 16, 2008, seealso an article describing the circular from ‘a very reliablesource,’ at http://www.awate.com/portal/content/view/4502/3/ (accessed January 26, 2009).[139]Human Rights Watch interview with formerofficer, Djibouti, September 16, 2008.[140]Meginsteab Girmay Ares, November 18, 2008.[141]Reporters sans frontières, AnnualReport 2008 http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=25386 (accessed December17, 2008).[142]Human Rights Watch interview, Sicily, Italy,October 30, 2008.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with formerprisoner, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with formerprisoner, Djibouti, September 16, 2008.[145]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with formerprisoner, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[147]DemocracyMovement of Eritrea, an opposition group opposed to the ruling PFDJ regime, anoffshoot of the Democratic Movement for the Liberation of Eritrea (DMLE).[148]HumanRights Watch interview with former prisoner, Djibouti, September 16, 2008.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with formersoldier, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[150]See Gaim Kibreab, “ForcedLabour in Eritrea,” Journal of Modern African Studies, 47, 1(2009), pp. 41-72, and Pool, From Guerillas to Government.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanmilitary deserter, Djibouti, September 16, 2008.[152]Human Rights Watch interview, Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 29, 2008.[153]Government of Eritrea, ‘Proclamation ofNational Service No.82/1995,’ Eritrean Gazette, No.11 October 23, 1995.[154]Ibid., article 5.[155]Ibid., article 13 (2).[156]See Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, ChildSoldiers Global Report 2008 - Eritrea, 20 May 2008. Online. UNHCRRefworld, available at: http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/486cb0fdc.html (accessedMarch 3, 2009).[157]Human Rights Watch interview with academic,London, January 11, 2009, also Human Rights Watch interviews with refugeesDjibouti, Italy, and Britain, September, October, and November, 2008. Onewitness said, “They say 50 but it’s not really,” Djibouti,Italy, September 16, 2008. See also, UK Border Agency, ‘Country of OriginReport,’ Home Office, September 13, 2008, p. 47 for a presentation ofsome of the source material, at: http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/country_reports.html#ecuador(accessed January 29, 2009).[158]Human Rights Watch interviews with diplomat,Asmara, by phone, January 13, 2009; with Gaim Kibreab, London, December 4,2008; and with Eritrean refugees in Djibouti and Italy, September and October2008.[159]Ibid.[160]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees in Djibouti and Italy, September and October 2008.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with GaimKibreab, London, December 4, 2008.[162]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees in Djibouti and Italy, September and October 2008. See also Governmentof Eritrea, ‘Proclamation of National Service No.82/1995,’ EritreanGazette, No.11 October 23, 1995, articles 12 and 14. See note 140, above.[163]Report of the fact-finding mission of aDelegation of the Development Committee of the European Parliament to the Hornof Africa (Eritrea, Djibouti, Ethiopia) (25 October-2 November 2008), p. 5.[164]United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on Ethiopia and Eritrea,S/2007/33, January 22, 2007, p. 3.[165]United Nations, “Safety and Security of humanitarian personnel andprotection of United Nations personnel,” A/60/223/Corr.1, November 10,2005, http://www.iom.ch/jahia/webdav/shared/shared/mainsite/policy_and_research/un/60/A_60_223_corr_1_en.pdf(accessed March 3, 2009).[166]“UNpeacekeeping mission voices hope Eritrea will release 11 arrested localstaff,” UN news, May 12, 2006, http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/news/2006/05/mil-060512-unnews03.htm(accessed March 3, 2009).[167]Ibid.[168]Eritrea ratified the Forced Labour Convention,1930 (No. 29) and the Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105) on22 February 2000, The Constitution of Eritrea, Chapter III ‘FundamentalRights and Freedoms, Articles 13-29.’[169]It isunclear exactly how many Eritreans are fleeing every month but the numbers havesteadily increased over the past few years. See “Sudan asks UN for aidfor Eritrean, Somali refugees,’” Reuters, December 22, 2008, http://lite.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/LM314868.htm(accessed March 3, 2009). Ethiopia claims there are more than 30,000 Eritreanrefugees in the Shimelba camp but the US Committee for Refugees put the numberof Eritreans in Shimelba at 16,800 in 2008. See Ethiopian Ministry of ForeignAffairs, “A Week in the Horn,” Jan. 23, 2009, http://www.mfa.gov.et/Press_Section/Week_Horn_Africa_January_23_2009.htmand United States Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, WorldRefugee Survey 2008 - Ethiopia, June 19, 2008. Online. UNHCR Refworld,available at: http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/485f50d171.html (accessedMarch 3, 2009).[170]HumanRights Watch interview, Djibouti, September 17, 2008.[171]Human Rights Watch interviews, Djibouti andSicily, Italy, September and October 2008.[172]HumanRights Watch interview with refugees, Sicily, Italy, October 24 and 26, 2008.[173]HumanRights Watch interview with deserter, Italy, October 30, 2008.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with refugees,Italy and Djibouti, September and October 2008.[175]HumanRights Watch interview with former conscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[176]HumanRights Watch interview with former conscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[177]Governmentof Eritrea, ‘Proclamation of National Service No.82/1995,’ EritreanGazette, No.11 October 23, 1995, article 13 (1).[178]HumanRights Watch interview with Eritrean refugee, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[179]See for example UN Commission on Human RightsResolution 1989/59.[180]Forfurther details on the persecution of Christians and Jehovah’s witnessesin Eritrea, see Amnesty International, Eritrea: Religious Persecution,December 7, 2005, at http://asiapacific.amnesty.org/library/Index/ENGAFR640132005?open&of=ENG-ERI(accessed February 26, 2009). See also US State Department, Bureau ofDemocracy, Human Rights, and Labor, “International Religious FreedomReport – 2008: Eritrea,” http://2001-2009.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2008/108367.htm(accessed February 26, 2009).[181]Human RightsWatch interview with Eritrean refugee, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[182]Ibid.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, London, November 13, 2008.[184]Human Rights Watch interviews with refugees, Djibouti and Italy, September andOctober 2008.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with formerstudent, Sicily, Italy, October 29, 2008.[186]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[187]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritrean refugee, Sicily, Italy, October 25,2008.[188]HumanRights Watch interview with Eritrean refugee, Sicily, Italy, October 24, 2008.[189]Eritrea acceded to theOptional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on February 16,2005, with a declaration that the minimum age for recruitment into the armedforces is 18.http://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&id=135&chapter=4&lang=en(accessed February 26, 2009).[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008, see also UK Border Agency, ‘Countryof Origin Report: Eritrea,’ Home Office, September 13, 2008, p. 44.[191]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 24, 2008.[192]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 27, 2008.[193]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[194]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[195]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[196]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008 and Djibouti, September 19, 2008.[197]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[198]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, London, November 13, 2008.[199]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[200]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Sicily, Italy, October 26 and 29, 2008.[201]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008, and Human Rights Watch interviewswith diplomats, by phone, January 13 and 22, 2009. See also AmnestyInternational, You have no right to ask.[202]At time of writing, the Eritrean Nafka was worth US$0.06.[203]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[204]Human Rights Watch interview with former armyaccountant, Sicily, Italy, October 27, 2008, and with former conscripts,Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with refugee,Sicily, Italy, October 28, 2008. See above for a discussion about the upper agelimits for national service.[206]Human Rights Watch interview with refugee,Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[207]Ibid.[208]Human Rights Watch interviews with refugees,Sicily, Italy, October 2008.[209]Human Rights Watch interviews by phone,December 19, 2008 and January 12 and 14, 2009.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with diplomat byphone, January 22, 2009.[211]See ‘Eritrea’s LegalObligations’, below.[212]The ICCPR exemption from the prohibition on“forced or compulsory labour” only applies to service of “amilitary character”, or that required of conscientious objectors, or“normal civil obligations”. (ICCPR article 8(3)).[213]Human Rights Watch interviews with formerEritrean conscripts, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[214]Human Rights Watch interview with formerEritrean conscript (name withheld), Sicily, Italy, October 27, 2008.[215]Human Rights Watch interview with former Eritreanconscript, Sicily, Italy, October 24, 2008.[216]Report of the fact-finding mission of aDelegation of the Development Committee of the European Parliament to the Hornof Africa (Eritrea, Djibouti, Ethiopia) (25 October-2 November 2008), p. 5.[217]Human Rights Watch, World Report 2007, p. 117,Amnesty, You have no right to ask - Government resists scrutiny on humanrights, 2004, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR64/003/2004/en(accessed, December 8, 2008).[218]Human Rights Watch interviews with diplomatsby phone, January 12, 14, and 22, 2009.[219]Ibid.[220]Human Rights Watch interview with scholar, London, January 11, 2009.[221]Gaim Kibreab, “ForcedLabour in Eritrea,” Journal of Modern African Studies, 47, 1(2009), pp. 41-72.[222]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 27, 2008.[223]Human Rights Watch interview with academic,January 11, 2009.[224]Human Rights Watch interviews with formerdetainees, Sicily, Italy, October 24-31, 2008.[225]Human Rights Watch interview with formersoldier, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[226]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, London, UK, November 13, 2008.[227]Ibid.[228]Reporters sans frontières, Eritrea Annual Report 2008,http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=25386 (accessed March 26, 2009).[229]Committee to Protect Journalists, 2007 AnnualReport: Eritrea, and www.cpj.org, the other three countries areChina, Cuba, and Burma.[230]Reporters sans frontières, Annual Report 2008, http://www.rsf.org/IMG/pdf/rapport_en-2.pdf (accessedMarch 26, 2009).[231]Reporters sans frontières, EritreaAnnual Report 2007, http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=20749(accessed December 17, 2008).[232]Reporters sans frontières, “Radio journalist arrested as he triedto flee,” July 2007,http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=22432 (accessedDecember 17, 2008).[233]RSF urged the European Union to cut development aid to Eritrea. “Plea toEU to suspend development aid in light of fresh crackdown onjournalists,” Reporters sans frontières, March 6, 2009, http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=30491(accessed March 27, 2009).[234]Human Rights Watch interview with formerjournalist, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008.[235]Jonah Fisher, “Quick Exit: BBC expelledfrom Eritrea,” BBC, September 10, 2004 http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/3644630.stm(accessed December 17, 2008).[236]Ibid.[237]Peter Martell, “Not so fond farewell toEritrea,” BBC online, March 10, 2008, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7283293.stm(accessed January 29, 2009).[238]Government of Eritrea, ‘ProclamationNo.90/1996 – the Press Proclamation’, Gazette of Eritrean Laws,Vol.6/1996 Asmara, June 10, 1996. Part II, article 1a, “the freedom ofthe press is guaranteed pursuant to this Proclamation.”[239]Human Rights Watch interview with formersoldier, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008.[240]Human Rights Watch interviews with formerconscripts, Djibouti and Italy, September and October, 2008.[241]Human Rights Watch interview with refugees, Sicily, Italy, October 24, 2008.[242]Human Rights Watch interview with formerteacher, Sicily, Italy, October 24, 2008.[243]Ibid.[244]Human Rights Watch interview with former teacher,Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[245]http://www.assenna.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1302&Itemid=70(accessed, January 5, 2008).[246]Accordingto Amnesty International, about 90 percent of the Eritrean population arefollowers of Sunni Islam or the Eritrean Orthodox church. Five percent areRoman Catholics and two percent are Protestants, belonging to a Lutheran churchknown as the Evangelical Church of Eritrea, part of the Lutheran WorldFederation. There are also small numbers of Jehovah’s Witnesses, growingnumbers of evangelical or “born again” protestant churches, and afew followers of the Baha’i faith. Amnesty International, Eritrea:Religious Persecution, AF/64/013/2005, December 7, 2005.[247]Ibid. See also See US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, andLabor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2008:Eritrea,” February 25, 2009, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2008/af/119000.htm(accessed February 27, 2009). See also US State Department, Bureau ofDemocracy, Human Rights, and Labor, “International Religious FreedomReport – 2008: Eritrea,” September 19, 2008, http://2001-2009.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2008/108367.htm(accessed February 27, 2009).[248]Human Rights Watch interviews with PentecostalChristians, Italy, September and October 2008.[249]See United States Commission on InternationalReligious Freedom, at http://www.uscirf.gov/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=154&Itemid=1(accessed January 28, 2009).[250]SeeAmnesty International, Eritrea: Religious Persecution, December 7, 2005.[251]Ibid.See also Christian Solidarity Worldwide, Briefing: Eritrea, July 2007, on filewith Human Rights Watch and Human Rights Watch interview with Jehovah’sWitness refugee, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008.[252]Human Rights Watch interviews with Christianrefugees, Sicily, Italy, October 24, 25, and 28, 2008.[253]Human Rights Watch interview with Pentecostal Christian, by phone, December 19,2008.[254]Helen Berhane interview with BBC World Service, October 24, 2007 http://blip.tv/file/443487(accessed January 5, 2009) and interview with Human Rights Watch, by phone,December 19, 2008.[255]Human Rights Watch interview with Helen Berhane, by phone, December 19, 2008.[256]See for example, Amnesty International,‘Urgent Action Eritrea: Torture/Prisoners of Conscience’ November3, 2006 which mentions one hundred and sixty members of banned churchesarrested on October 15 and 16 2006. http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR64/013/2006/en(accessed, December 19, 2008).[257]Christian Solidarity Worldwide, Briefing,2007.[258]Christian Solidarity Worldwide, “Wave ofarrests reaches Asmara,” December 19, 2008.[259]Compass Direct, ‘Christian Deaths Mountin Eritrean Prisons,’ January 23, 2009. The US State Department relied onthese reports for its estimate of at least 3,000 individuals in detention atthe end of 2008. US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, andLabor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2008:Eritrea,” http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2008/af/119000.htm (accessed February 27, 2009).[260]Compass Direct, ‘Christian Deaths Mountin Eritrean Prisons,’ January 23, 2009.[261]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Sicily, Italy, October 25, 2008.[262]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[263]Human Rights Watch interview, Sicily, Italy,October 26, 2008.[264]Human Rights Watch interview, Rome, Italy,October 23, 2008.[265]Human Rights Watch interview with formerChristian conscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[266]Human Rights Watch interview with formerChristian conscript, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[267]Human Rights Watch interview with formersoldier, Djibouti, September 18, 2008.[268]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Rome, Italy, October 23, 2008.[269]Human Rights Watch interview with recentvisitor, by email, December 12, 2008.[270]Human Rights Watch interviews, Djibouti andItaly, September and October 2008.[271]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Rome, Italy, October 23, 2008.[272]Ibid. and interview with recent visitor, byemail, December 12, 2008.[273]Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscripts, Sicily, October 24 and 26, 2008.[274]HumanRights Watch interview with refugees, Sicily, October 24, 2006.[275]HumanRights Watch interview with female refugee, Sicily, Italy, October 26, 2008.[276]US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights,and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2004:Eritrea,” February 28, 2005. The report states: “Men under the ageof fifty, regardless of whether they had completed National Service; women agedeighteen to twenty seven; members of Jehovah’s Witnesses; and others whoare out of favor with or seen as critical of the government, were routinelydenied exit visas. In addition the government often refused to issue exit visasto adolescents and children as young as five years of age, either on thegrounds that they were approaching the age of eligibility for National Serviceor because their diaspora parent had not paid the two percent income taxrequired of all citizens residing abroad. Some citizens were given exit visasonly after posting bonds of approximately US$7,300 (100,000 Nakfa).”[277]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanresident, by phone, December 19, 2008.[278]“Egypt: Don’t Return EritreanAsylum Seekers at Risk,” Human Rights Watch news release, December 19,2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/12/19/egypt-don-t-return-eritrean-asylum-seekers-riskand “Egypt: Stop Deporting Eritrean Asylum Seekers,” Human RightsWatch news release, January 8, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/01/08/egypt-stop-deporting-eritrean-asylum-seekers.[279]Precise numbers are not available from UNHCRbut an October 2008 UNHCR statement said that 40,000 refugees had attempted tocross the Red Sea to Yemen in 2008, a large number of them Eritreans. Yemen hasbecome increasingly concerned by the influx of refugees from the Horn of Africa.See “Yemen: Move to stem influx of Ethiopians, Eritreans,” IRIN,October 22, 2008, http://www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportId=81051(accessed March 26, 2009).[280]United States Committee for Refugees andImmigrants, World Refugee Survey 2008 – Ethiopia,http://www.refugees.org/countryreports.aspx?id=2137 (accessed March 2, 2009).[281]“Ethiopian government, UNHCR appeal foradditional assistance to Eritrean refugees,” Ethiopian News Agency, March10, 2009, http://www.ena.gov.et/EnglishNews/2009/Mar/10Mar09/82527.htm(accessed March 26, 2009).[282]“Sudan asks UN for aid for Eritrean,Somali refugees,” Reuters, December 22, 2008.[283]Human Rights Watch interview with UNHCR officials, Rome, October 23, 2008.[284]UNHCR’s policy paper states:“UNHCR recommends that asylum claims submitted by Eritrean asylum seekersshould undergo a careful assessment to determine their needs for internationalprotection. It is also recommended that states refrain from all forced returnsof rejected asylum seekers to Eritrea and grant them complementary forms ofprotection instead, until further notice.” UNHCR, ‘Position onreturn of rejected asylum seekers to Eritrea,’ January 2004 http://www.unhcr.se/Pdf/Position_countryinfo_papers_06/eritrea04.pdf(accessed January 7, 2009).[285]“Sudan, Eritrea resume severed diplomatic relations,” http://www.arabicnews.com/ansub/Daily/Day/051210/2005121017.html(accessed March 26, 2009).[286]Under Mengistu, Ethiopia supported the SudanPeople’s Liberation Army/Movement (SPLA/M) against the Sudanesegovernment and allowed the SPLM to establish bases in eastern Ethiopia. Eritreacontinued to support Sudanese opposition groups well into the 1990s, includingthe Sudanese National Democratic Alliance (NDA), a coalition of armed andpolitical opposition groups. The Ethiopia-Eritrea war of 1998-2000 promptedconsiderable realignment of regional dynamics and in 1999 Sudan and Eritreasigned a reconciliation agreement. “Sudan-Eritrea: ReconciliationAgreement Signed 5/3/99,” IRIN, May 3, 1999 athttp://www.africa.upenn.edu/Hornet/irin_5399b.html (accessed February 10,2009).[287]UNHCR’s application of the cessationclause did not apply to individuals with a “well-founded fear ofpersecution.” UNHCR, “Applicability of the “CeasedCircumstances” Cessation Clauses to Eritrean Refugees Who Fled TheirCountry as a Result of the War of Independence Which Ended in June 1991 or as aResult of the Border Conflict Between Ethiopia and Eritrea Which Ended in June2000,” February 18, 2002, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/country,,,COUNTRYPOS,ERI,,4165729f4,0.html(accessed February 10, 2009). The repatriation operation was consideredcontroversial because there were concerns that many Eritreans did not receiveadequate information about their ability to apply for asylum despite thecessation clause. See Amnesty, You have no right to ask, p. 32.[288]Amnesty International, ‘Egypt Continuesto Deport Eritrean Asylum Seekers,’ June 13, 2008 http://www.amnesty.org/en/news-and-updates/news/egypt-must-stop-flights-to-torture-in-eritrea-20080613(accessed January 6, 2009).[289]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Rome, October 23, 2008.[290]“Sudan asks UN for aid for Eritrean, Somali refugees,” Reuters,December 22, 2008.[291]“UNHCR says Eritrean refugees arrivingon Sudanese border,” Reuters, February 6, 2008.[292]“Sudan asks UN for aid for Eritrean,Somali refugees,” Reuters, December 22, 2008.[293]Christian Solidarity Worldwide,‘Briefing: Visit to Eritrean Refugees,’ September 2005, p. 8, onfile with Human Rights Watch.[294]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Italy, October 2008.[295]Human Rights Watch, Sinai Perils: Risks toMigrants, Refugees and Asylum Seekers in Egypt and Israel, November 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/11/12/egypt-end-shoot-stop-practice-sinai-border-crossings.See also other Human Rights Watch documents at www.hrw.org.[296]“Egypt: Stop Deporting Eritrean AsylumSeekers,” Human Rights Watch news release, January 8, 2009http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/01/08/egypt-stop-deporting-eritrean-asylum-seekers.[297]“Egypt deports 10 more Eritreans – airport sources,” Reuters,January 18, 2009.[298]“Egypt: Don’t Return Eritrean Asylum-Seekers at Risk,” HumanRights Watch news release, December 19, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/12/19/egypt-don-t-return-eritrean-asylum-seekers-risk.[299]“Egypt is continuing large-scale secretdeportations of Eritrean asylum seekers,” Reuters, June 19, 2008. Seealso UNHCR statement at http://www.unhcr.org/news/NEWS/485b8b032.html (accessedFebruary 10, 2009).[300]Ibid.[301]See Human Rights Watch, Sinai Perils.[302]Ibid.[303]Ibid. see also Amnesty International,‘Egypt/Israel: Fear for Safety’ September 3 2008 http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/MDE15/038/2008/en(accessed January 7, 2009).[304]“Egypt: Stop Deporting Eritrean AsylumSeekers,” Human Rights Watch news release, January 8, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/01/08/egypt-stop-deporting-eritrean-asylum-seekers.[305]See Human Rights Watch, Stemming the Flow:Abuses against migrants, asylum seekers and refugees, September 12, 2006.It is worth noting that 70 women were re-settled in Italy in 2007 after beingrepeatedly abused in detention in Libya. Human Right Watch interviews, Italy,October 2008.[306]See Human Rights Watch, Stemming the Flow:“UNHCR conducted interviews with sixty of the Eritrean passengers aftertheir arrival in Khartoum on 27 August. The group said that they had beendetained without charges for a prolonged period of time in the Libyan town ofKufra, and had endured repeated physical abuse. They also said that, despitetheir request to see UNHCR, they had not been given access to any asylumprocedure. Additionally, the group was never informed of the decision to deportthem to Eritrea, were forced to board a special charter flight, and only foundout after their plane took off that the destination was their country oforigin.”[307]Amnesty International, “Libya: Amnestywarns against deportation of Eritreans,” July 11, 2008, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE19/007/2008/en/a18438b2-4f5e-11dd-a20f-af4976c1087c/mde190072008eng.html(accessed January 7, 2009).[308]Human Rights Watch, Stemming the Flow and Human Rights Watch interviewswith Eritrean refugees, Sicily, Italy, October 2008.[309]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Italy, October 23-30, 2008.[310]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Sicily, Italy, October 28, 2008.[311]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Rome, Italy, October 23, 2008.[312]Ibid.[313]See Human Rights Watch, Stemming the Flow.[314]See Amnesty International, You have noright to ask.[315]Human Rights Watch interviews, formerprisoners, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008.[316]Human Rights Watch interview with diplomat,Rome, October 23, 2008.[317]United Nations, “UN Working Group onArbitrary Detention Concludes Visit to Malta,” January 26, 2009, athttp://www.unhchr.ch/huricane/huricane.nsf/view01/125F21AAD7DCBD1AC125754A0057F318?opendocument.[318]John Hooper, ‘Thousands more migrantsreach Italy’s shores,’ The Guardian, December 30, 2008 http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/dec/30/italy-libya-migration(accessed January 7, 2009).[319]Human Rights Watch interview with UNHCRofficials, Rome, Italy, October 23, 2008.[320]Human Rights Watch interviews, Sicily, Italy,October 24-31, 2008.[321]Human Rights Watch interview with UNHCR officials, Italy, October 23, 2008.[322]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, October 30, 2008.[323]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, Sicily, Italy, October 28-30, 2008.[324]European Commission, Qualification Directive, (2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004)Article 28,http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32004L0083:EN:HTML(accessed January 29, 2009).[325]1951 Refugee Convention, Article 23, see: http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/protect?id=3c0762ea4(accessed January 29, 2009). Under EU law, Art. 28 of the QualificationDirection says that “Member States shall ensure that beneficiaries ofrefugee or subsidiary protection status shall receive, in the Member State thathas granted such statuses, the necessary social assistance, as provided tonationals of that Member State.” Art 31 says, “The Member Stateshall ensure that beneficiaries of refugee or subsidiary protection status haveaccess to accommodation under equivalent conditions as other third countrynationals legally resident in their territories.”[326]Amnesty International, ‘Eritrea/Germany: Fear of torture orill-treatment/incommunicado detention/forcible return,’ May 29, 2008 http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR64/002/2008/en(accessed January 7, 2009).[327]Amnesty International, ‘Eritrea/UK: Fear of torture/incommunicadodetention/forcible return, AFR 64/10/2007, November 29, 2007 http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR64/010/2007/en(accessed January 7, 2009).[328]Amnesty International, ‘Sweden: Furtherinformation on forcible return/torture,’ November 12, 2008 http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/EUR42/007/2008/en(accessed January 7, 2009).[329]See for example, Amnesty International’s accountof the families of deserters who were rounded up and arrested: ‘AI, ‘Fear of Torture,’AFR 64/011/2005, July 28, 2005, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR64/011/2005/en (accessed January 5,2009).[330]Embassy of the State of Eritrea, Letter fromSenait Berhare, Head of Administration and Finance, to Michael Woldemariam,Head of Finance, January 20, 2004, on file with Human Rights Watch.[331]Embassy of the State of Eritrea, London,Annual Report of the Government’s Income, 2003, on file with Human RightsWatch.[332]See David Pool, From Guerillas toGovernment, 2001, pp. 129-130.[333]Human Rights Watch interviews with refugees inLondon, October and November 2008, see also Dan Connell, ‘Eritrea and theUnited States: the ‘war on terror’ and the horn of Africa,’in Richard Reid (ed.) Eritrea’s External Relations: Understanding itsregional role and foreign policy (Chatham House, 2009) p. 203[334]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, London, November 13, 2008.[335]Human Rights Watch interviews with Eritreanrefugees, London, October 11, 2008 and November 13, 2008.[336]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanresident, by phone, December 19, 2008.[337]Human Rights Watch interview with Eritreanrefugee, Rome, Italy, October 22, 2008.[338]Ibid.[339]Ibid.[340]HumanRights Watch interviews with refugees London and Italy, September and October2008.[341]Human Rights Watch interview with formerpolitical prisoner, Sicily, Italy, October 30, 2008.[342]HumanRights Watch interviews with Eritrean refugees, London, October 14, 2008 andNovember 13, 2008.[343]Constitution, art. 2, available at: http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/cafrad/unpan004654.pdf (accessed December 15,2008).[344] Ibid., art. 15.[345]Ibid.,art. 16[346]Ibid.,art. 17.4.[347]Ibid.,art. 17.5.[348]Ibid.,art. 17.7, 17.6.[349]Ibid., art. 19. 1, 19.2.[350]Ibid., art. 19.4.[351]Ibid., art. 19.7, 19.8.[352]Ibid., art. 26.2(b).[353]Ibid.,art. 26.3, 19.4.[354]Government of Eritrea, ‘ProclamationNo.90/1996 – the Press Proclamation’, Gazette of Eritrean Laws,Vol.6/1996 Asmara, June 10, 1996.[355]US Department of State Country Reports on Human RightsPractices, Eritrea, February 25, 2004,http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2003/27726.htm (accessed March 26, 2009).[356]Eritrea ratified the ICCPR in 2002. Otherinternational and regional human rights instruments to which Eritrea is a partyare as follows: Geneva Conventions and the two additional protocols relating tothe Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts andNon-International Armed Conflicts (2000), UN Convention on the Rights of theChild (1994), UN Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discriminationagainst Women (1995), International Convention on the Elimination of All Formsof Racial Discrimination (2001), International Covenant on Social, Economic andCultural Rights (2002), African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights(1999), African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (1999).[357]Resolution 45/111 on basic principles for thetreatment of prisoners, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 14,1990.[358]Eritrea submitted reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2008under the country review mechanism. See http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/CRC.C.ERI.3.pdf(accessed March 27, 2009).[359]Zegveld v. Eritrea,communication 250/2002 (Nov. 2003), Para 39-40, attached to Seventeenth AnnualActivity Report of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights2003 – 2004, available at www.achpr.org/english/activity_reports/17th%20REPORT%20-FINAL,%20Rev2,15dec2004,%20EN.doc. (accessed December 24, 2008) As part of its proceduralargument, Eritrea also said the G15 members had been detained for conspiring tooverthrow the legal government . . . colluding with hostile powers [and]. ..undermining Eritrean National Security and endangering Eritrean society andthe general welfare of its people.” Para. 47.[360]Ibid, Para 35.[361]Ibid, Para 56-58.[362]Zegveld v. Eritrea, Para 54.[363]Ibid, Para 62.[364]Article 19 v. State of Eritrea, communication 275/2003,adopted at the 41st Ordinary Session in May 2007 and issued as Annex II to theReport of the Executive Council, Ex. Cl/364 (XI) in June 2007.http://www.achpr.org/english/activity_reports/activty22_eng.pdf (accessedDecember 24, 2008).[365]Article 19 v. Eritrea. Note: in this case, Eritreapresented its arguments on both procedure and the merits. The Commissionrejected most procedural arguments and all arguments on the merits.[366]An opinion by the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention inNovember 2007 concluded that the incarceration of the G15 members sinceSeptember 2001, “at a secret location, during which they have had noaccess to legal counsel or contact with their families, have not been presentedbefore a judicial authority, and have not been formally charged, seriouslycontravenes article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights.” UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, Opinion 23/2007(Eritrea), Nov. 27, 2007, ¶26. The Working Group rejected Eritrea’scontention that the prisoners were being held because of grave crimes ratherthan because of their criticism of Isayas’s governance. It noted that thegovernment had never brought specific charges against them and thereforeconcluded that their incarceration for exercising their rights to opinion andexpression is also a “clear violation” of article 19 of theCovenant. Ibid., 27. The Working Group demanded their immediate release. Ibid.,30.[367]See status of treaty ratification http://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&id=135&chapter=4&lang=en#EndDec(accessed March 27, 2009).[368]See List of Ratifications of InternationalLabour Conventions, Eritrea. Available in http://webfusion.ilo.org/public/db/standards/normes/appl/appl-byCtry.cfm?lang=EN&CTYCHOICE=2100(accessed January 2, 2009).[369]See ILO, ‘Forcedlabour in Myanmar (Burma): Report of the Commission of Inquiry appointed underarticle 26 of the Constitution of the International Labour Organization toexamine the observance by Myanmar of the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No.29),’ Geneva, 1998, Part IV, Examination of the case by the Commission.[370]Forced Labour Convention discussed in GaimKibreab, “Forced Labour in Eritrea,”Journal of Modern African Studies, 47, 1 (2009), pp. 41-72.[371]Convention Concerning the Abolition of ForcedLabour (1957), Art 1 (a-c).[372]InternationalLabour Organization, General Survey of 1979 on the abolition of forced labourby the Committee of Experts, Paras 36 and 37. The ILO has requested informationfrom Eritrea to clarify its compliance with its treaty obligations severaltimes, see:http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/cgi-lex/pqconv.pl?host=status01&textbase=iloeng&querytype=bool&hitdirection=1&hitstart=0&hitsrange=2000&sortmacro=sortyear&query=Eritrea@ref&chspec=9&(accessed April 1, 2009).[373]US State Department, Bureau of Democracy,Human Rights, and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices– 2007: Eritrea,” March 11, 2008, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2007/100480.htm(accessed January 29, 2009).[374]“Eritrea pulls out of African bloc”, Al-Jazeera, April 22, 2007 http://english.aljazeera.net/news/africa/2007/04/2008525144333672612.html(accessed January 5, 2009).[375]For an excellent analysis of US-Eritrearelations see, Dan Connell, “Eritrea and the United States: the‘war on terror’ and the Horn of Africa,” in Richard Reid(ed.) Eritrea’s External Relations: Understanding its regional roleand foreign policy (Chatham House, 2009).[376]“Eritrea suspends US aid efforts,” BBC news online, August 26, 2005at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/4186728.stm(accessed March 3, 2009).[377]“Eritrea arrest two US embassy staffaccused of human trafficking,” Voice of America, September 15, 2005 at http://www.voanews.com/english/archive/2005-09/Eritrea-Arrests-Two-US-Embassy-Staff-For-Alleged-Human-Trafficking.cfm(accessed January 29, 2009).[378]Peter Martell, “How Eritrea fell out with the west,” BBC newsonline, September 11, 2007 at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/6987916.stm(accessed March 3, 2009).[379]International Crisis Group, Beyond thefragile peace between Ethiopia and Eritrea: Averting new war, Africa ReportNo. 141, June 17, 2008, p. 18, http://www.crisisgroup.org/home/index.cfm?id=5490&l=1(accessed January 8, 2009).[380]AP, “Eritrea denounces US‘meddling’ in the Horn of Africa,” International Herald TribuneJune 11, 2008 http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2008/06/13/news/Eritrea-Djibouti-US.php(accessed January 8, 2009).[381]Stefano Manservisi, Director General, EuropeanCommission, Directorate-General Development and relations with AfricanCaribbean and Pacific States, Letter to Elsa Chyrum, June 18, 2007, on filewith Human Rights Watch.[382]The Cotonou Agreement, Article 8 (4) http://ec.europa.eu/development/geographical/cotonouintro_en.cfm(accessed January 7, 2009).[383]Ibid, Article 9 (2) and (4).[384]Manservisi to Chyrum, June 18, 2007.[385]European Commission, Directorate General forHumanitarian Aid – ECHO, Humanitarian Aid Decision 23 02 01,ECHO/ERI/BUD/2008/0100, February 26, 2008.[386]Ibid.[387]Human Rights Watch interview with diplomat,European Commission Humanitarian Office (ECHO), Brussels, by phone, January 22,2009.[388]Reportof the fact-finding mission of a Delegation of the Development Committee of theEuropean Parliament to the Horn of Africa (Eritrea, Djibouti, Ethiopia) (25October-2 November), p. 11.[389]Ibid., p. 6.[390]The report of the fact-finding mission stated in part:“Members of the delegation, while acknowledging the need for atransitional phase after the war and the process character of democratictransition, underlined the need for identifying a perspective for returning toa democratic process and reinstating basic human rights in line with theinternational commitments of Eritrea. They were very concerned that the “nowar no peace situation” was used to justify the upholding of anundemocratic regime.” p. 8.[391]HumanRights Watch interviews with refugees, UN officials and diplomats, Italy andAsmara, October and December 2008 and January 2009.[392]Human Rights Watch interview with GaimKibreab, London, December 11, 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with formerconscript who worked on a private farm, London, November 13, 2008; Human RightsWatch interviews with Eritrean refugees, London, UK, and Sicily, Italy, Septemberand October 2008; Human Rights Watch interview with UN official, by phone,December 19, 2008; and interviews with diplomats, by phone, January 13, 17, and22, 2009.[393]Human Rights Watch email communication with UN Resident Representative inEritrea, January 14, 2009.[394]Human Rights Watch interview with former UNofficial, by phone, December 19, 2008.[395]The Parliament report recommends that, “TheEritrean government should allow the EC unhindered access to EC funded projectsand enhance its openness to technical assistance for jointly agreed projectsand programmes,” p. 11.[396]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with ECHOofficial, January 22, 2009.[397]David Cronin, “EU cautioned over aid toEritrea,” Inter Press Service, July 11, 2008.[398]Ibid.Related ContentApril 16, 2009News ReleaseEritrea: Repression Creating Human Rights CrisisHost Countries Should Cease Forced Returns of Eritrean RefugeesApril 16, 2009News ReleaseEritrea: Repression Creating Human Rights CrisisRegion / CountryAfrica EritreaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch