Delivered Into Enemy Hands: US-Led Abuse and Rendition of Opponents to Gaddafi’s Libya | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportAppendix I: Tripoli DocumentsAppendix II: Shoroeiya DrawingsDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportAppendix I: Tripoli DocumentsAppendix II: Shoroeiya DrawingsSeptember 5, 2012Delivered Into Enemy HandsUS-Led Abuse and Rendition of Opponents to Gaddafi’s LibyaAvailable InEnglishالعربيةA file folder found after the fall of Tripoli in a building belonging to the Libyan external security services containing faxes and memos between the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the Libyan Intelligence Service.© 2011 Tim GruczaDelivered Into Enemy HandsUS-Led Abuse and Renditionof Opponents to Gaddafi’s LibyaSummaryKey RecommendationsMethodologyI. BackgroundLibya from the 1970s to the 1990sFlight from LibyaLibyan Islamic Fighting GroupGaddafi’s Rapprochement withthe WestII. Detainee Accounts fromAfghanistan and MoroccoMohammed Ahmed Mohammed al-Shoroeiyaand Khalid al-SharifDeparture from LibyaArrest and DetentionAfghanistan IAfghanistan IIShoroeiya’s Transfer andTreatment in LibyaSharif’s Transfer and Treatmentin LibyaMajid Mokhtar Sasy al-MaghrebiDeparture from LibyaPakistanAfghanistan IAfghanistan IITransfer and Treatment in LibyaSaleh Hadiyah Abu AbdullahDi’ikiDeparture from LibyaArrest and DetentionAfghanistan IAfghanistan IITransfer and Treatment in LibyaMustafa Salim Ali el-MadaghiMoroccoTransfer and Treatment in LibyaMustafa Jawda al-MehdiDeparture from LibyaArrest and DetentionPeshawarIslamabadAfghanistanTransfer and Treatment in LibyaIII. Transfers to Libya that Began inAsiaAbdul Hakim BelhadjDeparture from LibyaMalaysia and ThailandTreatment in LibyaSamiMostefa al-SaadiDeparture from LibyaTreatment in LibyaMuhammed Abu FarsanDeparture from LibyaTreatment in LibyaIV. Transfer from Guantanamo Bay: TheCase of Abdusalam Abdulhadi Omar as-SafraniDeparture from LibyaTransfer to GuantanamoTransfer and Treatment in LibyaV. The Case ofIbn al-Sheikh al-LibiVI. Detainees Rendered From OtherAfrican Countries to LibyaIsmail Omar Gebril al-LwattyMafud al-Sadiq Embaya AbdullahAbdullah Mohammed Omar al-TawatyOthman Salah (Sheikh Othman)VII. International Legal StandardsRecommendationsAcknowledgmentsAppendix I: Tripoli DocumentsAppendix II: Shoroeiya DrawingsSummaryAll we seek is justice.… We hope the new Libya, freedfrom its dictator, will have positive relationships with the West. But thisrelationship must be built on respect and justice. Only by admitting andapologizing for past mistakes … can we move forward together as friends.—Abdul Hakim Belhadj, military commander during theLibyan uprising who had been forcibly returned to Libya in 2004 with US and UK involvement,Libya, April 12, 2012[1]When rebel forces overtook Tripoli in August 2011, prisondoors were opened and office files exposed, revealing startling new informationabout Libya’s relations with other countries. One such revelation,documented in this report, is the degree of involvement of the United States governmentunder the Bush administration in the arrest of opponents of the former LibyanLeader, Muammar Gaddafi, living abroad, the subsequent torture and other ill-treatmentof many of them in US custody, and their forced transfer to back to Libya.The United States played the most extensive role in theabuses, but other countries, notably the United Kingdom, were also involved.This is an important chapter in the larger story of thesecret and abusive US detention program established under the government ofGeorge W. Bush after the September 11, 2001 attacks, and the rendition of individualsto countries with known records of torture.[2]This report is based mostly on Human Rights Watch interviewswith 14 former detainees now residing freely in post-Gaddafi Libya and informationcontained in Libyan government files discovered abandoned immediately afterGaddafi’s fall (the “Tripoli Documents”). It providesdetailed evidence of torture and other ill-treatment of detainees in US custody,including a credible account of “waterboarding,” and a similaraccount of water abuse that brings the victim close to suffocation. Both typesof abuse amount to torture. The allegations cast serious doubts on prior assertionsfrom US government officials that only three people were waterboarded in UScustody. They also reflect just how little the public still knows about whatwent on in the US secret detention program.The report also sheds light on the failure of the George W. Bushadministration, in the pursuit of suspects behind the September 11, 2001 attacks,to distinguish between Islamists who were in fact targeting the United States andthose who may simply have been engaged in armed opposition against their ownrepressive regimes. This failure risked aligning the United States with brutal dictatorsand aided their efforts to dismiss all political opponents as terrorists.The report examines the roles of other governments in the abuseof detainees in custody and in unlawful renditions to Libya despite demonstrableevidence the detainees would be seriously mistreated upon return. Countrieslinked to these accounts include: Afghanistan, Chad, China and Hong Kong,Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Sudan, Thailand,and the United Kingdom.Finally, the report shows that individuals rendered to Libyawere tortured or otherwise ill-treated in Libyan prisons, including in two caseswhere the Tripoli Documents make clear the United States sought assurances thattheir basic rights would be respected. All were held in incommunicado detention—manyin solitary confinement— for prolonged periods without trial.  Whenfinally tried, they found that the proceedings fell far short of international fairtrial standards.Most of the former detainees interviewed for this reportsaid they had been members of the Libyan Islamist Fighting Group (LIFG)—agroup opposed to Gaddafi’s rule that began to organize in Libya in thelate 1980s and took more formal shape in Afghanistan in the early 1990s. Atthat time, Islamist opposition groups were springing up across the Middle East,North Africa, and Asia in response to governments they deemed corrupt,oppressive, and not sufficiently Islamic.Libya was no exception. In 1977, several years after Gaddafitook power, he imposed his unique political system, the Jamahiriya, or “stateof the masses,” on the country. The government confiscated property, and beganregulating every aspect of life, from religion to economics to education, inentirely new and often incomprehensible ways. Many Libyans, including traditionalMuslims who were particularly outraged by the changes Gaddafi made to thepractice of Islam and considered them blasphemous, expressed their opposition. Gaddafiput down dissent brutally, focusing in particular on Islamist opposition groupswho, due to their alignment with Islamist groups abroad and the deep devotionof many members, he treated as a dangerous threat. Those suspected of even the slightestconnection with the movement were rounded up, imprisoned, and sometimes executed,including in public and broadcast on television.  It is in the context ofthis crackdown that the LIFG began to organize and set out, from bases bothwithin and outside Libya, to overthrow Gaddafi.Virtually all the former Libyan detainees interviewed byHuman Rights Watch said that they fled the country in the late 1980s because ofGaddafi’s repressive policies against organized Islamic opposition groupsand against persons perceived to be associated with such groups, due to theirreligious practices. Some joined the LIFG while in Libya and others onceoutside the country. All but one said they participated in the fighting inAfghanistan that eventually defeated the Soviet-installed government of MohammedNajibullah in 1992 and used the training they gained there for LIFG-led anti-Gaddafiefforts.After the September 11 attacks on the United States, beingLibyan without documentation in Afghanistan, and being part of an armed Islamicopposition group, placed these Libyan expatriates at high risk of arrest. Thatwas true even if—as all those interviewed for this report claim—theirgroup was not at war with the West. And so many of them fled, along with theirfamilies, moving from country to country, including to destinations such asMalaysia and Hong Kong as well as Mali and Mauritania. It was in thesecountries that they were taken into custody before being sent elsewhere.For many of the individuals profiled here, this will be thefirst time their stories are told because until last year they were locked upin Libyan prisons.These stories provide new details about serious human rightsviolations in US detention sites, US and UK collaboration with the Gaddafigovernment, and the roles of several other countries that assisted in renditions.This information includes:New accounts of abuse in secret Central Intelligence Agency(CIA) black sites: Five former LIFG members told Human Rights Watch thatthey were detained in US run-prisons in Afghanistan for between eight months andtwo years. The abuse allegedly included: being chained to wallsnaked—sometimes while diapered—in pitch dark, windowless cells, forweeks or months at a time; being restrained in painful stress positions forlong periods of time, being forced into cramped spaces; being beaten andslammed into walls; being kept inside for nearly five months without theability to bathe; being denied food and being denied sleep by continuous,deafeningly loud Western music, before being rendered back to Libya. The UnitedStates never charged them with crimes. Their captors allegedly held themincommunicado, cut off from the outside world, and typically in solitary confinementthroughout their Afghan detention. The accounts of these five men provide extensivenew evidence that corroborates the few other personal accounts that exist aboutthe same US-run facilities. One of those five, before being transferred toAfghanistan, as well as another former LIFG member interviewed for this report,were also held in a detention facility in Morocco.New evidence of “waterboarding” tortureand a similar practice during interrogations: One former detainee,Mohammed Shoroeiya, provided detailed and credible testimony that he was waterboardedon repeated occasions during US interrogations in Afghanistan. While neverusing the phrase “waterboarding,” he said that after his captorsput a hood over his head and strapped him onto a wooden board, “then theystart with the water pouring…. They start to pour water to the pointwhere you feel like you are suffocating.” He added that, “theywouldn’t stop until they got some kind of answer from me.” He saida doctor was present during the waterboarding and that this happened numeroustimes, so many times he could not count. A second detainee in Afghanistandescribed being subjected to a water suffocation practice similar to waterboarding,and said that he was threatened with use of the board. A doctor was presentduring his suffocation-inducing abuse as well. The allegations of waterboardingcontradict statements about the practice from senior US officials, such asformer CIA Director Michael Hayden, who testified to the Senate that the CIAwaterboarded only three individuals—Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Abu Zubaydah,and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri.[3] FormerPresident Bush similarly declared in his memoirs that only three detainees inCIA custody were waterboarded.[4] FormerDefense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld has also denied the use of waterboarding bythe US military.[5]Unlawful rendition: All interviewees saidtheir captors forcibly returned them to Libya at a time when Libya’srecord on torture made clear they would face a serious risk of abuse uponreturn. All had expressed deep fears to their captors about going back to Libyaand five of them said that they specifically asked for asylum. One of them, MuhammedAbu Farsan, sought asylum in the Netherlands while in transit between China andMorocco. He said his asylum application wasultimately denied and he was sent to Sudan, where he held a passport. ButSudanese authorities kept him in detention and, shortly after his arrival,individuals representing themselves as CIA officers interrogated him on threedifferent days. Within two weeks he was sent back to Libya. Though theNetherlands is the only government that actually had provided any of theLibyans we interviewed with an opportunity to challenge their transfer, theTripoli Documents contain information suggesting Dutch officials might havebeen aware that Abu Farsan would ultimately be sent to Libya from Sudan. To theextent they knew that there was a genuine risk he would be returned to Libya, theyviolated his rights against unlawful return.More information aboutWestern collusion with theGaddafi government: The Human Rights Watch interviews and the TripoliDocuments present new details showing a close degree of cooperation among theUS, the UK, and other Western governments with regard to the forcible returnand subsequent interrogation of Gaddafi opponents in Libya. Ten of the fourteenLibyans interviewed for this report were rendered back to Libya within about yearof the date when Libya, the United States and the United Kingdom had formally mendedtheir relations, seven within the five months. The mending of relations wasvery publically marked by a visit from British Prime Minister at the time, TonyBlair, to Libya on March 25, 2004. The collusion is ironic, given that yearslater these same governments would end up assisting Gaddafi’s opponentsin their efforts to overthrow the Libyan leader. Several of those opponents arenow in leadership positions and are important political actors in Libya.Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi:  Al-Libi’scase is significant, among other reasons, because the United States relied onstatements obtained through his interrogation while in CIA custody to justifythe 2003 invasion of Iraq: Al-Libi died in a Libyan prison in 2009—asuicide, according to Libyan authorities at the time—so it is difficultto obtain information about him today. But by talking to family members andothers detained with him in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Libya, Human RightsWatch has pieced together some new details about al-Libi’s time in CIAcustody and circumstances surrounding his death. Human Rights Watch also observedphotos of al-Libi that Libyan prison officials appear to have taken on themorning of his death which allegedly depict him in the manner he was found inhis cell.  The photos show bruising on parts of his body.The United States, Libya, and most of the other countries discussedin this report are party to important international human rights treaties,including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and theConvention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment. Persons apprehended in armed conflict situations would also havebeen protected by the Geneva Conventions of 1949. These treaties prohibit notonly torture, but all cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Importantly, theyalso prohibit sending an individual to a country where that person would face agenuine risk of torture or ill-treatment.In discussing rendition policies, former Bush administrationofficials have tried to justify the forced returns that took place during theadministration by saying they always got “promises” from thereceiving countries or “diplomatic assurances” the transferees wouldbe treated humanely.  As evidenced by US State Department country reportson human rights in the mid-2000s, however, the US government was well aware ofthe torture and ill-treatment taking place in Libyan prisons.[6]The Gaddafi government’s many executions of its opponents after summarytrials would have made it obvious to anyone involved in the rendition of LIFGmembers to Libya that they would be at grave risk. The US government’sperfunctory resort to diplomatic assurances—unenforceable agreementsbetween governments to not harm a person being transferred, shown in theTripoli Documents to have been used in two transfers—reflect a callous disregardfor the lives and wellbeing of people who the United States never should havereturned to Libya.Several individuals interviewed for this report said theyendured physical abuse and mistreatment in Libya, some of which amounted totorture. This included being beaten with wooden sticks[7]and steel pipes;[8] whipped,[9]including with ropes[10] andelectric cables;[11]slapped, kicked and punched;[12] andadministered electric shocks.[13]At the same time, other interviewees said they were notsubjected to physical abuse in Libyan custody. Some speculated this may havebeen due to prison reforms initiated by Muammar Gaddafi’s son, SaifGaddafi, or agreements they had heard were made between the United States andLibya (perhaps diplomatic assurances) that transferees would not be mistreated.[14]But, neither Saif Gaddafi’s reforms nor US diplomatic assurances, ifobtained, appear to have protected those detainees who were subjected totorture and ill-treatment. Nor did they protect detainees from being placed insolitary confinement—which can amount to torture—ensure theiraccess to family members and legal counsel, or make sure they were promptlycharged and fairly tried. Typically detainees had no lawyers and were deniedfamily visits, sometimes for as long as two years.[15]All of those interviewed said they were held for years before finally beingcharged with any offense. Once charged, they were appointed a lawyer to whomthey either never spoke or who did not assist in their defense.[16]They faced summary trials, and all detainees interviewed for this report wereconvicted, receiving sentences of lengthy prison terms up to life imprisonment,or the death penalty. At least three said they were subsequently interrogatedin Libyan prisons by US, UK, or other foreign agents.[17]Summary of the CasesDetentions in Afghanistan and Morocco: Of the meninterviewed for this report, the five who experienced the worst abuses and spentthe longest period in secret US detention are Khalid al-Sharif (Sharif);Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed al-Shoroeiya (Shoroeiya); Majid Mokhtar Sasyal-Maghrebi (Maghrebi); Saleh Hadiyah Abu Abdullah Di’iki (Di’iki);and Mustafa Jawda al-Mehdi (Mehdi). All but Mehdi appear to have been held in thesame locations for their first period of detention which they all said was in aUS-run detention facility in Afghanistan. The four were then moved to a secondlocation, apparently also in Afghanistan, to which Mehdi was later brought. Intotal, Sharif was in both locations for two years, Shoroeiya for about 16months, Maghrebi for about eight months, and Di’iki also for about eightmonths. Mehdi was only in the second location and he appears to have beendetained there for about fourteen months. Prior to his detention in Afghanistan,Di’iki said he was also held in a facility in Morocco for about a month wherehe said he was interrogated by US personnel though it is not clear if they wererunning the facility. In addition to these five, Human Rights Watch also interviewedMustafa Salim Ali el-Madaghi (Madaghi), who was described in the TripoliDocuments as Di’iki’s deputy.[18] He was arrested inMauritania, sent to Morocco, held there for about five weeks, and then renderedto Libya. All six were senior members of the LIFG. Khalid al-Sharif, deputy toHead of the LIFG, Abdul Hakim Belhadj (see below), being the most seniormember.Transfers to Libya That Began in Asia: For three interviewees,their returns to Gaddafi’s Libya began in Asia. Two of these three cases—thoseof Abdul Hakim Belhadj and Sami Mostafa al-Saadi, are already well documented.Information about US and UK involvement in their renditions was revealed whenthe Tripoli Documents were discovered last year and a number of the documentsmade public.[19] Belhadjis the former head of the LIFG and a longtime opponent of Gaddafi. He and hiswife were taken into custody in Malaysia with the help of the UnitedKingdom’s Secret Intelligence Service (commonly known as MI6) anddetained for several days by the CIA in Thailand.  The United States thensent him to Libya around March 9, 2004. Libyan intelligence Chief Musa Kusa hadBelhadj brought directly to him. “I’ve been waiting for you,”he reportedly told Belhadj.[20]Belhadj’s transfer occurred just weeks before UK Prime Minister TonyBlair flew to Tripoli on March 25 for a very public rapprochement with Gaddafi.[21]The same day, Anglo-Dutch oil giant Shell announced it had signed a deal worthup to £550 million (approximately $1 billion US) for gas explorationrights off the Libyan coast.[22]Saadi had been a senior LIFG leader and was thegroup’s religious leader and religious law expert. The Tripoli Documentscontain communications from the CIA offering to help the Libyan government secureSaadi’s return to Libya and confirming MI6 involvement as well. Saadi wasrendered to Libya from Hong Kong just days after Blair’s visit to Libya.Five other former LIFG members interviewed for this report were also renderedto Libya that year, and two more the following April. Communications containedin the Tripoli Documents, relating to Belhadj and Saadi, are a key part of alawsuit against the UK government.[23] Theyhave also formed the basis of an investigation by the UK police into the government’srole in their rendition.[24]In addition to these eight, Human Rights Watch interviewedanother senior LIFG member, Muhammed Abu Farsan, who had been with Belhadj andSaadi in Asia before they were detained. As described above, Abu Farsan sought butfailed to obtain asylum in the Netherlands, which sent him to Sudan. In Sudanhe was interviewed by individuals representing themselves as being from the CIAon three different occasions. Within two weeks, Sudan returned him to Libya.Transfer fromGuantanamo Bay:We alsointerviewed Abdusalam Abdulhadi Omar as-Safrani, who as of this report’swriting was one of two former Guantanamo detainees sent back to Libya by theUS. He said he was not a member of the LIFG. He was detained with Ibn-al-Sheikhal-Libi (see below) by US and Pakistani forces before being sent to Guantanamo.Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi (Sheikh al-Libi):Sheikh al-Libi, also reportedly not a member of theLIFG, was held in US custody for years, allegedly tortured, and then renderedto Libya. We could not interview him for this report because he died in Libyancustody, allegedly by suicide. His rendition and torture is of particularimportance because it produced intelligence that the CIA itself has recognized wasunreliable but that nevertheless played a significant role in justifying the USinvasion of Iraq in 2003.Detainees Rendered from African Countries to Libya: Weinterviewed four other Libyans picked up in different places in Africa and thentransferred to Libya: one from Sudan, Ismail Omar Gebril al-Lwatty (Lwatty);one from Chad, Mafud al-Sadiq Embaya Abdullah (Embaya); and two from Mali,Abdullah Mohammed Omar al-Tawaty (Tawaty) and Othman Salah (Salah). Theseinterviews contained less evidence than the others of foreign or Westerngovernment involvement in the actual transfer, though there are indicationsthat Western governments were involved in the initial apprehensions andsubsequent interrogations. The African countries themselves, however, wereequally obliged not to render these individuals to Libya, without process andagainst their will.Most of the Libyansprofiled in this report were imprisoned until February 16, 2011, when theuprisings against Gaddafi began. LIFG leader Abdul Hakim Belhadj, his deputy, KhalidSharif, and LIFG religious leader Sami al-Saadi were released a year earlier,on March 23, 2010, as part of a negotiated release of hundreds of prisoners. Belhadj,Saadi and Sharif had to publically renounce their aim of overthrowing thegovernment by force as part of the deal.Many of those interviewed were also involved in theuprisings against Gaddafi. Sharif, Saadi, and Di’iki were all rearrestedduring this time for anti-Gaddafi activities and held until August 2011, whenTripoli fell to rebel forces. Belhadj commanded a brigade that played a keyrole in the uprisings and the taking of Tripoli. Shoroeiya, Sharif, and othersinterviewed for this report said that many former LIFG members who managed toescape arrest after the uprisings began, but are not profiled here, participatedpolitically in the uprisings and militarily in organizing and training rebelforces. Belhadj and Saadi both ran as candidates for their respective politicalparties during the July 7, 2012 elections.[25]US diplomats have engaged with Belhadj and his party since theyemerged as important players in Libya’s new democratic landscape, andseveral US Senators, including John McCain, have met with him. Sharif is now head of the Libyan National Guard. One of hisresponsibilities is providing security for facilities holding high valuedetainees (mostly officials of the former Gaddafi government) now in governmentcustody. Di’iki also works at the Libyan National Guard and has similar responsibilities.. Mehdi andShoroieya are prominent members of the same political parties to which Belhadjand Saadi belong, respectively.Key RecommendationsTo the United StatesGovernmentConsistent with its obligations under the Convention againstTorture, investigate credible allegations of torture and ill-treatment sinceSeptember 11, 2001 and implement a system of compensation to ensure all victimscan obtain redress.Acknowledge past abuses and provide a full accounting of everyperson that the CIA has held in its custody pursuant to its counterterrorismauthority since 2001, including names, dates they left US custody, locations towhich they were transferred, and their last known whereabouts.Create an independent, nonpartisan commission to investigate themistreatment of detainees in US custody anywhere in the world since September11, 2001, including torture, enforced disappearance, and rendition to torture.To the Government ofthe United KingdomProvide a full accounting of the involvement of British securityservices in the detention or transfer of individuals to other countries withoutdue process since September 11, 2001.Set up a new, judge-led inquiry into the UK’s involvementin detainee abuse and renditions to torture with full independence from thegovernment and authority to allow it to establish the truth.To the Government ofLibyaPromptly investigate all allegations of torture and ill-treatmentin detention facilities run by the state and armed groups in a thorough andimpartial way.Hold accountable all those responsible for using torture orill-treatment against persons in custody.To the Governments ofPakistan, the Netherlands, China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Thailand, Chad,Mauritania, Mali, Morocco, and SudanConduct a thorough and impartial investigation into the role eachgovernment played in either the detention and abuse or the transfer orrendition of individuals identified in this report to Libya, where they faced asubstantial risk of torture or persecution.Where warranted, prosecute individuals found to have engaged intorture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment and provide a means forvictims to obtain redress.MethodologyThis report is based primarily on interviews Human RightsWatch conducted during a research trip to Libya from March 14 to March 27, 2012;documents that Human Rights Watch discovered in Libyan foreign intelligencechief Musa Kusa’s office on September 3, 2011; and Human Rights Watch researchon unlawful rendition and secret detention by the United States and othergovernments over the past decade.During its March 2012 trip to Libya, Human Rights Watchconducted in-depth interviews with 14 former detainees who had been transferredto Libya between 2004 and 2006. Before each interview, we informed intervieweesof its purpose and the kinds of issues that would be covered, and asked whetherthey wanted to participate. We informed them that they could discontinue theinterview at any time or decline to answer specific questions without consequence.We did not offer or provide incentives to persons we interviewed. We conductedeach interview individually and in private.Human Rights Watch was previously aware that seven of theseindividuals had been transferred to Libya. We had already interviewed four ofthem in 2009 while they were still in Libya’s Abu Salim prison, but hadconducted those interviews in an open courtyard, occasionally within theearshot of guards.[26] Thefall of the Gaddafi government and the prisoners’ release from detentionprovided Human Rights Watch with an opportunity to speak to them in private,without the stress of prison conditions, and in greater depth about theirexperiences.These interviews and documents led Human Rights Watch toother individuals who had also been unlawfully rendered, detained, andinterrogated with varying levels of foreign government involvement. Inaddition, Human Rights Watch worked with Sheikh Othman, a former LIFG memberwho worked in the Tripoli Military Defense Council. He was in charge ofcompiling the names of those who had been returned to Libya against their will,with foreign government involvement. He himself had been rendered to Libya fromMali in 2006. Othman provided Human Rights Watch with the names and contactinformation for 21 former prisoners who he said were returned to Libya duringthe Gaddafi era with US, UK, or other foreign government involvement. Much ofthis information overlapped with information we already had, but some of it wasnew. Of those on Othman’s list that we were not able to interview, onewas no longer alive (Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi). Another, Abu Sufian Ibrahim AhmedHamuda Bin Qumu, the only other Guantanamo detainee to be returned to Libyabesides Abdusalam Abdulhadi Omar as-Safrani, refused to speak with us. We wereunable to reach six others. As a result, we were not able to confirm or denythese other alleged transfers to Libya. In addition, Othman said that another15 people had been turned over to Libya from prisons in Sudan, more than 70from Saudi Arabia, and at least eight from Jordan. Due to limited time, HumanRights Watch was not able to investigate these claims.Human Rights Watch interviewed some family members of peoplewho had been returned to Libya, as well as family members and former cellmatesof Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi, who died while in Libyan custody.Tripoli DocumentsOn September 3, 2011, Human Rights Watch discovered a numberof Gaddafi-era files, abandoned, in the offices of former Libyan intelligence chief MusaKusa in Tripoli.[27] Scoresof those documents—several of which are presented here for the first time—provideimportant information on the high level of cooperation between the United Statesand the United Kingdom in the rendition of Gaddafi’s political opponentsto Libya. (See Appendix 1 for a complete list of the documents drawn on in thisreport.)The documents include communications between MusaKusa’s office and the CIA, and between Kusa’s office and the MI6.They show a high level of cooperation between the United States, the United Kingdom,and the government of former Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi on the transfer ofGaddafi’s opponents into Libyan custody. The documents are significant becausethey shed light on the still opaque CIA renditions program, identify formerdetainees by name, and provide corroborating evidence in several specificcases, most notably confirming the involvement of the US, the UK, and othergovernments.Past Human Rights Watch Interviews in LibyaSince the September 11, 2001 attacks, Human Rights Watch,journalists and other nongovernmental organizations have reported on CIA secretdetention sites, tracked the names of missing detainees believed to be in UScustody, and requested information as to their whereabouts.[28]In 2006 and 2007, Human Rights Watch received reports from Libyans abroad thatseveral individuals who had been in US custody had since been sent back toLibya. Some media outlets also reported these returns.[29]By February 2009, Human Rights Watch had the names of seven Libyans we believedhad been detained by the CIA and transferred to Libya. In April 2009 HumanRights Watch got access to the notorious Abu Salim prison in Tripoli, the main prisonwhere the government held political prisoners and the site of a massacre in1996 where roughly 1,200 inmates were killed within a few hours. During the2009 visit, we confirmed that five of the seven had indeed been transferred toLibyan custody and we were able to interview four of them, though only for alimited period of time and not entirely in private. The fifth, Ali Mohammedal-Fakheri, also known as Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi, declined to speak with us. Twoweeks later, according to the Libyan government, he committed suicide.[30]I. BackgroundLibya from the 1970s to the 1990sTwelve of the fifteen men profiled in this report said theyleft Libya between 1988 and 1990. Of the three others, one left in 1991 and theothers in 1996.[31] Libyaat the time was a brutal police state.[32] Dissidentswere arbitrarily arrested and held for years without charge, and often for longperiods in incommunicado detention.[33]Torture of those in custody was rampant.[34]Family members of suspected opponents of the government were harassed, threatened,and detained.[35] It wasa country in which the death penalty could be imposed on “anyone whocalls for the establishment of any association or party which is against theRevolution in purpose and means.”[36]Leading up to this period Gaddafi had developed a uniquepolitical philosophy, a hybrid of socialism and Islam called the ThirdUniversal Theory, which sought independence from communism and capitalism. Thistheory was enshrined in the “Green Book,” which he wrote to presenthis theory of a system of government called Jamahiriya, or “stateof the masses.”[37] Accordingto the Green Book, the Jamahiriya system was the final evolution ofdemocracy, because citizens did not elect representatives but participatedthemselves directly in governmental affairs.  All citizens were obliged toparticipate in Basic People’s Congresses in their local districts, wherethey could debate all matters of government. Parliaments were considered“a misrepresentation of the people,” and parliamentary governmentswere “a misleading solution to the problem of democracy.” Politicalparties were considered “contemporary dictatorships.”[38]New laws banned any group activity based on a political ideology opposed tothese views.[39] AsGaddafi once declared, “It [the revolution] is a moving train. Whoeverstands in its way will be crushed.”[40]Gaddafi created Revolutionary Committees, an extensivesurveillance system that mobilized citizens to support his political agenda.[41]The rights to freedom of speech and assembly were virtually non-existent.[42]Both local and international phone calls were routinely monitored, as evidencedby the extensive monitoring equipment found after Gaddafi’s fall.[43]In the years that followed, police and security forces arbitrarily detainedhundreds of Libyans who opposed, or authorities feared could oppose, the newsystem, subjected them to arbitrary detentions, and many were killed.”[44]  Libyan authorities referred to theseindividuals as “stray dogs.”[45] On manyoccasions, the executions were carried out in public and broadcast ontelevision.[46]Gaddafi also made major changes to the practice of Islam in Libyathat he expected others to follow.[47] Forexample, the second source of authority in Sunni Islam, the Sunnah (theacts and sayings of the Prophet as told by his companions), was discarded.[48]The Islamic calendar was changed so that it no longer started with the date of theProphet’s migration from Mecca to Medina, but rather with the date of hisdeath ten years later.[49] Libyabegan fasting for the holy month of Ramadan on a different day from the rest ofthe Middle East.[50]The most contentious of these changes was the discarding ofthe second Sunnah, which was deeply offensive and sacrilegious to Muslims, andnot just those in Libya. Though Gaddafi was not the only one advocating this atthe time, it was very much a minority position and put him at odds with theclerical establishment, as well as Islamists.[51]In the early 1980s, a series of fatwas were issued againstGaddafi which proclaimed him a heathen.[52] Libyanswho were opposed to Gaddafi’s changes began organizing. In turn Gaddafistepped up surveillance and repression against them.[53]Many victims of the detentions, and killings going on at the time were membersof Islamist opposition groups.[54] Theformer head of Libya’s foreign intelligence service, Musa Kusa, oncereportedly boasted to foreign visitors that he monitored domestic Islamicextremists so closely that he knew the name of every Libyan with a beard.[55]Even fleeing the country did not mean escapingGaddafi’s reach. In the 1970s and 80s, Gaddafi’s government reportedlyformed assassination squads that tracked down and killed his opponents abroad.[56]Flight from LibyaState restrictions on the practice of Islam were the mainreason most of the men interviewed for this report said they had left Libya, thoughsome also cited more general freedom of expression issues. “I had a beardwhen I was at the university and it was obvious I used to pray,” saidMustafa Salim Ali el-Madaghi, one of the men who fled Libya in 1990 only to besent back by foreign governments. “I was afraid to show anything likethat because such an appearance was considered an act of outright opposition. Istarted to be followed by a security person…. All of this plus thecontinuous arrests of people made me decide to leave Libya because I knew thatif I stayed I would end up in prison.”[57] Anotherformer detainee, Abu Farsan, said he prayed at home and avoided the mosquebecause “going to the mosque was the route to prison.”[58]Those interviewed said that after they had left the country,a number of friends and relatives who stayed behind were harassed, detained, orkilled.[59]  Afterhe fled Libya in 1988, Sami al-Saadi said that security forces repeatedlyharassed his elderly father, even breaking into his house and beating him. Twoof Saadi’s brothers were also arrested and imprisoned in Tripoli’shigh security prison, Abu Salim, where many political prisoners were held.After being held for several years without trial, both lost their lives in the1996 Abu Salim massacre, in which prison guards killed some 1,200 prisoners aftera revolt over prison conditions.[60]All of the men interviewed for this report were in theirlate teens or early twenties when they left Libya. Some of them were foundingmembers of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG), discussed below. Afterleaving Libya, most were among a large group of Libyans who went to Afghanistanaround this time, where they joined other Libyans there fighting with rebelgroups, referred to broadly as “the mujahidin,” against Sovietmilitary forces and the Soviet-backed Afghan government.[61]The United States, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and several other governments backedthe Afghan rebels with covert funding, weapons, and training for the fighters.[62]The Saudi government for example, contributed $350 to $500 million per year forthe mujahidin through a US government controlled Swiss bank account.[63]“In Saudi Arabia, everyone was talking about the Afghan Jihad,”said Osmail Omar Gebril al-Lwatty, one of the rendered Libyans who fought inAfghanistan. “They made it so easy for us. There were camps where youcould live normally and train, in Jalalabad and Khost, then you went toPeshawar to get equipped.”[64]A well-known Palestinian cleric at the time, Abdullah Azzam,authored numerous statements and texts, one of which was published as a book, consideredby many to constitute a fatwa (legal pronouncement), in which he argued thatMuslims had a personal obligation to defend Afghanistan against the Soviets.[65]“I believed the people in Afghanistan were oppressed,” said Samial-Saadi, when explaining to Human Rights Watch what took him toAfghanistan.”[66]  Headded that the Libyans who went also viewed their time in Afghanistan as a wayto obtain military training that they could eventually use to overthrow Gaddafi.Libyan Islamic Fighting GroupThe date the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG) wasfounded is unclear. According to some senior members, the LIFG grew out of a secretgroup that was formed in Libya in the late 1980s out of frustration withGaddafi’s rule and his crackdown on organized Islamist opposition.[67]Some scholars, however, assert that the group formed in Afghanistan in the1990s.[68]“So many people think that we established our organization in Afghanistanand that it was due to the ideas in Afghanistan, but we started here in Libyain 1988,” said Mohammed al-Shoroeiya, who was the LIFG’s DeputyHead of the Military Council.[69]“We had one goal, getting rid of theGaddafi regime.” In any case, the LIFG appears to have become a moreorganized and larger entity in Afghanistan during the 1990s.[70]After the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989, astruggle to remove the Soviet-backed proxy government of Mohammed Najibullahcontinued through the early 1990s. Infighting among many Afghan factions ensuedand intensified, with many areas in Afghanistan, including Kabul, engulfed incivil war.[71] Thefighting made it difficult for many Libyans to remain in Afghanistan. The LIFGbegan covertly sending operatives into Libya, staging operations against thegovernment.[72] It alsoset up bases in Pakistan and Sudan, as well as in Europe and the Middle East. From1995 until 1998, the LIFG waged a low-level insurgency, mainly in eastern Libya,intended to overthrow Gaddafi militarily. It staged three unsuccessful attemptsto assassinate Gaddafi between 1995 and 1996.[73]“The regime was like an upside down pyramid builtupon the personality of Gaddafi. Get rid of Gaddafi and everythingchanges,” Shoroeiya said. “That was our goal.… Wedidn’t anticipate that other groups [in Afghanistan] would have ideasto fight against others in this world.”The LIFG did not formally announce its existence untilLibyan authorities discovered it in June 1995, after a clash over the rescue ofan LIFG member who was under armed guard in a hospital.[74]This clash forced the LIFG into the open and was the start of several seriousbattles between the LIFG and the Libyan government for the next three years. Thisincluded large-scale aerial bombardment of the LIFG’s strongholds ineastern Libya.[75] By1998, the government succeeded in crushing the group’s Libyan operations,and many of its members fled. Some sought asylum in the United Kingdom andelsewhere in Europe, but a large number of them returned to Afghanistan, one ofthe only locations where, according to many of those interviewed for thisreport, Libyans who did not have proper papers or documentation were able to remain.[76]“At the time there was no other country that allowed us to be togetherand train,” said Muhammad Abu Farsan, an LIFG member who had fled Libyain 1990.[77]  Manywere also drawn to the Taliban’s concept of an Islamic state.[78]At the time, many others from the region, such as Morocco and Algeria, whosought to overthrow their governments for being insufficiently Islamic, alsowent to Afghanistan.[79] Al Qaedatried to use these groups and their members to further its own aims but most of them reportedly resented these efforts.[80]Some senior members of the LIFG said that al Qaeda tried topersuade the LIFG on several occasions in 2000 and 2001 to form an alliancewith them, but that the LIFG refused.[81] At thetime, the LIFG was the largest Arab armed group in Afghanistan besides al Qaeda.[82]In meetings in Khandahar, Afghanistan, in April and May 2000,both Sami al-Saadi and Noman Benotman, senior LIFG members, said the LIFG demandedthat bin Laden cease using Afghanistan as a base from which to launchoperations.[83] Afterthe September 11, 2001 attacks, most of the core leadership of the LIFG, withsome exceptions, fled Afghanistan, sure they would be swept up inpost-September 11 arrests and unwilling to stay behind and fight with theTaliban and al Qaeda.[84] Indeed,as is documented in this report, many senior LIFG members were arrested in 2003and 2004. The biggest blow came in March 2004 when both Belhadj, head of the LIFG,and Sami al-Saadi, the LIFG’s religious leader, were taken into custody andsent back to Libya with direct US and UK participation.Years later, there was speculation that two other longtimeLIFG members—one of whom reportedly had been detained by US forces inBagram, Afghanistan, but escaped, Abu Yahya al-Libi,[85]and another who remained behind in Afghanistan after the September 11 attacks, AbuLayth al-Libi[86]—hadjoined al Qaeda.[87]In late autumn of 2007, these reports appeared to be confirmedwhen Abu Layth al-Libi announced that the LIFG had joined al Qaeda.[88]This assertion, however, was later rejected by core leaders of the LIFG, which postedstatements on several websites saying it was unauthorized. The LIFG “hadno link to the al Qaeda organisation in the past and has none now,” thestatement read.[89]In fact, by the time Abu Layth made the announcement, thecore leadership of the LIFG, then imprisoned in Libya, had already begun reconciliationtalks with the Gaddafi government.[90] The mediatorfor these talks was Saif al-Islam, one of Gaddafi’s sons.[91]Noman Benotman, a LIFG member based in the UK,was allowed to return to Libya for the talks.[92]  AbuLayth al-Libi and Abu Yahya al-Libi reportedly opposed reconciliation.[93]In January 2008, Abu Layth was reportedly killed in a US air strike.[94]Ultimately the LIFG leadership imprisoned in Libya didreconcile with the Libyan government. Part of that reconciliation involved thepublishing of a book, over 400 pages long, called “Corrective Studies inUnderstanding Jihad Accountability and the Judgment of the People,” inwhich the LIFG renounced the use of violence to achieve political aims.[95]The book was authored by six of the LIFG’s most senior members: Belhadj,Saadi, Sharif, Abd al-Wahhab (the elder brother of Abu Yahya al-Libi), Mitfahal-Duwdi, and Mustafa Qanaifid. It ultimately resulted in the early release in March2010 of three of the men interviewed for this report—Belhadj, Sharif andSaadi—along with hundreds of other prisoners.[96]Clearly some prominent LIFG members did sympathize with and even joined al Qaeda, but the announced merger  did not occur until years after the LIFG’s core leadership were detained, with US and UK help, and locked up in Libyan prisons.  All of the former LIFG membersinterviewed for this report said that the LIFG never shared the ideology of alQaeda or any of its goals. “It happened that we found ourselves in thesame place at the same time as al Qaeda: in Afghanistan, where we sometimesfought next to them when it was to liberate the country, but we were never attheir service,” said Belhadj, the head of the LIFG who would play aleading role in the resistance that overthrew Gaddafi in 2011. “There wasno other place [besides Afghanistan] for us to go,” said Saadi, the LIFG’sreligion and legal expert. He said that al Qaeda asked the LIFG to join them,as other jihadist groups had, but that the LIFG refused. “Our purpose,the object of our fight, was the Gaddafi regime and we did not want to open anyconflicts up with Western governments or with anyone besides the Gaddafi regime,”he said.[97]The US government took a different view. After September 11,2001, Gaddafi condemned the attacks against the United States, said the US governmenthad the right to retaliate, and urged Libyans to donate blood to victims. He latersaid that the United States and Libya had a common interest in fightingterrorism.[98] Shortlythereafter, on September 25, 2001, President George W. Bush signed an executiveorder freezing the assets of the LIFG in the United States.[99]One month later, senior administration officials went to Tripoli to meet withMusa Kusa, who handed over information on Libyans who he claimed were alliedwith al Qaeda, as well as the names of several Libyan militants living in the UnitedKingdom.[100] And inDecember 2004, after the United States and the United Kingdom had reconciledwith Gaddafi and a number of LIFG leaders had been sent back to Libya, the USState Department placed the LIFG on its list of terrorist groups.[101]Later the State Department elevated the LIFG to an al Qaeda “affiliate.”[102]Gaddafi’s Rapprochement with the WestGaddafi’s willingness to provide intelligence aboutIslamist armed groups, and his agreement to give up Libya’s“weapons of mass destruction” program, appear to have been key to thethawing of relations between Libya and Western governments.[103]Some correspondence in the Tripoli Documents reflects this newrelationship.[104] In September2003, Gaddafi also agreed to pay compensation to family members of those killedin the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland in 1988; inreturn, international sanctions against Libya would be lifted.[105]In February 2004 the United States opened a diplomatic mission in Tripoli and, inJune 2006, the US State Department rescinded Libya’s designation as astate sponsor of terrorism.[106] TheTripoli Documents also show that at some point in March 2004, the CIA began to setup an office in Libya.[107]On March 25, 2004, UK Prime Minister Tony Blair paid a visitto Libya, the first by a British prime minister since 1943. He and Gaddafiformally mended relations between the two countries and discussed their“common cause” in counterterrorism operations.[108]On the same day, Anglo-Dutch oil giant Shell announced it had signed a dealworth up to £550 million (approximately $1 billion US) for gasexploration rights off the Libyan coast.[109]Gaddafi’s rapprochement with the West had profoundeffects on the LIFG. After the United States added the LIFG to its officiallist of foreign terrorist organizations, the United Kingdom followed suit inOctober 2005.[110] As oneprominent LIFG member, Noman Benotman, said at the time, “Now anyone whois an enemy of Kadafi is also an enemy of the United States.”[111]After the September 11 attacks and the US-led invasion ofAfghanistan in October 2001, the Libyans who had been training with the LIFG inAfghanistan—as well as many other armed groups that had established a footholdin Afghanistan—broke apart and fled. Many of the Libyans initially wentto Pakistan and then on to Asia, Africa, and elsewhere in the Middle East. Thosewho spoke to Human Rights Watch said that they constantly feared apprehensionand that their worst fear was being captured and returned to Libya.  MustafaJawda al-Mehdi said he begged his American captors not to send him back:I informed them that I faced a real danger if they sent meback. I was wanted in Libya…. If I reached Gaddafi that was when the real‘ceremony’ was going to begin. I was so clear. I said they willkill me, they will torture me…. It was the first time I cried actually,the first tears I wept were when they told me I was being handed over to theLibyans.PLACES OF ARREST, DATES OF TRANSFER, AND TIME IN US SECRET DETENTION INAFGHANISTAN OF FIVE LIBYANS HELD IN US CUSTODYClick to expand ImageThe dates in the table areapproximations based on the accounts of the five Libyans as well ascorroborating information from other detainees thought to be held in the samelocation. For example, the transfer between the different Afghan facilities isbelieved to have been around April 25, 2004, but that may not be the exact datefor each detainee.*) The dates for Di'iki areestimates. He said he was arrested on October 12, 2003, detained in the firstlocation in Mauritania for about two to three weeks, and then in the secondplace for about two weeks. That would have occurred around November 12-19,2003. He said he was then sent to Morocco, where he was held for about onemonth.Thattook place around December 8-15, 2003. He said he was then transferred toAfghanistan in early January 2004; he thought it was around January 7, 2004. Ifthat is correct, it would mean he was in detention either in Mauritania orMorocco for longer than he thinks, or he is mistaken about the date of transferto Afghanistan. In either case, he said he was forcibly returned from a secondfacility in Afghanistan to Libya on August 22, 2004.**)The dates for the time Maghrebi was in the first and second location in Afghanistanare estimates. He said that in the first location he was in his first cell forabout two months, then another cell for about 15 days and then a third cell foranother one and a half to two months. This would put him in the first celluntil around February 10, 2004, the second cell until March 10, 2004, and thethird cell until sometime between March 10 and April 25, 2004. Several otherdetainees said they were transferred around April 25, 2004 to a second locationand Maghrebi said he was with about six other people during his transfer, so webelieve that he was moved to the second location on that same date. The April25 date is consistent with his assertion that he was held in the secondfacility for about four months and was returned to Libya on August 22, 2004with Shoroeiya and Di'iki.II. Detainee Accounts from Afghanistan and MoroccoThis section focuses on six individual cases involvingdetentions in Afghanistan or Morocco and subsequent transfers to Libya. We havegrouped them together because, of the 14 individuals interviewed by HumanRights Watch, these are the ones whose unlawful renditions to Libya were mostclearly connected to the United States. They also are the ones who spent thelongest period of time in US custody, and experienced the most serious abuse.Five of them reported being held in US-run prisons in Afghanistan for betweeneight months and two years before being transferred to Libya. Four of the fivewere detained in Pakistan before being transferred to Afghanistan and one wasdetained in Morocco before being sent to Afghanistan. A sixth individual,connected to the latter by a communication in the Tripoli Documents,[112]was also held in Morocco. Unlike the others, he was not sent to Afghanistan butrather straight to Libya from Morocco.Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed al-Shoroeiya and Khalidal-SharifClick to expand ImageMohammed al-Shoroeiya. © 2012 Human Rights WatchMohammedal-Shoroeiya (Shoroeiya)[113]and Khalid al-Sharif (Sharif)[114]are two former LIFG members whosaid they left Libya in 1991 and 1988 respectively. Pakistani authoritiesarrested the two together in Peshawar, Pakistan, in April 2003. Pakistani andUS personnel interrogated and then transferred them to US-run detentionfacilities in Afghanistan. While they were physically abused duringinterrogations in Pakistan, they said the mistreatment in Afghanistan wasmuch worse.Shoroeiyaand Sharif said that once in Afghanistan, they were detained andinterrogated—for more than a year in Shoroeiya’s case, and fortwo years in Sharif’s case—by US personnel. This included beingchained to walls naked—sometimes while diapered—in pitch black,windowless cells, for weeks or months at a time; being restrained in painfulstress positions for long periods of time, being forced into cramped spaces;being beaten and slammed into walls; being kept inside for nearly five monthswithout the ability to bathe; being denied food; being denied sleep bycontinuous, deafeningly loud Western music; and being subjected to differentforms of water torture including, in Shoroeiya’s case, waterboarding.Click to expand ImageKhalid al-Sharif © 2012 Human Rights WatchFollowingtheir US detention, they were rendered to Libya, where they were again abusedin detention. Both were eventually summarily tried and convicted, withShoroeiya sentenced to life in prison and Sharif sentenced to death by firingsquad. Sharif was released on March 23, 2010, after nearly five years inprison, as part of a negotiated agreement involving other imprisoned LIFGleaders and hundreds of other prisoners. Shoroeiya was released on February16, 2011, when the uprisings against Gaddafi began.HumanRights Watch interviewed Shoroeiya and Sharif separately on two differentdays in March 2012 in Tripoli and then again by phone from New York in May2012. Human Rights Watch also spoke to Shoroeiya in Abu Salim Prison inTripoli in April 2009. The men have been in contact with one another sincetheir release from Libyan custody.Departure from LibyaSharif was born in 1965 in Tripoli and left Libya in April1988 when he was 23 because “the situation was getting worse,” hesaid. “Our religious people were subjected to abuse. We had no ability toexpress ourselves, no choices. Even attending the mosque was a crime.” Hehad been studying pharmacology at college in Tripoli. He and some othersstarted a secret group to try and overthrow the government, but one of hisfriends was executed. After that, he and others in the group decided to leaveLibya, out of fear, but also to organize and train. Sharif left Libya for SaudiArabia, then Pakistan and Afghanistan. He became very active in the LIFG, eventuallybecoming the deputy head of the organization. In 1995 he moved to Sudan, wherehe said the LIFG started to take some action against the Libyan government. Hesaid he was forced to leave Sudan in 1996 and went to Turkey, then back toPakistan, where he lived until 2002. After the September 11 attacks, he and hisfamily went to Iran, but in Iran he was detained and forced to return to Pakistan.He arrived back in Pakistan in early 2003.[115]Shoroeiya is from Misrata in eastern Libya. He was born onMarch 22, 1969 and left Libya in 1991. He was in the middle of his studies inscience but left, he said, because of threats against committed Muslims,especially those who were students. He first went to Algeria and then to joinother members of the LIFG in Pakistan and Afghanistan. In 1995 he moved toSudan, where the LIFG was based and planning actions against the Gaddafi government.The actions drew new recruits, he said, but the Sudanese government would notallow the LIFG to train the recruits, so they moved back to Afghanistan. Heleft Afghanistan for Turkey in 1999 and married an Algerian woman, Fawziya,while there. They returned to Afghanistan in 2000 and were in Kabul during theSeptember 11 attacks, though they quickly moved to Karachi, Pakistan. He said thatfor him this was a very frightening time and that the LIFG did not agree with binLaden’s actions. He told Human Rights Watch, “[f]or us there werehuge differences between us [al Qaeda and the LIFG], but we knew that they weregoing to see us all as one group together. At that time, the US lost itsability to distinguish between people.” He began to feel that Karachi wasnot safe, so he moved to Peshawar. He wanted to try and get to Iran as other LIFGmembers had done, but his wife was pregnant so his ability to travel was limited.[116]Arrest and DetentionShoroeiya and Sharif wereboth arrested in Peshawar on April 3, 2003. Shoroeiya was living with his wife,Fawziya, and their 9-month-old daughter, Aisha. Sharif was staying on thesecond floor of Shoroeiya’s home.[117]Around noon, the house was suddenly surrounded bywhat seemed to both of them like scores of police, some in vans with blackwindows.[118]Sharif tried to escape by jumping out the windowand climbing over a wall next door. In the process he broke his foot.[119]Shoroeiya was also injured during the arrest,breaking his leg.[120]Shoroeiya was detained for about ten days in aplace he referred to as “Khyber.” Sharif said he was detained forabout seven days in a building called the “army stadium” near a fairground.Both places were in Peshawar, but it is not clear if these were the samelocations.Both men were then moved to a facility in Islamabad,Pakistan’s capital. Sharif and Shoroeiya said they were in cells next toeach other while in Islamabad.[121] Sharifsaid he knew he was in Islamabad because he had been living in Pakistan by thenfor many years and knew Islamabad well. He was not blindfolded, and on thesecond day of his arrival he was brought to a hospital in Islamabad to treathis broken foot.[122]During this period both say they were interrogated byPakistani and US personnel. Shoroeiya said there were two teams of Americans,one in Peshawar and one in Islamabad, all men. Sometimes he was hooded during interrogations,but not always. The Pakistanis at times beat him during these interrogations, insome cases after the Americans ordered them to do so. Whenever he was beaten,however, the Americans would leave the room.Sharif provided additional details of his arrest anddetention in Pakistan, including his reasons for believing his captors andinterrogators were Pakistani and American. After the arrest, he was immediatelyblindfolded and hooded. The interrogation began on the same day as the arrest,right after he was taken to the detention facility in Peshawar. He said hebelieved it was a Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) facility because duringhis detention the guards were wearing Pakistani military uniforms and theofficers, who were in civilian clothes, had a file on him.During his interrogation, Sharif’s blindfold and hoodwere taken off. He said that because of his broken foot he could not walk, and hewould be carried into the interrogation room, an American on one side, aPakistani on the other. He said the American, who spoke Arabic poorly, wouldask the questions and when Sharif did not provide an answer they seemed tothink was adequate, the Pakistani would step on his broken and untreated foot. ThePakistani officer would also beat Sharif and lash him with a whip all over hisbody.Sharif said that while he was detained in Peshawar, aPakistani officer who spoke to him in Pashto beat him. He spread Sharif’slegs apart and kicked him in his groin. The officer also hit Sharif on his headwith a whip so violently that he nearly lost consciousness. While the Pakistaniwas beating him, a different American sat on a chair right in front of him.On another occasion at the Peshawar facility, the firstAmerican asked him in his poor Arabic for help finding Abu Faraj al-Libi (nowdetained in Guantanamo). He offered millions of dollars as a reward. Thisquestioning session did not involve any physical abuse. Sharif said that duringthe final few days of his detention he was not interrogated. He was then movedto Islamabad.Both Shoroeiya and Sharif said they were interrogated byPakistanis and Americans at the facility in Islamabad. Sharif said that a fewhours after he arrived he was told he was going to be transferred to a placewhere he would be “better able to speak.” He said the comment feltlike a threat.CIA Rendition Transportation ProceduresTheaccounts of many former detainees subjected to CIA renditions between theyears 2002-2005 show standardized treatment during transfer. In most cases,the detainee was stripped of his clothes, photographed naked, andadministered a body cavity search (rectal examination). Some detainees describedthe insertion of a suppository at that time. The detainee was then dressed ina diaper. His ears were plugged, headphones were placed on his head, he wasblindfolded or provided black goggles, and his head was wrapped with bandagesand adhesive tape. The detainee’s arms and legs were shackled and hewas put into the transportation vehicle.[123](Hereinafter “CIA rendition transportation procedures”).The UNStandard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners allow the use ofinstruments of restraint when prisoners are being transferred. However, someinstruments may never be used, such as chains or irons, and others, includinghandcuffs and straitjackets, shall never be applied as a punishment.[124]The transfer of a prisoner also does not permit treatment that would amountto torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.[125] While the US wasentitled to use constraints as necessary for transporting detainees by plane,some of these methods, particularly when used in conjunction with others,appear intended to punish the detainee or were, at a minimum, degrading.After one week in Islamabad, both said they were stripped,blindfolded, handcuffed, and their legs shackled.[126]Their captors also put ear plugs in their ears and hoods over their heads.[127]Shoroeiya said that they did some additional things to him, but they werethings he could not describe to a female Human Rights Watch researcher.[128]Before being stripped, Sharif mentioned that they examined his mouth, ears, andeyes. The two said they were thentaken on a vehicle, and then boarded onto a plane.They flew for about half an hour to a location they believewas inside Afghanistan. Sharif said that after they disembarked, the detainees werethrown into the back of trucks. Sharif believed he was brought to a hangar-typefacility near Kabul airport.[129]Shoroeiya also said he was in a hangar-type facility and believed it was in ornear Bagram Air Base, which is about 40 kilometers north of Kabul airport.[130]Neither was sure of their locations but both said they knew they were inAfghanistan because of the time it took to fly to the location and the factthat the guards were dressed in traditional Afghan clothing when they firstarrived, occasionally spoke to them in Dari (the local Afghan language), andserved them Afghan food. Both knew they were detained in the same locationbecause although they never saw each other, occasionally they were able to talkto one another over the loud music that played constantly.[131]Both were detained in this first location in Afghanistan forabout a year. Shoroeiya gave the exact dates, stating that he was there fromApril 18, 2003 to April 25, 2004.[132] Sharifsaid he was there for about a year from the time he arrived from Islamabad,though he did not know the exact date of his arrival, until sometime betweenApril 20 and April 25, 2004. They were then moved to a second facility thatthey both also believed was in Afghanistan and run by Americans. Shoroeiyastayed there for about four months and Sharif for approximately one year.The following is a description of the first facility inAfghanistan, where they allege the worst abuse occurred.Afghanistan IShoroeiya and Sharif each said they were kept inalmost total darkness the entire time they were in the first facility inAfghanistan. Their cells, as well as the rooms where they were interrogated,were dark. Guards and interrogators would come to them with flashlights and insome cases strong spotlights they would shine in their eyes. In addition to thedarkness, there was loud, Western music blaring constantly.[133]Both said they were denied clothing during the first few months of theirdetention.Shoroeiya had a thin mat in his cell, while Sharifsaid he had a carpet, perhaps a mat, in his cell. Both had a bucket in theircell they were to use as a toilet. The men said that chemicals were in thebucket that, when mixed with their urine and excrement, gave off a terriblestench. Shoroeiya drew a layout of the facility where he was detained and hiscell for Human Rights Watch (see below). He was in cell one, which he said wasslightly bigger than the rest of the cells. According to Shoroeiya, there wereabout 15 cells for prisoners in this same location.[134]Click to expand ImageA sketch by Mohammed Shoroeiya depicts his cell. ©2012 Mohammed ShoroeiyaThough neither Sharif nor Shoroeiya saw otherprisoners, occasionally they were able to talk when there was a break in themusic or the volume lessened. Sharif said these periods were usually very shortso he and the other prisoners would immediately take the opportunity to shoutto each other. Once, the break lasted an entire day: “One day there was aday-long failure of the music so it was a great opportunity for us to talk,”said Sharif.[135]They would try and remember names and details of each other’s cases sothat if anyone got released, they could communicate this information to their familiesand the outside world.From this type of communication, Shoroeiya was ableto provide a list of those who he believed were detained within this facility.Some he just knew by nickname or first name and where they were from.[136]They include:[137]Abu Yasser al Jazairi, from Algeria;[138]Omeir, from Yemen;[139] Reyad,from Yemen; Khalid Sharif; Majed;[140] Nassem;Ahmad, from Malaysia; Malik, from Saudi Arabia; Mu’ad, from Syria; SalehDe’ayki;[141] IbnSheikh;[142] Marwan,from Yemen; and Ayoub.[143]From the sound of their voices and information heobtained from other prisoners, Shoroeiya drew where he believed each individualwas detained within the facility.[144]Click to expand ImageMohammed Shoroeiya drew this rough depiction of the facilityin Afghanistan where he was held for nearly a year. The typed, red writing areEnglish translations of the Arabic names Shoroeiya drew in pencil on thissketch. © 2012 Mohammed Shoroeiya.Sharif also said that he was either able to speakto, or heard the voices of, other prisoners during his detention in thisfacility:[145]Abu Nasseem al-Tunisi; Marwan al-Yemeni; Assad Allah—theson of Sheikh Ibn Omar Abdul Rahman—from Libya; Shoroeiya; Majed Adnan;[146]Salah al Di’iki;[147] someonefrom Malaysia whose name he could not remember; someone from Baluchistan; AbuAmmar, but he was not sure of his name; and Ibn Sheikh al-Libi.[148]Sharif also said he learned the names of some prisoners hewas told were there before he arrived, who he believed were transferred to Guantanamo.[149]They were:Abu al-Faraj al Libi;[150] Nuqmanfrom Zliten; Abu Ahmad; Abu Omar al Baidawi, from al Bayda; and Munir al Khomsi,from Khoms. Sharif said his cell was about 4 x 3 meters. It had a steel door in the middle anda window with steel bars over the door. On what he described as the backside ofthe cell there was also another small window.[151]Shoroeiya did not provide measurements for his cell, but he said it wasslightly bigger, and drew it as slightly bigger than Sharif’s cell.Shoroeiya’s cell also had a door with a window at the top with bars on itand a slot in the middle of the door that the guards used to pass food throughand check on him occasionally. There was a small window, about 10 x 30 centimetersthat had bars on it too, was about 13 centimeters from the ground, and providedsome ventilation.[152] Headded that it also “was a very good entrance for rats.”[153]In their cells, during the first three to four months ofinterrogation, which both called the first “period” of interrogation,each was chained to two iron rings that came out of the wall. Shoroeiya saidthe rings were about one meter above the ground. They described being chainedto these rings, sometimes by one arm so that the other arm and both legs werefree (Position 1); sometimes by both arms with both legs free or at timeschained together (Position 2); and sometimes both legs and arms were allshackled to the ring together (Position 3;). Later, after about a four-monthperiod of intense interrogation and abuse, Shoroeiya said he was allowed to beunchained in his cell and to walk freely around it.Click to expand ImagePosition 1[154]Click to expand ImagePosition 2Click to expand ImagePosition 3“Iwould try to take that time to use the bucket for a toilet I had in my room,but could not do so all the time, so I usually would just pass urine through myclothes.”Sharif said that at one point he spent two weeks in position3, with both his arms and legs shackled to the iron ring. During this time,they would unchain him only once a day for half an hour to eat the one mealthey gave him. Afterwards they would chain his hands and feet back up to thewall: “I would try to take that time to use the bucket for a toilet I hadin my room, but could not do so all the time, so I usually would just passurine through my clothes.”[155]Shoroeiya said he was in either position 1, 2, or 3 in hiscell for four months continuously after he first arrived. After four months hewas not shackled or handcuffed but was able to move freely around his celluntil he was moved to the second place of his detention in Afghanistan on April25, 2004. Both men said they were not able to shower or bathe during the firstseveral months of their detention. “For the first three months we were not able to haveany showers. We could not wash our bodies.”[156]Shoroeiya said of that same time period, “That whole time we didn’teven get a drop of water over our body.  We couldn’t cut our hair oreven the nails of our fingers. We looked horrible. We looked likemonsters.”[157] Afterthis first period, they were allowed to shower for 10 to 15 minutes weekly.They were also allowed some exposure to the sun, for a short period of time,mostly once a week for the whole year.[158]Sharif said sometimes his captors sent him to a cell wherehis hands were suspended above his head for significant periods of time. Onetime this period lasted three days. During this time he was provided limitedsustenance: They only gave me water once, at night. They gave me amilkshake and a small cup of milk with cocoa. That was all I had for threedays. They banned me from going to the restroom for those three days. I had topass urine and go to the bathroom standing up. I wasn’t wearing clothes.At night, they gave me some water to drink but poured the rest of it over mybody. I was trying to move to create some warmth in my body. Because of thelack of sleep for three days, I went hysterical. I thought I was going crazy.Everything was spinning around me and it was totally dark.[159]Click to expand ImageA sketch byMohammed Shoroeiya depicts a narrow windowless box where he said he was heldnaked for one and a half days. © 2012 Mohammed ShoroeiyaOn another occasion he said he was in a room that was about1.5 x 1.5 meters.[160] Againhis hands were suspended above his head from an iron bar that went between thewalls. His feet could touch the ground but he also could only stand on one footbecause his broken foot was still not healed. There were no windows and it wasdark, but there were small, “yellow” holes. He could see a smallred light that made him think there may have been a camera in there. They lefthim there for several hours. Shoroeiya said that when he first arrived, he was also putin a place with his hands suspended above his head in a similar position,though he describes the conditions differently. He said it was a very narrow room or box, about 0.5 meterswide and just high enough for him to stand with his hands above his head. He is1.75 meters tall. His hands were handcuffed to a bar that went across the topof the room. There were other rooms next to his. His feet could touch the floorbut he could only stand on one leg because the other leg was still broken and veryswollen. Speakers built into the walls of the box were on each side of his headjust centimeters to his ears blasting loud Western music. There were nowindows. It was dark but there was just enough light to see what he said lookedlike blood stains on the walls. He was held there, with his hands suspendedabove his head, for one and a half days, with no food, naked, with the musicblasting loudly the entire time.“I found a womanthere who was screaming and beat on the table. She literally told me,‘Now you are under the custody of the United States of America. In thisplace there will be no human rights. Since September 11, we have forgottenabout something called human rights. If you think you are going to stay herein a very good room and get your newspaper daily, you arewrong.’” Shoroeiya and Sharif both alleged this facility was run byAmericans. With one exception, however, they said the Americans were notwearing official uniforms.[161]Shoroeiya said all of the Americans were dressed in black with caps on theirheads and sometimes, when they carried out severe physical abuse, they woremasks. They were able to see some of this, despite the darkness, because guardsand interrogators would come to them with lights on their foreheads andflashlights in their hands. Afghan guards brought them food and maintained the facility,but mostly the Americans ran it. Shoroeiya said he knew the guards were Afghanbecause he spoke Dari and Pashto, and some of them spoke to him in these languageswhen he first arrived and occasionally afterwards. After some time, however,the guards stopped all interactions entirely. Shoroeiya said the guards woretraditional Afghan clothes in the beginning but then later began also wearingblack clothes with military boots and facemasks similar to the attire of theAmericans. Sharif said that when he spoke Pashto or Dari, the guards neverspoke back but would sometimes give indications that they understood what hewas saying. He also said their dress was “mixed,” with some inAfghan clothes and some all in black with black facemasks.[162]When asked how they knew they were in US custody, they eachsaid it was made very clear.Sharif said that after he arrived at the facility:I was approached by a tall, thin officer from the army [hewas in uniform] who told me he was American. He was bald, but not naturally—hishead was shaved. He had a lamp with a light on his head and was with a translator.And the room was totally dark—the only light in there was the light onhis head. He started threatening me. He said, ‘Now we can kill you and noone will know. We want to hear about your last plan to strike America. All ofwhat you said in Peshawar, we are not interested in that. We want new thingsnow.[163]Later this army officer would suddenly be very nice to Sharif,asking if his leg was hurting and promising to get him some medical attentionfor it. Shoroeiya said that withinthe complex, there were several types of rooms. One was a group of rooms where hewas interrogated. Another set of rooms were freezing cold and were used tosubmerge the prisoners in icy water while lying on plastic sheeting on theground.  A third set of rooms he called the “torture rooms,”where they used specific instruments. One of these instruments was a wood plankthat they used to abuse him with water.  Although he did not refer to the abuse he received aswaterboarding, the abuse he described fit that description.[164]The InterrogatorsShoroeiya said the interrogators, all of whom he believedwere American, came to him in three waves.[165] Thefirst group would do a sort of soft interrogation, just asking questions. Theywere wearing what Shoroeiya described as “special forces” blackuniforms with black caps on but no masks. Then the second group would come in.They were also wearing the same type of black uniforms with caps on, but unlikethe first group, had what appeared to be some sort of bodyguards with them.“They were tougher,” he said.  They had “some sort ofspecialists in this group who were very rough with us and who did the beatings,”he said. “The third group was the toughest.” They also wore thesame black uniforms, but their faces were masked. They were the ones that usedwhat he called “torture instruments:” the waterboard, the smallbox, and a tall, thin box. Sharif said the interrogators were assisted by interpreterswho, based on their accents, he believed to be from different Arab countries,possibly including Lebanon, Egypt, Algeria, and Syria.[166]Sharif also mentioned that at times he had been interrogated by women while hewas naked. It was not clear if this occurred in one or both of the places inAfghanistan where he was detained.[167]Waterboarding  Shoroeiya said the board was made of wood and could turnaround 360 degrees (see above).[168]Sometimes they would strap him onto the board and spin him around while wearinga hood that covered his nose and mouth. This would completely disorient him. Whilehe was strapped to the board with his head lower than his feet, they would pourbuckets of extremely cold water over his nose and mouth to the point that hefelt he was going to suffocate. After the hood was put over his face, he said, “thenthere is the water pouring…. They start to pour water to the point whereyou feel like you are suffocating.”[169] Whenasked how many times this was done to him, he said “a lot …alot … it happened many times ….  They pour buckets of waterall over you.”[170]Click to expand ImageA sketch by Mohammed Shoroeiya depicts a wooden board towhich he was strapped and on which his interrogators put him when he underwentabuse with water. © 2012 Mohammed ShoroeiyaShoroeiya in a later interview explained that each sessiontook about half an hour, and during this half hour he was waterboarded manytimes.[171] Hesaid he felt like each time lasted about three minutes but said there was noway to really tell time. When told that the United States had admitted to doingthis to a few people for between 20 and 40 seconds each time, he said he wassure his sessions were definitely longer than that.[172]He said: “I could hold my breath for 20, even 40 seconds, so it wasdefinitely longer than that.”[173]Theywould do this numerous times over and over again during a session. They wouldask him questions in between. He told Human Rights Watch,“They wouldn’t stop until they got some kind ofanswer from me.”He said there were doctors present. He knows they weredoctors because his leg was broken while he was there and he was treated bythese same people. The doctors would monitor him as the cold water was pouredon him, and when his body temperature got too low, they would order warm waterbe added to the cold. Once his temperature was okay, they would begin adding coldwater again.[174]In addition to waterboarding, his interrogators would alsomake a sort of basin out of a type of plastic sheeting. They would have him liedown on the floor in the basin and then pour freezing water over him. Shoroeiyasaid the water was so cold it had a gel-like, icy texture. Again, when his bodytemperature got too cold, they would pour warmer water on him. Doctors werepresent during these sessions also, monitoring his body temperature. He was oftennaked when subjected to both types of abuse with water.[175]Sharif described being subjected to a similar type oftreatment, though not with a board.[176] Hesaid he was threatened with use of the board, was shown the board, and wasaware it was being used on other prisoners, but that it was not used with him. Duringthis treatment, Sharif would be made to lie down on his back on plasticsheeting while guards would hold the sides of it up, so that when water waspoured in, it would not spill out. The water was freezing cold, with an icy,gel-like consistency. His whole body was lying in it. While this was going onhe would be made to wear a black hood made out of thick cloth over his head andthey would also pour jugs of freezing cold water directly over his nose andmouth. Sharif told Human Rights Watch:Sometimes they put a hood over my head and they lay me downand they start to put water in my mouth.… They poured the water over mymouth and nose so I had the feeling that I was drowning. I couldn’tbreathe.… I tried to turn my head left and right as much as I could totake in some gulps of breath. I felt as if I was suffocating.[177]When asked how often this happened, he said he could not besure about the number of times or how long the sessions lasted: “I really can’t be sure about the numbers. Ispent three months getting interrogated heavily during the first period andthey gave me a different type of torture every day. Sometimes they used water,sometimes not.… Sometimes they stripped me naked and sometimes they leftme clothed.”[178]Sharif said a male doctor was present during the sessionswith water.  He could feel him putting his hands on his upper arms whilehe was undergoing this treatment, as if he were measuring his body temperature.He would then tell others in the room to either continue with the treatment orstop.[179] Sharifalso said that the cast he had on his leg due to his broken foot became soft asa result of this water treatment, so the doctor put another type of cast on himthat had three sides that could be removed. They would take off his leg castbefore the sessions with water and then put it back on afterwards, binding itwith mesh.[180]Wooden Box Shoroeiya described the use of a small wooden box, about 1 x1 meter in size, with a lock on it and small holes on the sides. A number oftimes his American interrogators would threaten to lock him in the box. He saidthat he was only actually put in there on one occasion which lasted for an houror more.[181] Whilein the box, they prodded him with long thin objects through the holes on theside of the box.[182]Click to expand ImageMohammedShoroeiya said his interrogators would sometimes threaten to lock him in asmall wooden box, such as the one drawn by him above, and once did lock him inthe box.© 2012 Mohammed ShoroeiyaSharif said he was threatened with use of a box that fit thesame description, but they never actually put him inside. He told Human RightsWatch, “Then he [the interrogator] brought me a small box. They said,‘We are going to push you into this box and we will close it.That’s what’s going to happen to you if you don’t talk andtell us everything. We will squeeze you until you fit inside thisbox.’”[183]Wooden Wall Both Shoroeiya and Sharif said they at times were taken to aroom that had a wooden wall and Americans beat them against it. Sharif said, “Theyhad a ring covered with foam that they would put around my neck and then theywould push me against the wall. They were also slapping and punching my faceand torso.” Sharif explained that his back was to the wooden wall when hewas being pushed into it.[184]Sharif said that the Americans warned him that unless he wasmore cooperative, they would strap him to a table (pointing to a steel one thatwas in the room), turn him upside down and leave him like that until he died. Afghanistan IIShoroeiya said he wasmoved with other prisoners to another facility on April 25, 2004.[185] Sharif said the transfer took place sometimebetween April 20 and 25, 2004.[186] Sharif said he knew he was in a group because hecould hear voices all around him, but he was not sure who was in the group.[187] Shoroeiya believes Sharif was among those movedwith him.[188]Sharif said he went through a process similar to what hewent through when he was taken from Islamabad to the first detention facility inAfghanistan: his captors cut off all his clothes; examined his mouth, eyes, andears; took pictures of him while naked; put him back in diapers; and put himback in clothes. They then put plugs in his ears, covered his eyes, and put ahood over his head and headphones over his ears on the outside of his hood.[189]Shoroeiya described similar treatment during the move and said whenever theymoved him from place to place he went through the same process. Then they wereput in a plane and flown somewhere. The plane took off from someplace very nearwhere they were being detained. They knew this because they did not have totravel very far to get to the plane. Once they landed they were rushed to ahelicopter and flown somewhere again.[190]  After landing, they were taken to a new detention facilityabout a five minute drive from where they landed. They were sure it was stillin Afghanistan, though again, they were not sure exactly which part ofAfghanistan. “We lived in Afghanistan for a long time. We know theatmosphere and the climate there,” said Shoroeiya. “When you lookat the buildings, you can tell from the structure and the materials they aremade out of that it is Afghanistan.”[191] Boththought they might have been taken to a location not far from where they werepreviously detained, but neither could be sure. They suspected the plane andhelicopter flights were intended to deceive them into thinking they had beenmoved far away because their captors, who they again alleged were Americans,seemed to go to a lot of effort, in addition to the flights, to make them thinkthey were somewhere else.[192] Theybrought in food from places like Turkey and Germany, Shoroeiya said.[193]They asked them where they thought they were and when they answeredAfghanistan, they asked them, “Why, how can you be sure?”[194]Shoroeiya said the structure of the second location differedfrom the first in that it was more like a building than a hangar.[195]Sharif also said the facility was much newer: “This place was brand new.We could tell it was new because everything in it was new, even the toilets,and there were all new cameras, and all new microphones and speakers everywhere.”[196]Shoroeiya also said there were cameras everywhere.[197]In the prior location, Sharif said, there were not cameras and microphoneseverywhere, just loudspeakers.Shoroeiya described the building itself where the cells werecontained as being “closed and tight.”[198]The cells themselves had only a door, not a gate, and there was “noventilation at all in there.”[199] Sharifalso said “it was all closed in, no bars, just walls.”[200]This time, they both said, they were not handcuffed to a round steel ringconnected to a wall but to a long chain that was connected to the floor oftheir cell.[201]“We were locked to the floor like animals. You couldwalk around but your legs were still chained.”[202]Sharif said he had a toilet and a basin as well as amattress in his cell.[203] Healso said there was a very loud noise, like the sound of a turbine, going onall the time. “When the door to your cell opened, you could hear it veryloudly but if your door was kept closed, you couldn’t hear it aswell,” Sharif said. “It kept us from being able to speak to eachother.”[204] Loudmusic was also played at times, but it was not continuous like it was in theother location, Sharif said. In this location, both Shoroeiya and Sharif said there wasnot the same kind of physical abuse there was in the other location. It wasmore just isolation, restraint, use of music and noise, and continuousinterrogation. Sharif told Human Rights Watch,The whole period of my detention they were interrogatingme. I can’t remember a time I spent more than two days withoutinterrogation. They brought me photos of people from all over the world, photographedin other countries, and they would ask, “Do you know this guy, do yourecognize him?” When I would say no, they were astonished. They wouldsay: “How come you don’t know this guy? He was in Pakistan, howcome you don’t know him?”[205]Shoroeiya said there were intrusive searches and roughtreatment, but it was more psychological abuse—not treatment with instrumentsas in the first location. The American interrogators here were in civilianclothes, not masked and not wearing black.[206] Theguards were Afghans and, like the guards at the prior location, wore all black uniformsand facemasks. According to Shoroeiya, however, the guards at the secondlocation looked “neater” and were not the same guards as at thefirst location.[207]Shoroeiya’sTransfer and Treatment in LibyaShoroeiya was sent back to Libya on August 22, 2004. He wasthreatened many times with being sent back to Libya, but on the day it happenedthey did not let him know where he was being taken.[208]“I didn’t realize I was back in Libya until Iactually arrived in Tripoli,” he said. “It was a horrifyingfeeling. It was terrible.… We knew that Gaddafi had been treatingpeople, especially from our group, in a very bad way.”[209]After he arrived, Shoroeiya was housed in several differentprisons, including Tajoura, al Nasser bureau, Sikka, Ajn Zara, and finally AbuSalim, where he was taken in 2006. Initially he was not mistreated. He saidthat foreign intelligence chief Musa Kusa personally told him upon arrival thatthere was some kind of agreement with the United States not to mistreat thosewho were transferred back to Libya with US assistance. Though he was not abusedpersonally, he heard and saw other prisoners (who had not been sent back withUS assistance), being abused. After about six months he too was abused, he said.In addition to long periods of solitary confinement, the guards punched him andbeat him with sticks, steel pipes, and electrical cables that were used as awhip. He was bloodied and bruised, but the abuse never resulted in broken orfractured bones. The physical abuse was sporadic and mostly occurred in oneprison on Sikka Road. Conditions improved once he got to Abu Salim prisonsometime around 2006. He had been allowed to see his Algerian wife, Fawziya, andhis child, Aisha, for the first time in September 2004. The last time he hadseen Aisha, she was nine months old. “By this time [she] was runningaround and talking,” he said.[210] He sawthem again two months later, but then not again until April 2006. After that hereceived four visits and then no visits for another two years, after which hewas able to see his family for about half an hour every 60 days. Several monthsafter her husband was apprehended in Pakistan, Fawziya contacted the Libyanembassy in Pakistan. They did not have any information on her husband’swhereabouts, but made arrangements for her and her daughter to go to Libya tobe with Shoroeiya’s family. She had never been to Libya before. It was notuntil August 2004 that she had any news about her husband. “The firsttime I knew he was alive was when the Americans handed him over to MusaKusa,” she told Human Rights Watch.[211]After several years of detention without charge, Shoroeiya wasfinally taken to court. On his first appearance, the court read out thecharges; the next time, the court appointed him a lawyer; and the third time,the court sentenced him to life in prison.[212] Hetold Human Rights Watch,“It was like an absurd play. I was presented to thecourt in June, met my lawyer once, and then they sentenced me in July. Thewhole thing, the three days combined, took about an hour.”Despite the sentence, hesaid he still was hopeful that he would one day be released. “In allhonesty, I could even imagine us sitting here like we are right now, having aconversation,” he said. “I knew there were people like [HumanRights Watch] out there trying to get the truth, letting people know aboutGaddafi and all that was going on at Bagram.” Shoroeiya was imprisoned untilFebruary 16, 2011, when the uprising began against Gaddafi. Shoroeiya said the most difficult thing him while in Libyancustody was that he knew how his detention was affecting his family. He said,“The biggest suffering for any prisoner like myselfwas the situation with our families. When my daughter comes to me and says theyprevented her from going to school or my wife comes to me and says shedoesn’t have a dime to spend, that is suffering. You asked me about thephysical abuse. That was number 10 on the list of the worst things that I wasgoing through.”[213]Sharif’s Transferand Treatment in LibyaSharif was not returned to Libya until many months after Shoroeiya.Prior to this, his American interrogators frequently asked him what he thoughtthey should do with him. This question was one of the “most disturbingthings to me psychologically,” he told Human Rights Watch. By then, hesaid, “it was clear—they knew I was not associated with al Qaedaand was not a threat to the US.  They kept asking me ‘What is thesolution for you? We are not just going to open the door for you and let yougo.’” He suggested they help him get political asylum in anothercountry; he promised to respect the laws of that country and begged them not totransfer him to Libya. “I will sign any document … [b]ut please,don’t send me back to Libya. If you send me back there I will be sentencedto death and killed,” he said he told them. Despite his pleas, Sharif was transferred to Libya on April20, 2005. His US captors secured his hands, blindfolded him, took off hisclothes, examined his body, and took photographs of him naked.[214]They then drove him by car somewhere five or ten minutes away. When they tookthe hood off his head, he found himself in a shipping container and his arm washandcuffed to a steel ring welded to the wall of the container. The containerwas in a hangar that appeared to be some sort of military storage facility. Hesaid he could tell because it was filled with boxes of ammunition and othermilitary equipment, even large airplane bombs. At that point he was informed hewas being transported to Libya. “I felt like this was the end,” hetold Human Rights Watch. “I am a military opponent of the Gaddafi regime,a leader of an armed group against Gaddafi, that participated in actionsagainst him, and now I am going to be handed over, delivered to him.” Sharif said that once in Libya, although he was held inextreme isolation for prolonged periods of time, he was not physically abused.“Fortunately, it was the destiny of God or my fate that during this time,Gaddafi was trying to brighten his image with the outside world and build goodrelationships with the West,” he said. The periods of solitary confinementwere extremely difficult: “Even in the cells next to me, there was noone. For six months I was kept like that, not able to talk. Every morning theywould bring you what you were going to eat and then leave. … I could noteven hear people walking to and from the bathroom or hear anyone moving around.I was totally and completely alone.”  Unlike Shoroeiya and others, he was held in just twolocations: Tajoura, in the same cell for two years and eight months, and thenAbu Salim. In January 2008 he was taken to court, convicted of attempting tooverthrow the regime, and sentenced to death by firing squad.  He saidthat at one point he was interrogated by individuals speaking French who saidthey were from the French intelligence service. He was allowed family visitssporadically in the beginning, denied them entirely for a year, and then laterallowed to receive regular visits once every two months. Sharif was released,along with Belhadj and Saadi, on March 23, 2010 after the three publicly renouncedtheir aim of overthrowing the government and the use of violence as a means topolitical change.[215] Sharif was arrested again on April 28, 2011, alittle over two months after the Libyan uprising began. During this period heoften witnessed physical abuse including beatings, sometimes with iron rods,and beards being lit on fire, among other things. We did not determine how longSharif was detained during this period or when he was ultimatelyreleased.  He is currently head of the Libyan National Guard. One of hisresponsibilities is security in facilities holding high value detainees, mostlyofficials of the former Gaddafi government, who are now in the custody of thecurrent Libyan government.Majid Mokhtar Sasy al-MaghrebiClick to expand ImageMajid al-Maghrebi. © 2012 Human Rights WatchMajidal-Maghrebi (Maghrebi)[216] is a former LIFG member who leftLibya in 1989. He was arrested in Pakistan in 2003 and detained andill-treated by Pakistani authorities as well as interrogated by persons hebelieves were Americans. He was then transferred to Afghanistan, where he washeld by the United States. He said US personnel interrogated and physicallymistreated him for about eight months. The United States then rendered him toLibya, where he was again subjected to abuse. He was summarily tried andconvicted in Libya of trying to overthrow the government and was sentenced to10 years in prison. He was released on February 16, 2011 when the uprisingsagainst Gaddafi began.HumanRights Watch interviewed Maghrebi in Tripoli in March 2012. The informationin this section is drawn from that interview, unless otherwise noted.[217]Departure from LibyaMaghrebi was born in 1970. He said he left Libya in November1989 at the age of 19 because the government had made it clear to him that anyonewho was serious about practicing Islam was a target. The authorities came tohis house looking for him and some of his friends were arrested, detained, andeven killed. “I feared for my life, so I decided to leave.” Maghrebi left from Benghazi and traveled through Egypt and SaudiArabia before arriving in Afghanistan in December 1989. There he joined up withother Libyans to become part of the LIFG. Two friends decided to return toLibya to take part in LIFG operations against the government, but Maghrebi feltit was too dangerous. His friends were arrested, sent to Abu Salim prison, andkilled in the Abu Salim massacre of 1996. Maghrebi remained in Afghanistan, training in Libyan camps,until after the Soviet-backed Afghan government was overthrown in 1992. He toldHuman Rights Watch, “[w]e didn’t interfere in the Afghan matter.Our aim was to get rid of the Libyan regime. The Afghan jihad helped me trainin how to use guns.” He went to Syria and Saudi Arabia twice, and thenfrom 1995 to 1997 he was with the LIFG in Sudan. From Sudan the LIFG attemptedto infiltrate Libya and conduct operations against Gaddafi, which failed. Hethen went to Pakistan, got married in Peshawar in 1998, and moved to Kabul. Hewas with the LIFG in Afghanistan in 2000. After the September 11 attacks, he returnedto Peshawar. Pakistan   Maghrebi said that he did not feel Peshawar was safe for himand he moved with his wife and two sons from apartment to apartment. OnNovember 14, 2003 at 1 a.m., Pakistani authorities arrested him at home. Theytook him to a facility that he believes was in Peshawar and detained him therefor 39 days. During this time, Pakistani authorities, who spoke to him inPashto, repeatedly interrogated him, beating and otherwise ill-treating him. Inaddition to slapping and punching him, they repeatedly struck him on his bareback with a bamboo stick and a whip made of thick leather. He was not sure thenumber of times this occurred but estimated about 15 separate occasions.“I was screaming and crying openly,” he said. He said that on oneoccasion his interrogators used electric shocks on his feet until he lostconsciousness. They did this multiple times that day. Also, nearly every day,they took him downstairs to a room where he was forced to lie on his stomachwith his hands handcuffed to the top of a steel frame and his feet handcuffedat the bottom. They would take a rope and tie it around his shackled feet andpull his legs towards his head, stretching him painfully. Maghrebi said that during his detention in Peshawar, he wasinterrogated on two occasions by individuals he believes were from the United States—oncea few days after he arrived and another time about half-way through his periodof confinement. He was blindfolded, so his vision was mostly obstructed, but hebelieves they were American because he could recognize their American accents;unlike the Pakistanis who spoke to him in Pashto, they spoke to him in very badArabic, and they asked him questions that concerned the United States such asthe whereabouts of Osama bin Laden and Abu Faraz al Libi (who, as previouslynoted, is now detained in Guantanamo). The Americans were not present when he wasbeing beaten, but he thinks it was very unlikely they were not aware of hismistreatment given his physical condition. He also said that during this timehe could hear the screams and pleas for mercy from other prisoners beingabused. He told Human Rights Watch,“I can still hear the voice of one of the guys in myhead asking them to stop, saying blood was coming out of his mouth.”In late 2003, Maghrebi was taken to a villa somewhere inIslamabad. After a day and a half, guards blindfolded and handcuffed him andtook him to a car. In the car, several people spoke English and Arabic with abroken accent then pushed him down on his stomach. Using apparent CIA renditiontransportation procedures, his captors cut off all his clothes, put somethingin his anus using a plastic applicator, and put him in diapers. Then they putearplugs in his ears, headphones on his head, and bandages all around his headand eyes so he could not see. Then they wrapped adhesive tape all around him.He also felt he was being chained but is not sure. They took him to a plane andthrew him in, “like I was a piece of luggage.”[218]Based on the period of time that passedbetween when they took off and landed, he assumed they had taken him to Bagramin Afghanistan, where the United States was known to be holding many detainees.Afghanistan IMaghrebi said that after his arrival in a facility inAfghanistan, he was detained in a few different cells in the facility. Eachusually had a thin blanket and a bucket to use as a toilet. His first cell,where he was held for just a short time, was about 2 x 2.5 meters in size. Ithad a thin mattress when he first arrived, which was taken away after a fewdays. His cell had almost no light. He told Human Rights Watch, “[i]t wasso dark I couldn’t find the bucket to use as a toilet. I banged my headagainst the wall.” Loud Western music blared almost constantly the entiretime of his detention. At some point, he overheard Shoroeiya and Sharif talkingloudly over the music, and they were able to converse a little.[219]He said he was denied food for the first five days after his arrival. He was sosick he called for a doctor, but when the doctor came he behaved like aninterrogator. One night the “doctor” stripped him of all hisclothes, shackled him to the wall naked, and took away his blankets. Maghrebisaid he was left in that position the entire night.After being held in the first cell, he was taken to adifferent room and interrogated particularly harshly. He said his interrogatorscut off his clothes with scissors, shaved off all his body hair, and put him indiapers.[220] Theyhandcuffed his arms to something above his head and shackled his legs beneathhim to the floor. They kept him in that position for what he said felt likeabout 15 days, only taking him out of the room roughly five times forquestioning. He said, “I was there for 15 days, hanging from my arms,another chain from the ground. They put a diaper on me but it overflowed sothere was every type of stool everywhere, the temperature was freezing.”[221]Loud music was blaring constantly. He could touch the floor,but his legs became very swollen while restrained in this position. He said hestarted having delusions; once he was sure he saw his wife and one of hischildren in front of him. Sometimes the interrogations that took place duringthese 15 days were conducted in front of a woman while Maghrebi was naked. Theywould take his diaper off for these interrogations. The day they released himfrom detention in this room, they brought him to the showers, chained one armto the wall and told him to shower. They were watching him, but he could notmove his arms to bathe so they had to bathe him.He said that his next cell was completely dark. He washandcuffed to a steel ring low to the ground, sometimes by one arm so the otherarm and both legs were free; sometimes by both arms but legs shackled together;and at times with both arms and legs handcuffed together on the same steelring. These are the same positions that Shoroeiya and Sharif described beingdetained in. (See illustrations and descriptions above). Sometimes they wouldtake him to another room and shackle his hands and feet together to the bottomof the table and keep him there for hours. Towards the end of his time in thiscell, he was permitted to walk around freely in his cell but with his arms handcuffedand his feet shackled together.  While he was detained, his captors brought him unclean water,for prayers and drinking. “We could see inside the bottles, there wasthis green fungus,” he said. “Sometimes there would be bugs in myfood. Once when this happened it made me cry.” After one and a half to two months in this third cell, theymoved him to a different place. They used the same transfer procedures as theyhad utilized when transporting him to the first site.[222]Afghanistan IIMaghrebi, like Sharif and Shoroeiya, was taken to a secondlocation first by airplane, then by helicopter. He added that they moved him bycar from the helicopter to his place of detention. He did not know who else waswith him, but he was counting the chains trying to figure out the number ofother prisoners and thought there were about six. At this next location he wasput in a cell that was about 2 x 2 meters in size. He was kept naked in thiscell, which had a camera and speakers, for about two of the four months he wasthere. His legs were shackled together, but from time to time his hands werefree. He had no mattress but a very small rug that he used at night to try andcover himself up. It was cold. There were other prisoners there and they usedto call out to each other. Once he called out to Di’iki (see full casedescription in later section), who answered him. He was hooded some of the time,but his interrogators would take the hood off during questioning. Maghrebi told Human Rights Watch that his interrogatorsspoke English and looked like Americans or Westerners. They had Arabic-speakinginterpreters with them, who he believed were Americans from different countriesof origin. Though he was not clear about how he knew this, he said one of theinterpreters was a woman of Lebanese ancestry and the other two were men, one ofEgyptian ancestry and the other of Moroccan ancestry. He counted the number ofinterrogators and said there were exactly 17. Maghrebi told Human Rights Watch that he nearly went insanein this cell. At one point he began banging his head against the wall andstopped eating. Reacting to this, guards chained him again to the wall and putcushions on the wall and on the ground that would prevent him from injuring himself.He said, “I screamed ‘I want to die, why don’t youjust kill me?’”They then restrained him with a belt and started“pretending to be nice,” bringing him a carpet for praying and aQuran. They bathed him, tried to convince him to eat, and took him to a doctor.It was around this time that they told him that they would be taking himsomeplace else, though they did not say where. This place later turned out tobe Libya. On various occasions while detained in both prisons, he wasphotographed while naked from many different angles. Transfer and Treatmentin LibyaMaghrebi said he was returned to Libya on August 22, 2004.His American captors prepared him for transport using the exact same proceduresthat they had employed when moving him from Pakistan to the first detentioncenter in Afghanistan and then from there to his current location. He thoughthe was going to Guantanamo, but instead they took him to Libya.Maghrebi was put into what he described as a container andsaw Di’iki and Shoroeiya in front of him. After he arrived he was housedin a number of different prisons in Libya over a long period of time. The firstprison was Tajoura, where he was held for nine months. There he was beaten andthreatened with rape. He was then taken to an internal intelligence building,Amen Dakhali, then another prison on Sikka Road, then Abu Salim prison, then alNasser bureau, then Ajn Zara (or Enzara), and then again to Abu Salim for theduration of his detention. After being detained without charge for nearly two years, hewas charged in December 2007 with attempting to overthrow the government,summarily tried, and sentenced to 10 years in prison. He said that during his incarcerationhe was beaten many times, once so badly that he lost a tooth after beingpunched in the jaw. He was also put into solitary confinement for long periods,though for how long was not clear. He did not have contact with his wife untilApril 2005. At that time he learned that one of his two sons, age 6, had died. Hesaw his brother for the first time on July 22, 2006 and learned that his motherhad died of cancer four months earlier. Maghrebi was released on February 16,2011. Saleh Hadiyah Abu Abdullah Di’ikiSalehHadiyah Abu Abdullah Di’iki (Di’iki)[223] is a former LIFG member who was inUS custody before being returned to Libya. He left Libya in 1990, spent timetraining and fighting against the Soviet-installed Afghan government, andeventually ended up in Mauritania. In 2003 Mauritanian authorities arrestedhim. Both the Mauritanians as well as individuals he alleges were Israeli andAmerican interrogated him. The Mauritanian authorities then transferred himto Morocco, where he believes he was again interrogated by Americans. USauthorities transferred him from Morocco to Afghanistan, where US personneldetained, interrogated, and ill-treated him. The United States eventuallytransferred him to Libya, where he was detained for years before being triedand sentenced to life in prison. He was released when the uprising againstGaddafi began in February 2011 but then re-arrested shortly thereafter anddetained and mistreated until Gaddafi’s forces fell that August. HumanRights Watch interviewed Di’iki over the course of two days in March2012 in Tripoli and then again by phone from New York in May 2012. Theinformation in this section is drawn from these two interviews unlessotherwise noted.[224]Departure from LibyaDi’iki was born in 1973 and was 17 years old when heleft Libya in 1990. He had been studying applied engineering but had not yetfinished his studies. He said he left Libya due to abuse and harassment againstdevout Muslims at the time. He first went to Pakistan and Afghanistan, where hebecame part of the LIFG, trained in Libyan camps, and participated in fightingagainst the formerly Soviet-backed government of Mohammad Najibullah. He saidthat after the Najibullah government fell in 1992, infighting among thedifferent Afghan armed factions made it difficult for Libyans to remain, so heleft the country in late 1992 for Mauritania. He said he lived in Mauritania untilJune 1998 and, while there, pursued religious studies, worked with the LIFG,and got married. He travelled to Syria and then back to the Afghanistan-Pakistanregion in 2000. He said that on September 11, 2001 he was in Karachi, Pakistan.After the attacks, he went to Iran via Afghanistan, then to Malaysia, and thenback to Mauritania. Arrest and DetentionMauritanian authorities arrested Di’iki on October 12,2003 and took him to the headquarters of the main military intelligence agency,where he was interrogated for two to three weeks. He said that after two weeks,the Mauritanian authorities informed him that they had no problem with him butthat the Americans wanted him detained. Then a second group of interrogatorscame.  They spoke Arabic but did not seem to be Mauritanian. He said aMauritanian official told him that these interrogators were Israeli. They tookhim to a villa, which was called Kufra Zeina, asked him many questions aboutIsrael, and accused him of planning to use his car to blow up the Israeliembassy in Mauritania. Di’iki called these allegations“ridiculous.” Then he was taken back to military intelligenceheadquarters where the senior official there, Abdullah, told him that someonefrom the United States had come to ask him some questions. Di’iki saidthat the American, who spoke to him in French, was perhaps under 30, of mediumheight, with white skin and blond hair, and wearing glasses and military boots.The man questioned him for one day. Di’iki remained at the militaryintelligence building for another two weeks. One day at noon, Mauritanian authorities handcuffed him andtook him to the airport. They told him he was being taken to Morocco because hehad a Moroccan passport. He said the Mauritanian authorities were well aware hewas Libyan. He had told them he only had a Moroccan passport because he could notget a Libyan one. At the airport there was a small Fokker aircraft for 14passengers waiting for them. When he arrived in Morocco, Moroccan agents tookhim to a prison where he said there were a lot of names on the walls of peoplewho were eventually taken to Guantanamo. One he remembers was a Yemeni, Ramzibin al-Shibh.[225] Di’ikitold Human Rights Watch, “He had written on the wall, ‘For the onewho is going to read this, I am Ramzi bin al-Shibh and for anyone who can readthese lines, I ask him to please inform my family in Yemen that I believe thaton this date ___ I will be transferred to Guantanamo tomorrow.’”Di’iki could not remember the date.  Another was Kuwaiti, but hecouldn’t remember his name. In Morocco, Di’iki was detained for about one month. Hesaid his detention conditions were not that bad. His cell was made of stone,had a window and a mattress on the floor. “If you want to compare it tothe other places I was later held,” he said, “it was fivestars.” He was able to communicate with one other prisoner, Abu Omaral-Maghrebi.[226] Theothers were too afraid to talk. Abu Omar al-Maghrebi confirmed that he was inMorocco, but the food and the guards who identified themselves as Moroccan andspoke Arabic with a Moroccan accent also made this clear. Di’iki and AbuOmar al-Maghrebi would signal by banging on the walls that it was safe to speakand then they would whisper to each other through the wall very carefully so asnot to be heard. Abu Omar al-Maghrebi said he had come from Guantanamo and thatall the prisoners where the two of them were being held at the time seemed tobe taken to either Guantanamo or Bagram. Di’iki said that in Morocco he was interrogated by awoman who he believes was American. She was tall, blonde, with light green eyes,about 35 years old, and wore civilian clothes and the same type of militaryboots that the American interrogator in Mauritania wore. She spoke with anAmerican accent and used a female Tunisian interpreter. She interrogated himabout four or five times over the course of about two weeks. He said she wascontinuously angry with him. He was blindfolded in the beginning, but then shehad the blindfold removed, saying that she was not afraid of “you Arabicpeople.” When he asked if he could call his wife, who was seven monthspregnant, the interrogator accused him of being insensitive to the crimes that“his people” had committed. After a month, his guards took him to a place where he couldhear a plane. This was sometime in early January 2004, possibly January 7.Another detainee was there—he could hear him walking—and he countedsix American guards. They used mainly sign language, but sometimes they said aword or two in English, which they spoke with an American accent. They woremilitary uniforms with American flags on them and had masks on their faces. Hesaid he saw from the eyeholes cut out of their masks that two had light skin andone had dark skin.  They told him to bathe, and if he didn’t do ithimself, they said they would bathe him. His Moroccan handcuffs were removedand he was re-handcuffed and his legs shackled. They cut off all his clothesusing scissors. He told Human Rights Watch,  “I was totally naked…Then they did horriblethings to me that I can’t talk about. They didn’t rape me but theydid terribly humiliating things.”Then they diapered him, put patches over his eyes, plugs inhis ears, and a hood over his head. Then they wrapped him in what he describedas adhesive tape all around his head. He said every time they moved him to anew place they went through this same procedure.[227]Then they took him to the plane and threw him in the back. They lay him on oneside and bound him by rope. It was a very long trip and from time to time someonehe believed was a doctor would come around and put something on his finger,which appeared designed to check his pulse. The person also examined his nose. Afghanistan IDi’iki said that after arrival he was put in a cellapproximately 2 x 2 meters. The cell was one of approximately 15 to 20 thatwere in a big hangar. His was “very simple,” with no paint on thewalls and iron doors. He was handcuffed and his feet shackled for one month.After that he was attached by one arm to a steel ring attached to the wall ofhis cell, the position described by Shoroeiya, Sharif, and Maghrebi. He said a number offactors led him to the conclusion that he was in Afghanistan. Even though theguards wore masks and rarely spoke to him, sometimes they wore traditionalAfghan clothes and they fed him Afghan food.[228] The Afghan bread specifically, he said, is verydistinctive. Also, though they clearly were not supposed to, some of the guardsspoke to him in Pashto.[229] Sometimes he could see a little bit of theirbeards, too. After some time, they began to take him out once a week for about15 minutes of exposure to sunlight. When they did this it was usually aroundnoon. They would stand him in front of a wall, and on several occasions hecould hear children playing nearby, speaking in Pashto.[230]  At some point, his captors asked him wherehe thought he was. He told them Afghanistan and said he could tell because ofthe texture of the soil and the structure of the buildings.[231]Other than the briefoutdoor sessions and weekly baths that he was allowed to take after some time,his captors only took him out of his cell to interrogate him. Much of this timehe was kept naked, though it is not clear for how long. He went on a hungerstrike over this, asking only for clothes because he said it is forbidden inIslam to pray while naked. He said,“At that moment, if I had found anything in Sharia[Islamic law] that would have allowed me to commit suicide, I would have doneit. But there is nothing. Suicide is prohibited in our religion.”There was a loudspeaker over his head that played loud Westernmusic continuously. He said, “Even if the music they were putting on wassomething nice, you would end up hating it because they were playing it soloud.” It was dark almost all the time, but every now and then the lightswould come on—he thought usually because of some power failure or othermalfunction.  His interrogators would come to him with flashlights. Hebelieves his interrogators wore civilian clothes but had military boots on andthe American guards wore military uniforms. Several of the interrogators werefemale. They all spoke English and used interpreters. He thought some of theseinterpreters were American as well because their Arabic had a strong American accent.Di’iki described his cell as rat and insect infested.“We know most rats are afraid of humans but these ones were soirreverent, going all over my head and body,” he said.  He told Human Rights Watch that this was the first time hehad described his confinement in detail and that in doing so he felt a sense ofrelief. He was not sure he could adequately convey the abuse he received: “They were taking good care to harm me withpsychological abuses. The concentration was on humiliating me. It was notreally physical abuse…. What they did to me was so humiliating I am notsure I can explain it properly—especially forcing me to be naked.”Sometimes when the music was low, he would speak to otherprisoners. He remembers speaking to Shoroeiya, Maghrebi, and Sharif. He alsoheard the voices of two people from Yemen and one from Algeria, but he did notremember their names. He said their voices seemed like they were close to him. Shoroeiyaand Maghrebi, he said, were both on his plane back to Libya in August 2004. Afghanistan IIDi’iki said that after four months in the first placeof detention, he was moved to another location. This would have been sometimein late April 2004. When they moved him, they used the same CIA rendition transportationprocedures that were used before.[232] He wasthen taken to the next location either by helicopter or plane or both, he couldnot remember. He did not know who else was on the flight with him. They arrivedat night, which he could tell because they took off his hood and blindfold. In this location they seemed to be making a lot of effort toget him to think he was no longer in Afghanistan. They brought in differentkinds of non-Afghan food in cans. He told Human Rights Watch, “I find itvery strange that the Americans were so intent on obscuring the fact that I wasin Afghanistan. In the second place they tried to change the entire set up andI don’t know if it was just for me or for everyone else but they even triedto change the food, they gave me canned food, to try and obscure the fact thatI was in Afghanistan.” Nevertheless, Di’iki said he could tell he was still inAfghanistan by the guards, who on one or two occasions accidentally spoke tohim in Dari. His cell was bigger than it was in the other location, thoughstill about 2 x 2 meters, but unlike the first location there was not a lot ofdistance between each cell. The structure was more like a building and was muchbigger and newer. The first place was much simpler, less polished, and seemedto be an older facility, made out of mud, bricks, and stones. His cell in the second facility was gray, including paintedconcrete floors that had a lacquer finish. His cell had two doors, one in frontof the other. His feet were shackled the entire three to four months he wasthere, but not to the wall, so he was able to walk around. Occasionally, hishands were cuffed as well. There was a camera in his cell in this secondlocation. In the middle of the room there was a hole connected to a sewage lineso his whole cell smelled every time a toilet flushed. There was loud musicplaying constantly, but it seemed to be mostly outside his cell, not inside.They also played other sounds, like the sound of water dripping or the sound ofan electric shock. They would use the loud electric shock sound sometimes towake the detainees up.For his first few weeks in the new facility he was keptnaked. They gave him just one blanket that was very rough. He described it asbeing “like from World War II. When I tried to use it, it was so prickly,it was like getting acupuncture.” There was no mattress. He again went on hunger strike, asking for clothes, amattress, a different cell, and to be told the direction of Mecca for prayer. Hesaid he was also very sick during this time, but “by the grace of God,”managed to sleep about three quarters of the time. Sometimes a doctor wouldcome in to check on him, picking up an arm or a leg. He has a thyroid glandproblem that requires medication and rest but he did not tell anyone about itbecause he was afraid they would use it against him. Before his detention heweighed between 95 and 100 kilos (209 and 220 pounds) but by the time hearrived back in Libya, he was 70 kilos (154 pounds), a loss of some 25 to 30kilos (approximately 55 to 66 pounds). He is about 185 centimeters tall (approximately6 feet 1 inch).He said he faced fewer questions and interrogations in thissecond location. The interrogators, who he believed were Americans, wouldmostly just bring him photographs, asking him if he knew the person in them andsome questions about the people in the photos. As in the first location, theinterrogators wore civilian clothes. There again were American guards inmilitary uniform, but they appeared to play more of a supervisory role over theAfghan guards, who at this location wore all black with facemasks rather than traditionalAfghan clothes. Although the interrogations were less intensive, he feltthat time in this location was more difficult from a psychological perspectivebecause of the isolation. It was more difficult to communicate with others and detectthe passage of time. This and the lack of knowledge about his future—howlong he was going to be there and what they were going to do to him—madehis time in this facility very difficult: “When you are in a place like this … when youare alone and talking to no one, life is stopped. Nothing is new. The onlything new going on is the interrogations.… I can guarantee they havestudied psychology very well.”Di’iki said thatdespite the circumstances, it was possible to find some humanity. He could tellthat the interpreter used by a doctor did not agree with the way he and theother prisoners were being treated and once got into an argument with thedoctor over it in front of Di’iki. “This young man, every chance hegot, he would try and throw a smile or a joke my way,” Di’iki said,“trying to cheer me up, show me some kindness.” He stillappreciates this small show of support from the interpreter.Transfer and Treatmentin LibyaDi’iki said one day, which he later learnedwas August 22, 2004, his captors told him he would be transferred the followingday, but did not say where. He thought he would be taken to Guantanamo. Theytook off his metal handcuffs and put on plastic ones. Prior to that, however,they put him through the same CIA rendition transportation procedures[233]as they had on previous occasions, except this time, the man he believed was a doctortook photos of him while he was naked. Then they put him in a shippingcontainer.For a moment his blindfold was taken off and hesaw Shoroeiya on the floor of the container. On the plane back to Libya hecould tell that he was sitting next to someone but did not know whom. It was notuntil he heard the driver say “back up” using the Libyan wordderived from Italian, indetro, that he realized he was in Libya. He toldHuman Rights Watch,“When I realized I was being sent back to Libya, Ithought they would hang me by my tongue. There was a guy from the east thatdied that way and I was sure, because of what I had been writing and sayingabout the regime, I would die that way too.”Upon arrival his blindfold was removed and he wasput in a car with Maghrebi in which he was driven to Tajoura prison. Di’iki was detained in solitary confinement atTajoura until May 2005. Then he was taken to Ain Zara, where he remained for 13months. Then around June 2006 he was moved to Abu Salim, where he remained forthe duration of his detention. He was not physically abused while in detentionin Libya. While detained in Ain Zara, he saw his wife for the first time sincehis return. Following that visit he had no family contact for about two years. Whenhe was moved to Abu Salim in 2009, however, the visits became more regular. After being detained without trial for years, Di’ikiwas charged with attempting to overthrow the government and, after a summarytrial, was sentenced to life in prison. He was released on February 16, 2011when the uprisings against Gaddafi began but was arrested again on June 18,2011 and held until Tripoli fell to rebel forces on August 24, 2011. He saidthis last period of detention was the worst he experienced in Libya. He wasbeaten repeatedly. A man came and broke a broom over his head, and he wasforced to be naked. He was in a cell with three other prisoners that wassmaller than 2 x 2 meters, including the toilet. Human Rights Watch did not findout when he was finally released. Now Di’iki works with Khalid al-Sharifat the Libyan National Guard. Both he and Sharif are in charge ofsecurity at facilities holdinghigh value detainees (mostly officials of the former Gaddafi government)in Libyan government custody.Click to expand ImageTripoli Document 2142 © 2012 Human Rights WatchOne of the Tripoli Documents, found in the foldermarked “USA” and containing a number of faxes apparently from theCIA, mentions Di’iki in the context of an offer to transfer his supposeddeputy, “Mustafa Salim Ali Moderi Tarabulsi, aka Shaykh Musa” toLibya. Mustafa Salim Ali Moderi Tarabulsi or Shaykh Musa’s real name isMustafa Salim Ali el-Madaghi. Human Rights Watch interviewed Madaghi for thisreport as well.[234] Thedocument where he and Di’iki are mentioned is dated April 15, 2004 (see below).It appears to have been sent by the CIA to Libyan security.[235]By then Di’iki had already been picked up inMauritania, moved to Morocco, and was being detained in the first location inAfghanistan.  Mustafa Salim Ali el-MadaghiMustafaSalim Ali el-Madaghi (Madaghi)[236] was an LIFG member who said heleft Libya in 1990. He was arrested in Mauritania and coercively interrogatedby someone he believes was American. As the Tripoli Documents indicate, USauthorities later transferred him to a prison in Morocco, where he was heldfor a month and then returned to Libya. In Libya he was charged with trying to overthrowthe government, given a summary trial, and then sentenced to life in prison.This sentence was later reduced to seven years, then to four, but he remainedin custody after the four years were up, until the uprising against Gaddafibegan on February 16, 2011.HumanRights Watch interviewed Madaghi in Tripoli in March 2012. The information inthis section is drawn from this interview unless otherwise noted.[237]Mustafa Salim Aliel-Madaghi said he left Libya in 1990because of religious oppression. He joined the LIFG in Afghanistan, spent timein Sudan, and finally ended up in Mauritania.  He was arrested inMauritania on February 5, 2004, where he was living with his wife and children.He told Human Rights Watch that the Mauritanian intelligence service took himto a detention facility, but no interrogations began until a group offoreigners arrived about two days later. The foreigner who led theinterrogations spoke Arabic with a Lebanese accent and was dressed in civilianclothes. He was joined in one interrogation session by the head of Mauritanianintelligence and a Mauritanian interrogator named Ismael. Madaghi believes theforeigner was American because he asked about threats to the United States,talked on the phone in English, and sent text messages in English on his cellphone. The foreign interrogator in Mauritania questioned Madaghifor about 10 days. He wanted Madaghi to confess to being part of al Qaeda, togive up the location of a man named Abdul Rahman, and to describe the next attacksbeing plotted against the United States.[238] Theinterrogator also asked him if he knew people in al Qaeda as well as otherquestions about Libyans in the United Kingdom. Madaghi said he explained thathe was with the LIFG, not with al Qaeda. Madaghi said that theforeign interrogator threatened him throughout the interrogations.  Hetold Madaghi that harm would come to his wife and family if he did not providethe answers he wanted. His captors brought his wife to the detention center,showed her to Madaghi through a keyhole, and threatened to rape her if he didnot cooperate. They also warned that his children would be orphaned. They wentto his home and returned with recordings of his children’s voices for himto hear and then threatened their safety. The language used by the foreigninterrogator was full of derogatory and obscene sexual comments. After two weeks another foreigner, who Madaghi said appearedmore European than the alleged American interrogator, administered a liedetector test that Madaghi said he passed. He thought this might be the end ofhis detention, but then he was taken to a different facility in Mauritania.[239]In total, Madaghi was detained in Mauritania from February 5, 2004 until sometimeat the end of March 2004.MoroccoMadaghi told Human Rights Watch that one night aroundmidnight, he was taken abruptly from the detention center in Mauritania and puton a bus. He was blindfolded and his hands were bound, but he could see thefeet of the people holding him. At some point all the Mauritanians got off thebus and others, wearing boots, got on. They took his blindfold off and he sawthat he was now in the custody of several large men, perhaps five or six. Heknew that he had been taken to the airport. He believed the men who boarded the bus were Americans. Theywere wearing black and had masks on their faces; through the eyeholes he couldsee fair skin and eyes and light eyebrows. They were careful not to say verymuch, but he could hear some English. His belief that they were American wasconfirmed by the Tripoli Documents and his subsequent detention at a facilityin Morocco that appeared to be run by Americans. While on the bus they took offall of his clothes; inspected his eyes, ears, and mouth with a device; took photosof him; put him in diapers; covered his ears with headphones; put a hood andblindfold around his head very tightly; and bound both his feet and handstogether—the standard CIA rendition transportation procedures.[240]He was then put on a plane, though they did not tell him to where.Upon landing, his guards put him in a cell that had Arabicpoetry written all over the walls. The guards would repeat phrases glorifyingthe king of Morocco. Because once he heard Moroccan military training exercisesgoing on outside, he concluded the detention facility was either inside or neara military base. The interrogationsoccurred intermittently and were conducted by Moroccans. Madaghi said that theyasked essentially the same questions that the interrogators in Mauritania hadbut added more questions about Europe and other LIFG members such as Belhadjand Saadi. They often threatened to beat him, but never actually did. Madaghisaid his cell was freezing cold. They also left him barefoot, bathed him in icecold water, and clothed him in short-sleeve shirts and knee-high pants. He waskept in a cell that was below ground level, but there was a small window thatallowed him to see some light. With that and the sound of the call to prayer,he was able to keep track of the number of days he was detained there—aboutone month and five days. He did not speak to any other prisoners while there,but there was a Moroccan woman in the cell across from his who would screamfrom time to time. He could also hear other prisoners shouting and screaming. Occasionally,late at night he would hear cars arriving, doors slamming, and the sounds ofnew prisoners being brought in. On April 14, 2004, according to the date on document fromthe CIA, the CIA informed Libyan authorities that they were in a position to“deliver” Madaghi, who was then in a prison in Morocco.Transfer and Treatmentin LibyaOn May 5, 2004, Madaghi was taken away without notice in themiddle of the night. They blindfolded him and put him in a car. Because it wasclear they were moving him again, he begged them not to send him back to Libya.They drove for what felt like a very long time. Then theyput him in a place where he was left alone. He said he was again put throughthe same CIA rendition transportation procedure as before.[241]He was able to loosen the headphones a bit this time, and though he was beatenfor it, they did not tighten the headphones again, so he was able to hear alittle. Then they put him in another car and drove him to a plane. They put himin the plane, but this time he was bound to a chair instead of to a bed. Hesaid the flight took a very long time. Every now and then someone would comearound and put something on his finger to check him. They stopped someplace torefuel. He could tell they were at an airport because he could hear otherplanes, and he could tell they were refueling because he felt the movement of therefueling machinery. Because the flight took so long, he was sure he was beingtaken to Guantanamo, but in fact he was taken to Libya. Madaghi told Human Rights Watch that Musa Kusa came to seehim about two weeks after he arrived: “He asked me: ‘Do you know who brought youhere?’ I didn’t want to say anything. He said ‘The Americansbrought you here. It’s all over now. There is cooperation between us andthe Americans.’ I was sure that was the case, but then he just confirmedit for me.”Some Eurocontrol flight data on file with Human Rights Watchcorroborated Madaghi’s belief that the United States rendered him toLibya. The flight data states that a CIA-linked Gulfstream V, registrationN8068V (formerly N379P), used in other CIA renditions,[242]filed a flight plan to go into Nouakchott, Mauritania on March 25, 2004 at 1:22am local time (from Washington, DC, via the Canary Island of Tenerife,presumably for refueling). This is around the time that Madaghi said he wastaken to Morocco. The data also shows a plan was filed to fly out immediatelyto Rabat, Morocco, at 2:34 am, and to land in Rabat at 4:52 am. The pilots thenfiled a plan to return to Washington (again, via Tenerife). The sameEurocontrol flight data on file with Human Rights Watch also shows thatCIA-linked Gulfstream IV, registration N85VM, used in other CIA renditions,[243]filed a flight plan to go into Rabat on May 4, 2004 (from Washington via PalmaMajorca), arriving at 10:52 PM, and then to Misrata in Libya. The flightappears to have stopped and refueled at a military airport in Italy en route toMisrata on or about May 5, 2004—the same day that Madaghi said he wasreturned to Libya by the US. Madaghi said he was not physically abused in Libya but thathis conditions of confinement were still very difficult. He was first held inTajoura prison for about one year, in solitary confinement in a 1.8 x 1.8 metercell. He was not allowed to speak to any other prisoners during this time. Hewas then moved to Abu Salim for a few weeks, where he said the conditions wereworse than Tajoura and the cell smaller. He was then taken to al Nasser bureau foranother few weeks. He said his cell there was the worst of all: very dirty and tiny,about the size of a mattress. It had no windows and no bed, just a blanket onthe concrete floor. He was then in Ain Zara for another year, from May 2005until June 2006, and finally in Abu Salim for nearly five more years. After twoyears in detention, he was charged with trying to overthrow the government, givena summary trial, and then sentenced to life in prison. This sentence was laterreduced to seven years, then to four, but he remained in custody after the fouryears were over. He was not released until the uprising against Gaddafi beganon February 16, 2011.Mustafa Jawda al-MehdiClick to expand ImageMustafa Jawda al-Mehdi© 2012 Human Rights WatchMustafaJawda al-Mehdi (Mehdi)[244] was an LIFG member who left Libyain 1989. He first went to Saudi Arabia, then to Afghanistan and Pakistan. Hewas arrested in Pakistan in 2004 by persons he believed were with the Pakistaniintelligence services. He alleged he was interrogated multiple times and inmultiple locations by the same set of American interrogators. Subsequently,he was transferred to Afghanistan, where he said US personnel detained,interrogated, and mistreated him and then rendered him to Libya. In Libya hewas subjected to prolonged solitary confinement in multiple places ofdetention. After a summary trial for his involvement with the LIFG, he was sentencedto death. He was released from prison on February 16, 2011.Human Rights Watch interviewedMehdi in March 2012 in Tripoli and then again by phone from New York in June2012. The information in this section is drawn from these two interviews,unless otherwise noted.Departure from LibyaMustafa Jawda al-Mehdi was born in Tripoli in 1965and left Libya in 1989 at the age of 24. He had been working as an administratorat the al Brega Oil Company. He said he left Libya because of the religiouspersecution going on at the time: “Anyone who was committed to Islam, whoattended mosque five times a day, especially youths, was committing a crime—especiallythose who dressed in a certain way, had a beard for example. It didn’tmatter which school of Islam you belonged to, just that you were devout.”About 30 of his friends had been arrested, he said, and the authorities werecoming to his home asking questions, so he felt threatened. Many of his friendswere later imprisoned and killed in the 1996 Abu Salim prison massacre.Mehdi said he first went to Saudi Arabia“just to get out of Libya—to survive.” But once there, hefound that many people were going from there to Afghanistan and that it wasvery easy to do so.  He followed suit. It was in Afghanistan and Pakistan thathe first became involved with the LIFG. He stayed in the area, met his wife inPeshawar, married in 1993, and remained in Pakistan until 2004. Arrest and DetentionOn February 23, 2004, when Mehdi was travelling onKohat Road about 10 minutes outside of Peshawar, around 20 cars suddenlysurrounded his vehicle. He was arrested by men that Mehdi believed were membersof the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), because he recognized theiruniforms. Two other people with him were also arrested, but the authorities wereclearly just interested in him, as they asked for him specifically by the namehe was using at the time, “Ayoub.”Documents found in Musa Kusa’s office, in abinder marked “UK,” indicate that the British intelligence serviceMI6, also referred to as SIS, was looking for Mehdi (noting that he was born in1965 in Tripoli) at some point after January 29, 2003.[245]PeshawarMehdi said he was detained in Peshawar for about 40days at the Army Stadium in the military area. He told Human Rights Watch thaton that first day in detention, the interrogations were initially just done bythe Pakistani ISI, but by noon Americans were present. He said he knew theywere Americans because when they came, they put a hood over his head, used aninterpreter, and asked questions solely about the United States. He said thesame interrogators who questioned him in Peshawar later questioned him inIslamabad and after that, in Afghanistan, where he was in US custody for 10months. During those later interrogations, he was not forced to wear a hood andcould see their faces.While in Peshawar, Mehdi was interrogated aboutseven to ten times by an American woman, using an interpreter. He said he waslater able to tell that the interrogator had blond hair and green eyes, was ofmedium height, and was likely in her thirties. He was not physically abused inPeshawar, but he said the food was bad, the lights were on all the time, therewas just a mat on the floor, he was alone in the cell, and they threatened tobring his wife there and rape her. Although he was not physically harmed, heheard other people screaming in the basement.  IslamabadAfter about 40 days in Peshawar, Mehdi said he wastaken to Islamabad, where he was held for another two and a half months.  Approximately8 to 10 other prisoners were there. After about two weeks, the same Americanwoman who interrogated him in Peshawar did so in Islamabad as well. Sheinterrogated him several times with an interpreter. One of these times therewas another woman there who was young, in her twenties, had black hair, and hadsome sort of malformation in her teeth. His face was not covered during theseinterrogations.Mehdi said he was physically assaulted byPakistani authorities numerous times.  Sometimes they beat him using abroomstick on various parts of his body and other times they slapped him. Theyalso forcefully took away his clothes, leaving him naked. No beatings occurredin the presence of US interrogators, he said, but the Pakistanis told him theyhad “no problem with him, it was the US that had the problem.”The first timehe saw his American interrogator in Islamabad, he told her the Pakistanis werebeating, him but she accused him of lying. She kept threatening to take him toa place where he would “begin talking right away” if he did notbegin to provide more information. She kept insisting that he had been livingin Waziristan, along Pakistan’s border with Afghanistan in its Federally AdministeredTribal Areas, and knew people there, but he said had been living in Peshawarand was only on his way to Waziristan when he was arrested.[246]AfghanistanMehdi said that one night in June the guardsentered his cell, told him he was leaving, and drove him—handcuffed andwith his face covered—to an airport about 15 minutes away. On the planethere were both American and Pakistani guards, but when he spoke Urdu, thePakistanis responded in Pashto. He thought other prisoners were there with him,but he was not sure. They landed after about half an hour at what he believeswas Kabul or Bagram. He told Human Rights Watch,“I was scared. I knew that the worst was coming now.I knew I was going to face worse than what I had before. It was true. I was right.That’s when the nightmare began.”He said that at the detention facility, two peopletook him to a cell, put his hands up against the wall, and then cut off hisclothes with scissors. They put his bare feet in shackles and then chained himby one arm to the cell wall. His arm was positioned so that the bottom of hiselbow was just about four fingers from the floor. He could stand up but only bybending over, forcing him to either sit or lie down. “It was like torturein medieval times,” he said.  He remained in this position, totallynaked, for about two months. After two months his captors gave him some pantsand, a month later, a shirt. After the fifth month, they stopped handcuffinghim to the wall and he was able to move around inside his cell.The guards there were all wearing what hedescribed as “black special forces” uniforms. They were masked andwore black jackets that had four pockets in the front. They wore black bootsmade out of a Gore-Tex-like fabric and black gloves. He thinks the guards werea mix of Americans and Afghans, but he could not be sure. They never spoke tohim, but only communicated with signs and signals. Sometimes when his cell doorwas opened to bring him food, he would hear guards speaking in English. Andwhen he was taken out of his cell for washing, he sometimes heard Dari- orPashto-style music coming from what he believed were the guards’ rooms.His cell was approximately 2 x 2 meters. Thelights were kept on, along with cameras with microphones, 24 hours a day. Healso heard loud noises playing all the time from loudspeakers, as well as thesound of a loud generator or turbine that never stopped. According to Mehdi,the noise made it difficult for prisoners to speak to each other: “Theyused loud music there, but it only appeared to be to punish prisoners. Theguards were very strict there.” The only other prisoner he heard duringhis time there was a Yemeni man who was trying to talk to other prisoners. He saidhe thought the man was Yemeni because of his accent, but he did not know hisname. As punishment for trying to communicate with other prisoners they playedextremely loud music in the Yemeni man’s cell. It was so loud that Mehdi couldhear it over the loud constant sound of turbines. He said he was too afraid toever try to communicate with other prisoners there. One time he knocked on thecell next to him and someone knocked back but he was too afraid to try andspeak with him. In his cell, there was a bottle of water, a rubberspoon like the ones used to feed children, a small bucket with a chemical for atoilet, and a thin blanket. There was no mattress. The floor was made ofpainted concrete. The cell had two doors: a full door that was visible from theexterior and an interior door with a gate. There were two holes: a small one allowedpeople outside to see and talk to him, and a second one that his guards used topass food to him.[247] Hesaid there was virtually no ventilation in the cell—no natural air, justair conditioning and one small hole. The vapors coming from the bucket,combined with the lack of ventilation, made it very hard to breathe and causedhis eyes to burn.  About one month into his time there, the airconditioning was turned up so that it was very cold all the time, which seriouslyaggravated his rheumatism. Mehdi said he was interrogated daily, sometimestwice a day, and often while naked in front of female interrogators. He saidthat for the entire first month he was questioned while naked every day by awoman. He believes this was the same woman who had interrogated him in Pakistan.He said,“She would scream and yell and was so angry. Shewould throw chairs, push away tables. She would say, ‘Ok, we will startall over again.’”In total, about 10 different people, including fourwomen, asked him questions. Unlike the guards, the interrogators wore civilianclothes, though some of them at times wore green camouflage military trousersand regular T-shirts. He described them as very fit, as if they had receivedprofessional physical training. Some questioned him over a day, others a week,and some a month. There were about 12 interpreters, possiblyAmerican, he said, but from what seemed to be different backgrounds, such asEgypt, Syria, Algeria, and Lebanon. They spoke to him in Pashto, not Arabic. Theyasked him questions about whom he knew and about people in photographs shown tohim. One of the reasons he is sure he was in US custody is that whenever theyasked him questions, they would say “Washington says this and Washingtonsays that.” Sometimes the interpreters asked questions of their own andthe interrogators would stop them and tell them only to ask the question theytold them to ask.Mehdi figured out later that he was detained in thisfacility for about 10 months, but while he was there it was nearly impossibleto keep track of time. Sometimes he could tell the passage of time by notingwhen meals were delivered. Other times he would pour water on the floor beforehe went to sleep and would try to tell how much time had passed based upon howmuch water had evaporated.  He was only able to tell how long he was atthe facility later by calculating the time between his arrest and return toLibya.Transfer and Treatmentin LibyaOne night he was told that the next day, which he laterlearned was April 21, 2005, he would be taken to Libya. He begged his Americancaptors not to send him back there:I informed them that I faced a real danger if they sent meback. I was wanted in Libya…. If I reached Gaddafi, that was when the real‘ceremony’ was going to begin. I was so clear. I said they willkill me, they will torture me. And [the proof of that was] I was [eventually]sentenced to death [there]. It was the first time I cried actually, the firsttears I wept were when they told me I was being handed over to the Libyans.He said he asked if any sort of international organization,like the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), would be involved.When the Americans said no, he asked if they could be involved. He told HumanRights Watch, “They just laughed and said ‘no.’ I knew thedangers of being handed over without anyone registering me, I needed someone toknow, to be involved so it was public… If this went through the ICRC, Ifelt like it would be safer.”The next day the US personnel overseeing his detention transferredhim to another room where they took off all his clothes. They made note on ahuman body chart of every mark on his body.[248] Theyalso took photographs of him naked.[249] Beforeboarding a plane, they replaced one blindfold with another, which allowed himto see a huge hangar with military equipment and large aerial bombs, indicatinghe was at an air base. He said he was put into a container containing athree-person American team wearing black T-shirts. These men accompanied him onthe flight back to Libya. He was stripped again and more photos were taken ofhim naked.[250] Thenthey put him in diapers and put on earplugs, eye patches, and a hood over hishead. He was given something to drink and some clothes. They handcuffed him tothe seat and wrapped an adhesive or belt around him. He did not know it at thetime but later learned that Khalid Sharif was with him.Upon arrival he heard Libyan voices all around him.“Being returned to Libya was the worst fear I had,” he said.“I thought this was the end—that the real interrogations were goingto start and the real suffering was going to begin.”Mehdi said he was heldin a number of different prisons in Libya. While conditions were verydifficult, he was not physically abused. He was first detained for 14 months inTajoura, where he said he was held in poor conditions, kept in solitaryconfinement for long periods, and subjected to numerous long and arduousinterrogations. The questions very often had nothing to do with Libya but wereabout people from Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and other countries. His interrogators demandedinformation about the individuals and if they were part of al Qaeda. They oftencame with photos, sometimes with English writing next to them. He experienced the worst conditions while in Libyain his next place of detention, al Nasser bureau, where he was held for fourand a half months. He was in solitary confinement during this time in a verysmall cell that he said was about 2 x 0.5 meters in size, with no light.“They just leave you there in this place and forget about you,” hesaid. “You don’t know what’s going to happen to you.”Then he was moved to what he called the “political part” of AinZara prison for two months. Then on January 10, 2007, he was sent to Abu Salimprison, where he was placed in the military section, along with Belhadj, Saadi,and other senior LIFG members. Initially the Libyan authorities accused him ofbeing a member of the LIFG and trying to overthrow the government. He firstdenied the charges, but after long interrogations and time in solitary, he eventuallyconfessed. In 2006 he was charged and prosecuted. When at trial he tried todeny the allegations and say the confession was forced, they returned him to solitaryconfinement. “I don’t know how to describe it,”he said. “I was very hurt psychologically at that point. Because I hadbeen in a group and then they put me back in solitary—that was the mosthorrifying moment for me.” He confessed after one day of solitary:“I had had questions and solitary confinement. I said yes, whatever yousay, I will sign it.” He was appointed a lawyer, but he never talked toher. He had one day in court and then they issued a verdict on a different day,when he was not there. He was convicted and sentenced to death. Mehdi remainedin Abu Salim until February 16, 2011, when the uprisings against Gaddafi began.III. Transfers to Libya that Began in AsiaFor three of those interviewed by Human Rights Watch, theirreturns to Gaddafi’s Libya began in Asia. Their testimonies are describedbelow. Abdul Hakim BelhadjClick to expand ImageAbdul Hakim Belhadj© 2012 Human Rights WatchAbdul Hakim Belhadj (Belhadj)[251] said he left Libya in 1988. Hefought against the Soviet-installed government in Afghanistan in the early1990s and later became the leader of the LIFG. After fleeing Afghanistanfollowing the September 11 attacks, Belhadj went to various countries, endingup in China. From there, he and his wife sought asylum in the United Kingdomby traveling through Malaysia. He was denied exit from Malaysia and detainedby immigration authorities there. After a subsequent attempt to reach theUnited Kingdom by traveling through Thailand, Belhadj and his wife weredenied exit and detained by Thai authorities. They allege that while indetention there they were interrogated and ill-treated by persons theybelieved were Thai and US authorities. Belhadjand his wife were later rendered to Libya under circumstances indicatingAmerican and British involvement, which is corroborated by documents in theTripoli Documents. Once in Libya, Belhadj was detained for years andsubjected to ill-treatment—including prolonged solitaryconfinement—and numerous interrogations by Libyan, American, British,and other foreign personnel. After six years in Libyan detention, Belhadj wassummarily tried, convicted, and sentenced to death. He was released in March2010 as part of a “de-radicalization” initiative pushed by SaifGaddafi and later played a prominent role in the revolution. Most notably,Belhadj served as commander of the Tripoli Military Council afterrevolutionary forces seized control of the city from regime forces in August2011. He resigned his post in May 2012 to run for election to the NationalCongress.Departure from LibyaBelhadj was born in 1966in Tripoli. He left Libya in 1988 because he said it was impossible to liveunder the Gaddafi government. “I was forced into exile, I didn’thave a choice! In Libya we were living under a dictatorial regime that did notpermit any sort of freedom of thought or expression.… The Gaddafi regimewanted to destroy us.”[252] He was in his last year of engineering schoolwhen he left Libya. He first went to Saudi Arabia and then Afghanistan, wherehe fought against the Soviet occupation of that country.[253] After the Soviet-backed Afghan government of MohammadNajibullah lost power in 1992, he and other Libyans who were part of the LIFGfocused on their main aim—the overthrow of Gaddafi. Belhadj went on tobecome the leader of the LIFG, which from various locations around the worldwaged a low-level insurgency against the Libyan government for many years. Belhadjspent time in Turkey, Sudan, and other countries as well.[254]  During this time the LIFG had bases inseveral different countries but also in eastern Libya, where they launchedoperations against the Gaddafi government. However, in the mid-1990s the LIFGin Libya was crushed, and in 1999 Belhadj, along with other LIFG members,returned to Afghanistan.[255]Before September 11, 2001, Belhadj was based in Afghanistanwith other LIFG members.[256]After the attacks, he and other LIFG membersleft the country, worried they would be swept up in US-led post-September 11 arrests.Belhadj and others fled to different parts of the Middle East, Africa, andAsia.[257] By2004, Belhadj was living in China with his Moroccan wife, Fatima Bouchar. Inearly 2004, with Bouchar pregnant, the couple feared they were undersurveillance and decided to seek asylum in the UK.[258]They first tried to travel to London from Beijingin February 2004, but the authorities in Beijing sent the couple to KualaLumpur, from where they had previously travelled.[259]Malaysia and ThailandIn Kuala Lumpur, Belhadj and his wife were detained byMalaysian authorities for 13 days and held in very bad conditions.[260]“My wife needed a doctor and couldn’t get health care,”Belhadj said.[261] He saidthat one of his associates had visited the British embassy in Kuala Lumpur andlet officials there know that Belhadj wanted to seek asylum in the UK.[262]Shortly thereafter the couple was told, though it is not clear by whom, thatthey would be allowed to travel to the UK but only through Bangkok.[263]However, after the two arrived in Bangkok, they were arrested while in theairport waiting room.[264] Theywere then taken to a special room in the airport in Bangkok in which, Belhadjalleges, he and his wife were severely mistreated and abused by the CIA forseveral days.[265]While in CIA custody in Bangkok,Belhadj said he was “stripped and beaten.”[266]He was forced to be naked, wear a blindfold, was hung against a wall by one armand then by one leg, and was put into a tub with ice.[267]He was also forced to wear earmuffs that were only removed when his captorsblasted his cell with loud music or when he was being interrogated.[268]Belhadj said they gave them no food and they refused to get him a doctor whenhe told them he needed one.[269]  Hewas asked about his alleged ties to al Qaeda, which he denied.[270]Belhadj’s wifesaid that she was dragged away from her husband at the Bangkok airport and fearedhe was going to be killed. In an interview with The Guardian,she said, “I thought: ‘This is it.’ I thought I would neversee my husband again…. They took me into a cell, and they chained my leftwrist to the wall and both my ankles to the floor. I could sit down but Icouldn’t move.” She said her captors included two tall, thin menand an equally tall woman who were mostly silent and dressed in all black.[271] At the time, Bouchar was four and a half monthspregnant. “They knew I was pregnant,” she said. “It was obvious.”[272] She said her captors gave her water while shewas chained up, but no food for five days.[273]  The couple said they were separately put on a plane to Libya,but were not aware that the other was on the flight.[274]Belhadj said he was handcuffed and blindfolded and that his hands were tied tohis legs.[275] He wascrouched over, unable to stand or lie down, for the entire 17-hour journey. Hewas forced to drink water and prevented from using the bathroom.[276]He said he was beaten just before the plane landed.[277]Sometimes his captors put a cushion under his elbows, providing brief respite,but then took it away again.[278]Bouchar later told The Guardian that her captorsforced her to lie on a stretcher and bound her to the stretcher from head totoe with tape. They taped her stomach, arms, and then her chest so tightly thatshe was unable to move. They then wound the tape around her head, covering hereyes, before putting a hood and earmuffs on her. She was unable to move, tohear or to see. “My left eye was closed when the tape was applied …but my right eye was open, and it stayed open throughout the journey. It wasagony,” she said.  She did not know where she was going or that herhusband was on the plane. Only upon arrival in Libya did she hear a man gruntingwith pain, and realized her husband was with her.[279]The Tripoli Documentscorroborate the couple’s account. The UK government appears to havealerted Libyan authorities that Belhadj and his wife were in Malaysian custody.[280]A document in the folder marked “UK” mentions that Abdullah Sadeq(the name Belhadj was using at the time), travelling under a French or an Iraqiidentity, “is being held in the Sepang detention center inMalaysia” with his “pregnant wife.”[281]The document is undated, but notes that the couple was traveling aroundFebruary 21.[282]Two faxes found in the foldermarked “USA,” both dated March 4, 2004 and marked “SecretRelease Libya Only,” appear to have been sent by the CIA to the LibyanSecurity Service. One has a subject line that reads, “ClarificationRegarding the Rendition of Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq.”[283]The other had a subject line that reads, “Urgent Request Regarding theExtradition of Abdullah al-Sadiq from Malaysia.”[284]It is not clear which fax was sent first, but the fax seeking clarificationbegins by thanking the Libyan security service for the“hospitality” that it showed to CIA officers during their recentvisit to Libya; remarks that the discussions had during that visit were “veryproductive;” and pronounces that they are “committed to developingthis relationship” for the “mutual benefit” of both services.It then goes on to read:  Our service is committed to rendering the terrorist AbuAbdullah al-Sadiq to your custody. To this end, we have been in touch with theMalaysian authorities to help facilitate the transfer of custody in atimely [sic]manner. We do not yet have all the details from our station in Kuala Lumpurregarding how and when this transfer will take place, but we are very hopefulfor a [sic] expeditious resolution to this matter. We will provide you with thedetails as soon as they are available to us.[285]The other fax dated the same day,with “urgent request” in the subject line, says the United Statesis working “energetically” with the Malaysian government to“effect the extradition of Abdullah al-Sadiq” from Malaysia. Itsays that the Malaysians have “promised to cooperate and to arrange forSadiq’s transfer to our [the CIA’s] custody” and that they willbe “very happy to service your debriefing requirements” and“will share the information with you [Libyan security service].” Thefax also says that the CIA was “at a delicate point in [its] discussionswith the Malaysians” and therefore asks that the Libyans temporarily“cease any further engagement” with the Malaysian government untilthe CIA has “custody of Sadiq” or has judged that the Malaysiansare “unwilling to cooperate with the U.S. government.”[286]Two days later, on March 6, theCIA sent the Libyans another fax saying that Belhadj and his “pregnant (4months) wife” would be leaving Kuala Lumpur on the evening of March 7, ona commercial flight to London via Bangkok, corroborating Bouchar’s beliefthat her captors knew she was pregnant.[287]The CIA said it planned to take custody of the couple in Bangkok, and that itwas “vital” that a Libyan security officer be present to accompanythe couple on the flight from Bangkok to Libya.[288]Also on March 6, the CIA sent another fax, with the subject line “Schedulefor the Rendition of Abdullah al-Sadiq,” to Libyan intelligence.[289] It details the flight plan for the aircraft thatwas supposed to pick up Belhadj and his wife and take them to Libya. The faxinforms the Libyan intelligence service that the flight will leave Washington,DC Dulles International Airport on March 6/7, make a stop in Tripoli and refuelon March 7, then fly to the Seychelles, where it will remain overnight. Then onMarch 8, it will leave the Seychelles for Bangkok, where it will refuel, presumablypick up Belhadj and his wife, and fly to Tripoli, with a stopover for half aday in Diego Garcia (a US naval air base in the British Indian OceanTerritory).[290] The fax asks the Libyans to make sure theirofficers “have the proper documentation for [the Seychelles], otherwisethey will not be allowed to leave the aircraft.”[291]The flight plan laid out in thedocument corresponds to some Eurocontrol flight data on file with Human RightsWatch. According to that data, a flight plan for a Boeing 737 with tail numberN313P (the same tail number as a plane mentioned in Tripoli Document 2233, whichapparently transported the MI6’s Mark Allen and the CIA’s SteveKappes to Libya—see below), operated by Aero Contractors—a NorthCarolina company widely reported to have been used by the CIA—filed aflight plan to go from Dulles airport in Washington at 2:51 a.m. on March 7,2004 and land in Tripoli at 12:01 p.m. local time. The plane then appears tohave flown beyond Eurocontrol’s area of responsibility, because it disappearstemporarily from Eurocontol’s flight records. The plane’strajectory is not recorded again in the Eurocontrol records until March 9, 2012,when a flight plan was filed for a departure from Misrata, Libya on March 9 at4:47 p.m. local time for Palma Majorca, an island off the coast of Spain. Another of the Tripoli Documents provides evidence of the role of the UnitedStates and the United Kingdom in Belhadj’s transfer back to Libya. At theend of a two-page letter from “Mark in London” (presumably MarkAllen, former head of counterterrorism at MI6 named in other Tripoli Documents)[292] dated March 18, 2004, to “Musa,” hewrites to “congratulate” Musa Kusa on the “safe arrival ofAbu ‘Abd Allah Sadiq,” the name Belhadj used at the time.[293] The letter continues, “[t]his was theleast we could do for you and for Libya to demonstrate the remarkablerelationship we have built over the years.” Then, corroborating USinvolvement, he writes, “Amusingly, we got a request from the Americansto channel requests for information from Abu ‘Abd Allah through theAmericans. I have no intention of doing any such thing. The intelligence about Abu‘Abd Allah was British. I know I did not pay for the air cargo. But Ifeel I have the right to deal with you direct on this and am very grateful toyou for the help you are giving us.”[294] The exchange took place just a week beforeBritish Prime Minister Tony Blair made an official visit to Tripoli and praisedGaddafi for his willingness to help fight the so-called war on terror.[295] Earlier in the letter, details about theupcoming Blair visit are discussed.[296] “No. 10,” paragraph 5 of the blurrybut legible document reads—referring to No. 10 Downing Street, theresidence of the British prime minister—is “keen” that hemeet the “Leader” in his tent.  “[J]ournalists wouldlove it,” the letter continues. “If this is possible, No. 10 wouldbe grateful,” it reads.[297]  The Tripoli Documents formed the basis of a lawsuit thatBelhadj and his wife initially brought against the UK government and itssecurity forces.[298]Later Belhadj and his wife also sued former Foreign Secretary Jack Straw forpersonally signing off on their abduction and transfer.[299]When the suit was initiated, Belhadj said his main aim was an apology andacknowledgement of wrongdoing.[300] Onlywhen requests for this were ignored did he decide to sue.[301]Belhadj told the nongovernmental organization Reprieve, “What we haveasked for like many victims of rendition in the past is an apology. All we seekis justice.… We hope the new Libya, freed from its dictator, will havepositive relationships with the West. But this relationship must be built onrespect and justice. Only by admitting and apologizing for past mistakes… can we move forward together as friends.”[302]The Tripoli Documents also led to a criminal investigationby UK Police into MI6’s involvement in the rendition of Belhadj and Saadi(see below), another Libyan who was rendered to Libya with MI6 and CIAassistance.[303]Treatment in LibyaUponarrival in Libya, Belhadj and his wife were driven separately to Tajoura prisonin Tripoli.[304] Belhadjsaid he was then brought directly to Musa Kusa, who was standing right in frontof him when his blindfold was removed. “I’ve been waiting foryou,” Belhadj said Kusa told him.[305]  Bouchar wasput in a cell where she would spend the next four months.[306]She told The Guardian that she was interrogated for about five hours aday. “At one point a cot was brought in the cell along with some babyclothes, nappies, a bed cover and a baby bath,” she said. “I reallythought I was going to have to have my baby there, and that we would both beheld there.”[307]Bouchar was released three weeks before giving birth to a son.[308]Belhadj was brought to her cell for a few moments before she was set free,though not permitted to leave the country.[309]Belhadj was held for six moreyears, five of them in solitary confinement.[310] He saidhe went for a year and a half without any sunlight. His treatment depended uponhow responsive he was during interrogations.  Hewas denied family visits for three years and then subsequently was able toreceive visits every three months. He said he was deprived of sleep and ofteninterrogated at night and forced to stand for long periods of time.[311]While he was in Libyan custody, Belhadj said he was interrogated fourtimes by people he believes were American agents.[312] He was also interrogated by alleged Britishagents during two sessions that lasted about two hours each.[313]  He said they were very knowledgeable aboutthe LIFG and asked questions about members living in the United Kingdom. HisLibyan captors told him that his treatment would improve if he told the Britishthat the LIFG activists were linked with al Qaeda.[314] “I told the British, as I told everyoneelse, that LIFG had no link with al-Qa’ida. I knew making a link wouldstop what was happening to me, but I was not going to do it.”[315] Intelligence officers from other Europeancountries, including France, Italy, Germany, and Spain, also interrogated himwhile he was detained in Libya.[316]The authorities tried Belhadj in2008 for crimes against the state. Although he had a state-appointed lawyer, hewas never given a chance to meet with him. There were no witnesses at the trial,and the only evidence taken into consideration was a report from Libyansecurity services.[317]He was sentenced to death.[318]“I fully expected I would be killed,” he said.[319]Instead, over time and in conjunction with efforts started by Gaddafi’sson, Saif Gaddafi, he began to participate in an effort to negotiate a prisonerrelease. Several hundred prisoners, including Belhadj, Saadi, and Sharif were releasedin early 2010.[320] Toobtain his release, he had to publicly renounce his efforts to overthrow thegovernment by force.[321] However,he told Human Rights Watch that he never gave up his desire for regime change.[322]In February 2011 the uprisings against Gaddafi began and Belhadj played a significantrole, particularly in the capture of Tripoli.[323]He then became part of the transitional government’s Tripoli MilitaryCouncil, but stepped down to take part in elections in Libya on July 7, 2012.  Belhadjran as a candidate under the Islamist political party Hizb al-Watan which,although initially popular, did not do as well as expected.[324]They lost to the liberal National Forces Coalition party headed by MahmoudJibril.[325]Click to expand ImageSamiMostefa al-Saadi Sami Mostefa al-Saadi© 2012 Human Rights WatchSami Mostefaal-Saadi (Saadi)[326] left Libya in1988. He spent time in Afghanistan, fighting against the Soviet-installedgovernment. He was, as was Belhadj, a founding member of the LIFG.Later, rather than go back to Libya, he sought asylum in the United Kingdom,where he was granted “indefinite leave to remain.” After a series ofincidents made him feel unsafe there, he returned to Afghanistan andPakistan. He eventually became the LIFG’s law and religious leader.After the September 11 attacks, he fled with his family to Iran and then wentto Malaysia where he tried to seek asylum, failed, and traveled on to China,where he decided to try to return to the United Kingdom via Hong Kong. InHong Kong, he and his family were detained and ultimately rendered to Libya,with apparent direct US and UK involvement, as corroborated by the TripoliDocuments.In Libya, Saadi suffered abusive treatment in custody for five years,during which time he was interrogated by, in addition to Libyan authorities,persons he believes were US and UK personnel.  He was charged, given asummary trial, and sentenced to death. Human Rights Watch interviewed Sami Mostefa al-Saadi in Tripoli onMarch 14, 2012 as well as Saadi and his daughter Kadija on March 25, 2012.The following account and quotes are drawn from the former interview unlessotherwise noted.[327]Departure from LibyaSaadi was born in Tripoli on March 21, 1966. His family hada lot of property and businesses, all of which he said were“misappropriated by the state” by the Gaddafi government. He leftLibya in 1988, in his early 20s, because he said the government was interferingwith his ability to practice his religion and because he generally opposed itsoppressive practices. While he was studying engineering at the University ofTripoli, he became actively involved in a small secret group in Libya (aprecursor to the LIFG) that, at the time, was engaged in planning to resist thegovernment by force. He later became a founding member of the LIFG and its lawand religious leader.[328] He wasdetained once in 1984 for a month for distributing anti-Gaddafi leaflets. WhenSaadi left Libya, he went to Afghanistan via Saudi Arabia and Pakistan toassist in efforts to oppose the Soviet-installed government. “I believedin the fact that Afghan people were oppressed,” he said. He left twobrothers behind, both of whom were imprisoned for many years for theiranti-Gaddafi activities and both of whom he said died in the Abu Salim prisonmassacre of 1996. After the Afghan government fell in 1992, infighting amonggroups in Afghanistan made it hard to stay in the area. He also said it wasvery difficult for Arabs to remain. So in 1993 he sought asylum in the United Kingdom.In 1994, Saadi was granted “indefinite leave to remain.”[329]At some point, either prior to or during his time in the UK,he went to Algeria and got married. From 1994 to 1997 Saadi was in the UK,where he and other LIFG members continued to organize and plan operationsagainst Gaddafi.  By 1997, however, he began to feel unsafe there as well.Twice, an individual approached him and tried to speak to him in Urdu andArabic, asking him questions that showed knowledge about his family and attemptingto get information from him. Then a Libyan associate of his who was opposed toGaddafi, Ali Abuseid, was killed in a stabbing in his grocery store in Londonin 1996.[330] SoSaadi left with his family and other LIFG members and they began to organizefrom Pakistan and Afghanistan. Saadi said he felt “there was no otherplace for us to go.”During his years in Afghanistan, Saadi lived and worked inKabul, where the LIFG was active. He said he met Osama bin Laden on twooccasions in Kandahar, in 2000 and in the late summer of 2001. Saadi told HumanRights Watch that bin Laden had already been making harsh statements againstthe United States and it was clear to him that bin Laden was planning violence againstthe US.  Saadi said he had an argument with Osama bin Laden about thiswhere he told him that for many reasons, the actions against the US that he wasplanning were not legally authorized within Sharia. “We told OBL [binLaden] that the consequences of operations against civilians would be negative,but he was not convinced,” Saadi said.Immediately after the September 11 attacks, Saadi andseveral other LIFG members and their families left the area, moving from placeto place to avoid arrest. They first went to Pakistan, but that did not feelsafe there either. They then moved on to Iran. They sent their families therefirst. “I asked my wife if she wanted to go to Algeria and be with herfamily there, but she preferred to be with me,” Saadi said.  But atthe time Saadi himself could not get proper papers for Iran, so he crossed overborders illegally, only meeting his family there later. They stayed in Iran forabout a year. “The LIFG were all there together in a sort ofcommunity,” he said. But in January 2003, he said they were forced toleave Iran. By this time, Saadi had four children.They went to Malaysia, where he hoped to get asylum. Hevisited a UN office and was given an appointment for a month later. Before then,he was arrested by the Malaysian authorities, who detained him and his family forabout 10 days. Saadi asked to be released to go to his UN appointment. TheMalaysian authorities said they would, but if he went back to the UN, he wouldfind US officials waiting for him. So he asked to be sent to China, where hehad already obtained a visa. “The Chinese visa was so easy for us,”he said. “The Chinese were receiving people from everywhere at thetime.” The Malaysians then sent him to China. From China he attempted to get back to the United Kingdom. Saadi’sfriends and family in the UK told him that if he went to the UK embassy in HongKong, someone there would be able to help him.[331]When he arrived in Hong Kong, a man he assumed was a UK diplomat was waitingfor him when he got off the plane. Instead, he was arrested for purportedpassport or immigration violations and detained, most of the time with hisfamily. The room was monitored with cameras. During this period he said heoverheard two police women arguing: “They were talking in their ownlanguage and I didn’t understand everything, but I did hear‘CIA’ about four or five times, so I expected that something notgood was about to happen.” After 13 days of detention, the Hong Kongauthorities told him he would be sent back to China. On or about March 28, 2004, Saadi said he was handcuffed,his legs zip-tied, and he was taken along with his wife and four children ontoan empty plane with an Egyptian crew. He and his children were taken to theback of the plane, while his wife, who was screaming and in what he describedas a “terrible psychological condition,” was kept elsewhere. It wasnot until five Libyan security personnel—four men and a woman—appearedon the plane during a stopover in Bangkok that Saadi realized he was beingrendered to Libya. Once he realized it, he lost consciousness. Saadi isdiabetic and his blood sugar had risen. “That’s when I firstrealized I was being sent back to Libya. It was a mixture of horrible emotions:anger, fear, sadness.” “I felt like we were being kidnapped. I was veryscared. I thought they would execute us all,” Kadija al-Saadi,Saadi’s oldest child who was 13 years old at the time, said.[332]Around this time, she came to the area of the plane where her father was. Whenshe saw many soldiers around him and the needle in his arm while he was stillhandcuffed to the chair, “I fainted too,” she said. Later duringthe flight, about half an hour before they landed, Libyan security agents cameand told her to come and say goodbye to her father. “I expected that thatwas when they would come and execute him,” she said.[333]The Tripoli Documents corroborate Saadi’s story.Saadi’s return appears to have been initiated by the MI6, but once theCIA discovered it was underway, they stepped in to do everything they could toassist. A March 23, 2004 fax from the CIA to Libyan intelligence, found in thefolder marked “USA,” states that the CIA has “becomeaware” that Saadi and his family were being held in detention in HongKong and that the Libyans have been working with the British to “effect[his] removal to Tripoli” on a Libyan plane that was in the Maldives.[334]In the fax, the CIA said that it was aware that the Hong Kong special wing haddenied permission for the Libyan airplane to land. It went on to explain,“However, we believe that the reason for the refusal was based oninternational concerns over having a Libyan-registered aircraft land in HongKong. Accordingly, if your government were to charter a foreign aircraft from athird country, the Hong Kong government may be able to coordinate with you torender Abu Munthir [Saadi] and his family into your custody.”[335]The CIA even offered to pay for the non-Libyan-registered charter aircraft.“If payment of a charter aircraft is an issue, our service would bewilling to assist financially to help underwrite those costs.”[336]The CIA requestedperfunctory diplomatic assurances that Saadi and his family would not be harmedif they provided assistance: “Please be advised if we pursue that option[providing assistance], we must have assurances from your government that AbuMunthir [Saadi] and his family will be treated humanely and that his humanrights will be respected.”[337]In the same fax, the CIA also provided suggestions as to howthe Libyans might expedite the process and convince the Hong Kong authoritiesto cooperate.[338]“[W]e believe that you will need to provide significant detail on AbuMunthir (e.g. his terrorist/criminal acts, why he is wanted, perhaps proof ofcitizenship)…. Specifically, the Hong Kong government must have astipulation … that he will not be subject to the death penalty.”[339]The next day, on March 24, 2004, the Libyan authorities senta 32-page fax to Hong Kong authorities containing, among other things, a birthcertificate, information on why Saadi was wanted, and details on the“crimes and the terrorist activities that [Saadi] committed.” Theyalso promised that the “maximum penalty” for what he had done was“life imprisonment.”[340] (Thoughlater, after being in Libyan custody for five years without charge, Saadi wassentenced to death).  The United States also provided the name andtelephone numbers for Hong Kong’s principal secretary for security.[341]After the Hong Kong authorities received this information,it appears they agreed to allow the non-Libyan registered charter aircraft toland. Also in the Tripoli Documents, in the folder marked “USA,” afax sent just two days before Saadi arrived in Libya contains a cover pagemarked “Hong Kong Landing Requirements” and two pages stamped“confidential.” It states that in order for the “Non-ScheduledFlight to land in Hong Kong,” the Libyan government has to comply with “certainregulations” so that a “Permission to Land” can be issued.[342]It also confirms, “[i]t is agreed that the subject person will be movedtogether with his whole family (a total of six persons) on board of the sameflight” and recommends a “local Aircraft Handling Agent” forthe transaction who needs to be paid in “cash (in US dollars).”[343]Saadi was transferred around March 28, 2004, just a few days after TonyBlair’s historic first visit to Libya on March 25. [344]Treatment in LibyaThree days later, Saadi and his family were put aboard aprivate, Egyptian-registered jet and flown to Tripoli. When they landed, Saadi saidhe and his wife were both hooded in front of their children. Local authoritiestook them to the External Security Office of Amn Kharihi prison in Tajoura,where they were separated. Saadi’s wife and children were held at thefacility for two months before being released. Saadi was detained for six yearsand only saw his family sporadically.[345]Saadi said that the day after he arrived on March 28, 2004,Musa Kusa, the head of the Libyan intelligence service, came to his cell andsaid, “Before 9/11, you went to countries where we couldn’t reachyou. But now, after 9/11, I can just pick up the phone and call MI6 or the CIAright away and they will provide us with the most recent or up to date informationon you.” [346]Saadi said he was held without charge at the Tajoura prisonfor approximately three years, much of that time in solitary confinement. Thenon December 15, 2007, he was moved to Abu Salim prison, where he was held untilMarch 23, 2010.[347] Duringhis time at Tajoura, Libyan authorities interrogated him sporadically and attimes beat him. The interrogations usually started at 5 a.m. and went untilnoon. He said he was not treated badly during the first month in custody andwas even led to believe that he would be released in a matter of days. Butafter that, the treatment got worse. He said he was hit with a black woodenstick that was just over a foot long, whipped with a rope, slapped, kicked,punched, and administered electric shocks on the neck, chest, and arms. Heestimates that he was shocked 15 times. After about a year and a half atTajoura, Saadi noted that the abuses began to lessen. He thought that thismight have been because of increased cooperation with the Americans and acommitment by the Libyan authorities as part of that cooperation to not useforce. He added, however, that when interrogators got angry, they still seemedto have a “green light to start” physically abusing him.Saadi told Human Rights Watch,The beatings took place outside the cell and outside theinterrogation room—it was a room just for beating and torture.… Thebeatings were random, not regular. For example, after an interrogation, if theyweren’t satisfied, I found myself in a different room and the torture andbeating would start. It would be a different group doing that [the beating] butsometime the interrogators would be there just watching.During his time at Tajoura, Saadi said, he was interrogatedby Libyan, American, British, and Italian intelligence agencies, as well assome agents who spoke French, though he did not know if they were French. The interrogators Saadi believes were American questionedhim twice: once immediately after he arrived in Libya and again four of fivemonths later. The first team of Americans consisted of two interrogators, a mannamed Joe or John, who was short and thin, and a woman in her 40s. He said, “Itseemed that this lady was specialized in Libyan files because she knew everythingabout the Libyan guys—their fake names, their true names,everything.” For the first part of the interrogation, Musa Kusa waspresent in the room, but he eventually left the room “angrily” overSaadi’s denials that he and his group were the same as al Qaeda.“He was telling them that there was no difference between our group andal Qaeda and that we are dangerous not only for Libyans but for Westernersespecially.” They questioned Saadi for several hours over one day, askinghim about his time in China and one of the Libyans living in the UK. He saidthey did not physically abuse him. The second group of American interrogators—a team offive—consisted of the same short thin man, another man, and three women,including the interpreter. This time the questions were much more specific andlasted all day, until past midnight.Sometime between the first and second visit by Americaninterrogators, a team of two that Saadi believes were from the United Kingdom questionedhim—a man in his 30s with brown hair and a short beard and a woman in her40s who was thin and blond. He said the British interrogation was short andfocused more on the LIFG’s ideology. Saadi said the French-speaking agents questioned him about ayear into his imprisonment and that the “nicest” interrogators werethe Italians. “They were so decent with me,” he said. They asked“for permission” to interrogate him and explained that “itwould be very useful to know” certain things. “They knew I had metOsama bin Laden and wanted to know more about this. They also asked my opinionsabout things like whether or not I thought their presence in Iraq would resultin retaliations against Italy.” In 2009, Saadi was charged with 14 crimes, includingattempting to overthrow the government and spreading ideology against therevolution. His trial took place in the prison and he was convicted andsentenced to death. Saadi was released on March 23, 2010 as part of the samenegotiated release that freed Belhadj, Sharif, and other prisoners (see above).Yet after the uprisings against Gaddafi began in February 2011, he was arrestedagain, along with his son, and held until August 2011, when rebel forcescaptured Tripoli. In October 2011, Saadi filed a lawsuit against the Britishgovernment (the security services, the attorney-general, the Foreign andCommonwealth Office, and the Home Office) for their complicity in his transferback to Libya.[348] InJanuary 2012 Saadi, along with Belhaj, also filed a civil suit againstMI6’s former head of counter-terrorism, Sir Mark Allen, accusing him ofcomplicity in torture, misfeasance in public office, and negligence.[349]Then on June 17, 2012, Saadi filed a claim against the government of Hong Kongfor its role in his transfer.[350] Saadinow lives in Tripoli with his family. He is an imam at a local mosque and foundeda political party, al-Umma al-Wasat. He ran, as did Belhadj, as a candidateduring the July 7, 2012 elections. But his party, along with many other smallerones, was defeated by the National Forces Coalition party headed by MahmoudJibril.[351]Muhammed Abu FarsanClick to expand ImageMuhammed Abu Farsan© 2012 Human Rights WatchMuhammed Abu Farsan (Abu Farsan)[352] was a member of the LIFG who leftLibya in 1990. He spent a decade in Libyan opposition training camps inAfghanistan and Sudan. After the September 11 attacks, Abu Farsan traveled to multiplecountries with his family seeking asylum. While in transit in theNetherlands on the way from China to Morocco, he sought asylum in theNetherlands but his asylum claimswere ultimately denied. The Netherlands deported Abu Farsan and his family to Sudan, where hewas taken into custody. Abu Farsan said that inSudan he was interrogated by Sudanese authorities and by a man who introducedhimself as being with the CIA. After two weeks the Sudanese transferred himto Libya, where he spent several years in Libyan detention and was subjectedto prolonged solitary confinement and repeated interrogations by Libyanauthorities. Ultimately he was charged and tried for his involvement with theLIFG, convicted, and sentenced to life in prison. He was detained in Libyauntil February 16, 2011, as the uprisings against Gaddafi began. HumanRights Watch interviewed Muhammed Abu Farsan in Tripoli in March 2012. Thefollowing account and quotes are drawn from this interview unless otherwisenoted.[353]Departure from LibyaIn 1982, when Muhammed Abu Farsan was about 18, he joinedthe police department. In 1988, against his will, he was transferred to themilitary. During his military service, he said, he came under pressure becauseof his religious beliefs. The military was a secular institution and he saidthose who were devout Muslims were held in suspicion. At some point during hismilitary service, he was arrested and detained for a month. In June 1990, hesuspected the security service was looking for him again, so he decided toleave Libya.Abu Farsan spent the next decade at Libyan opposition trainingcamps in Afghanistan and Sudan, with brief visits to Egypt, Malta, Saudi Arabia,and Syria. He told Human Rights Watch, “Afghanistan was a good place forthe Libyans to train to get new skills to fight Gaddafi. At the time there wasno other country that allowed us to be together and train.” In 1994, hereturned to Libya to visit family and stayed for two years, much of it inhiding. Then in June 1996, he left again, this time going to Sudan to trainwith the LIFG. He spent about five years in Sudan and got a Sudanese passport.In May 2001, he went to Syria and got married, and then shortly afterwards he wentto Afghanistan.When he arrived in Afghanistan, Abu Farsan said, everyone atthe various training camps knew that al Qaeda was planning some sort of operationagainst the United States. He said there was an open debate about it amongstall of the various groups. Even many al Qaeda Arabs did not agree with binLaden’s methods, he said: “The LIFG did not want anything to dowith it. We did not agree with these actions, but Afghanistan was a refuge forall wanted people.” After the September 11 attacks, Abu Farsan said hespent the next several months “running around all over the place tryingto find some safe refuge.”He went first to Pakistan, then to Syria and Iran. Along theway, his wife gave birth to a son, so he returned to Sudan to add his son tohis passport. He spent the next few years on the move, moving back and forth amongSyria, Iraq, Malaysia, and China. “I was worried constantly I was goingto get caught any minute,” he said. During this period, he was in contactwith Belhadj and Saadi, who were also in Asia at the time. In early 2004, he decided to seek asylum in Europe. OnFebruary 19, 2004, travelling withMoroccan passports, Abu Farsan, hiswife, and his infant son boarded a KLM flight bound for Morocco via theNetherlands. “I thought that if I made it to Holland and asked forasylum, I would be okay there. My son was less than two years old,” AbuFarsan said. When he arrived in the Netherlands, the Dutch authorities held him for six months while they entertained his asylum application. The Dutch authorities found his Sudanese passport and were trying toinsist he was Sudanese but he told them that he was in fact Libyan butcould not get Libyan documentation from the Libyan government. Heapplied for asylum based onhis Libyan nationality saying he could not return to that country. The Dutch authorities appearto have given his application consideration. He was provided a lawyer and tookpart in immigration proceedings. At one point he said he was askedto sign papersagreeing to be sent to Syria, but he refused. Ultimately, he said his asylumapplication was denied. Among the TripoliDocuments, in the UK folder, was an April 23, 2004 fax from Britishintelligence to the Libyan government thanking them “for the informationwhich you provided us on Abu Zinad, also known as Muhammad Abu Farsan,”and requesting more.[354]Click to expand ImageThey noted in the fax that they understood he was currentlyin Dutch custody and indicated their intention to share information with theDutch government. British intelligence stated, “We would like to sharethe information on Abu Zinad with Dutch liaison in The Hague in case they canassist us in identifying Abu Zinad if he is there.”[355]Four months later, on August 9, 2004, Abu Farsan and his family were deportedto Sudan. He knew it was likely that less developed countries would have fewerqualms than Western governments about sending him back to Libya, so he was veryconcerned that if he was sent to a non-Western country he would in fact be returned.He said he protested strongly. “In the court I asked if they were goingto transfer me to Libya,” he told Human Rights Watch. “I told them,if you are going to send me anywhere else, I am going to end up in Libya, sowhy not just send me to Libya directly?”[356]The Netherlands sent Abu Farsan to Khartoum around August 7or 8. His wife and son appear to have been with him. His son was about one yearold at the time. After a night in Nairobi, they arrived in Khartoum on August9, 2004. Sudanese authorities took him to a detention facility and interrogatedhim for three days. On the fourth day, they took him to what he describes as a“large building with air conditioning,” where two Sudanese officialsand an American—who introduced himself as being from the CIA—interrogatedhim. Abu Farsan said the American agent was tall, in his early thirties, had anathletic build, spoke very good Arabic “in a way I could completelyunderstand,” and “had a beard like Mohammed.”Abu Farsan said that the CIA agent interrogated him threetimes, asking him about the LIFG and its relationship with al Qaeda. He toldhim that the British also had a lot of intelligence on him but Abu Farsan saidhe was not interrogated by British agents. At first, the CIA agent was verypolite, but when Abu Farsan did not provide the answers he wanted, the agentbegan threatening that he would be sent to Libya. The CIA agent insisted thatLibya would not be any worse than Guantanamo or Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq. AbuFarsan said the American agent never physically abused him. In total, Abu Farsan was in Sudanese custody for about twoweeks. He spent much of that time on a hunger strike because the authoritieswould not tell him where his wife and son were. Then, on the morning of August21 or 22, he was told that he would be going back to Libya. He was taken to aplane with Libyan intelligence agents on board. At some point his family cameon board as well. They were all flown together to Tripoli.Treatment in LibyaUpon arrival in Tripoli, he was again separated from hiswife and child and taken to the external affairs building at the Tajouraprison. Abu Farsan said that on the first day, he was brought to see Musa Kusa:“He told me, we will bring all of you. We haveBelhadj and Saadi. We will get you all and bring you here.”For 16 months, Libyan authorities held him in isolation in adark cell “about the size of a mattress.” He had no idea what hadhappened to his family. He was forbidden from speaking to other prisoners, andthe only time he was taken out of his cell was for interrogation. Abu Farsansaid that for the first month, Libyan agents interrogated him constantly, dayand night. After the first month, he was not interrogated again, though he saidsometimes Libyan intelligence agents would show him photographs of people andask if he knew anything about them. Foreign intelligence agents neverinterrogated him. On December 23, 2004, Abu Farsan was taken out of Tajouraprison. For the next year-and-a-half, he was transferred back and forth betweenthe Sikka and Enzara prisons. During that time, he was told that his wife andson were in Libya, and he was allowed to see them.  He was also duringthis period tried and convicted for being a member of the LIFG, possessing fakedocuments, participating in the Afghan jihad, and providing material support tothe LIFG. On March 15, 2006, Abu Farsan was sentenced to life in prison. On June 7, 2006, Abu Farsan was transferred to Abu Salimprison. At Abu Salim, Abu Farsan said conditions were a little better than at Tajoura.His cell was slightly bigger and he was allowed to bathe, and the ventilationwas better. But he was still kept in isolation most of the time. He was at AbuSalim when a riot broke out in October 2008. One of his friends was killed andfive others injured when the government violently suppressed it.Overall, Abu Farsan said that the conditions of hisdetention were better than those experienced by others he knew who had beendetained in earlier years. During his period, he said, the Libyan authoritieswere being easier on prisoners as they opened relations with the West andprepared for Gaddafi’s son, Saif Gaddafi, to come to power. Conditions atAbu Salim in particular started to improve when Belhadj, Saadi, and KhalidSharif began negotiating with the government for the release of prisoners.[357]Abu Farsan was released on February 16, 2011.  IV. Transfer from Guantanamo Bay: The Case ofAbdusalam Abdulhadi Omar as-SafraniAbdusalamAbdulhadi Omar as-Safrani (Safrani)[358] is one of twoLibyans detained by the United States at the military detention facility atGuantanamo Bay and then returned to Libya by the US.[359]He asked not to be sent back to Libya, but the United States ignored theserequests. HumanRights Watch interviewed Abdusalam Abdulhadi Omar as-Safrani in Benghazi inMarch 2012. The following account and quotes are drawn from this interviewunless otherwise noted.[360]Departure from LibyaSafrani told Human Rights Watch that he left Libyain 1990 because of the enormous pressure the Gaddafi government was putting onthose committed to Islam. He first went to Saudi Arabia, but without proper papersit was difficult to remain. He went to Pakistan and then Afghanistan. He saidhe was not a member of the LIFG or al Qaedaandhe went to Afghanistan as an immigrant, not to fight against theSoviet-installed government, as did other Libyans.[361]Others detained with Safrani in Guantanamocorroborate that Safrani was not a fighter.[362]Records from Guantanamo also indicate that he had “congenital clubbedfeet.”[363] Abu Zubaydah,a Saudi currently held at Guantanamo who apparently knew Safrani inAfghanistan, said that though Safrani was at a training camp, he was justsimply “sitting with the brothers.… [Safrani was a] simple personwho could not make explosives and had bad security.”[364]After the USinvasion of Afghanistan following the September 11 attacks, Safrani fled Afghanistanto Pakistan, where he was apprehended by Pakistani security forces. He wasfirst taken to Kohat prison, where he was held for two weeks by the Pakistanimilitary. There he was interrogated by Americans in civilian clothes who tookpictures of him. After two weeks he was transferred to US custody and taken toKandahar in Afghanistan. There, he said, US personnel interrogated himcontinually and deprived him of sleep. His cell was in a tent and he wasdetained with about 10 to 15 other detainees. He said it was very cold andthere was no heat and not enough food. “This was January,” he toldHuman Rights Watch. “They gave us only one blanket for each prisoner andit wasn’t warm enough.” The Americans held him there forapproximately six weeks and then transferred him to Guantanamo Bay. Transfer to GuantanamoHe said the 18-hour transit to Guantanamo wasrough. He was transported with a large group. Their heads were shaven and theywere dressed in orange jumpsuits, hooded, and required to wear headphones andblack glasses to block sound and sight. Safrani was only told he was beingtaken to a US Navy base but not told where. He only later figured out he was inGuantanamo. He was given a blanket, toothbrush, and towel and then put in acell that was about 2 x 1 meters, where he was held for the next three months.It had a wooden ceiling, held up by four pipes from each corner of the room,mesh walls, and a concrete floor. There was no toilet in the cell, just abucket.After about three months, he was moved by bus toanother detention facility at Guantanamo, where he was detained for the nextfive years. He described this facility as a hangar, with galvanized steel wallsand a slanted roof. His cell was about the same size as his prior one—themain difference being the walls were not mesh and the lights were on 24 hoursper day. The Americans also played voices and sounds over a loudspeaker between7 a.m. and about 1 p.m. and would sometimes bang on the galvanized steel sheetsto make noise. This prevented him from sleeping and occurred almost daily forthe entire five years he was there. He said US guards beat him on several occasions,once fracturing his shoulder. Another time guards used “a hose, puttingwater on our faces, so you feel like drowning.” The InternationalCommittee of the Red Cross visited him on several occasions, and he heard fromhis family by letter for the first time three years into his detention. Safranisaid that when the US personnel deemed him uncooperative, he was put in a roomthat was extremely cold. The air conditioning was turned on high and theAmericans interrogated him the entire time. He was in the cell 20 to 30 times,and the longest time he spent in the room was 30 days.[365]He said that over time, conditions improved. Hewas allowed to participate in sports about two to three times weekly in thebeginning, and then eventually daily. The rule eventually became that detaineeswere to get up to 30 minutes of exercise per day, but often he was only allowedfive minutes, which he said was a form of punishment. Transfer and Treatmentin LibyaWhen Safrani learned he was being returned to Libya, heasked his captors for asylum or resettlement in a third country. This requestwas denied, and on December 15, 2006, he was transferred to Libya.[366]He was initially held in Tajoura for six months, then moved to al Nasser bureaufor approximately 45 days, and finally to Abu Salim prison until his release. He said he was physically abused while detained in Libya. Hesaid the Libyan authorities used electrical shocks several times on his hands,legs, and sensitive areas of his body. He was whipped on his back, kicked,punched, and slapped. He suffered pain from a toothache and was denied painrelief for one year. After several years of detention, Safrani was charged withbeing a member of LIFG and al Qaeda. He was appointed a lawyer and was in courtabout three or four times. Ultimately he was convicted and sentenced to life inprison. He was released on August 24, 2011 after the fall of Gaddafi.  V. The Case ofIbn al-Sheikh al-LibiIbn al-Sheikh al-Libi,whose real name is Ali Mohamed al-Fakheri, was a Libyan taken into custody inthe Afghanistan-Pakistan border area in late 2001. He was held in secret CIAdetention for years and subjected to abusive interrogations on numerousoccasions in different locations. During a coercive interrogation by USpersonnel in Egypt, al-Libi provided false information about Iraq having agreedto provide two al Qaeda operatives with chemical or biological weaponstraining. Then-US Secretary of State Colin Powell cited this as a key piece ofevidence during his historic speech to the United Nations on February 5, 2003,when trying to rally international support for an invasion of Iraq. Al-Libilater recanted these facts, and the CIA itself later deemed them unreliable.After years in secret CIA custody, al- Libi was subsequently sent back toLibya. He died in a prison cell in Libya on May 9, 2009. Libyan authoritiesclaimed he committed suicide.Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi was born in Ajdabiya, Libya in 1963.He left Libya in 1986, in his early 20s. According to his family, he leftmostly because he wanted to study classical Arabic and travel, not necessarilybecause he opposed the Gaddafi government.[367]“At that time, all Libyans were dissatisfied with the regime,” hisbrother, Abdul Aziz al-Fakheri, told Human Rights Watch. “But inal-Libi’s case opposition to Gaddafi was not the main reason he leftLibya.… He just wanted to see the world, to be a tourist.”[368]He first went to Mauritania, where there were a number of highly trained andrespected sheikhs specializing in classical Arabic, as well as Islamic studiesand Islamic history.[369]In Mauritania, while at the Libyan embassy, the consularofficials confiscated his passport.[370] Hisfamily said al-Libi told them the Libyans did this because they assumed thatsince he was living abroad, he was opposed to Gaddafi.[371]Without his passport, travelling became difficult. From Mauritania, for thenext four years, he traveled on foot, according to his brother, to manydifferent countries in the region including Ghana, Senegal, Morocco, and Algeria.[372]Eventually he went to Saudi Arabia, where he joinedjihadists fighting the Soviet-installed government in Afghanistan.[373]He also may have spent some time in Syria studying engineering.[374]Eventually he became the head of the Khalden training camp in Afghanistan,which pre-dated al Qaeda and was not known to be aligned with any particulargroup.[375]Various Islamist armed groups trained there, not just al Qaeda. While al-Libihas been labeled both a senior LIFG member and a senior al Qaeda operative, theevidence suggests that he was not a member of either armed group.[376]Some sources said that he strongly disagreed with al Qaeda’s philosophyand did not like Bin Laden.[377]“For [al-Libi], his time in Afghanistan was more about a man making hisway in the world, making a living,” said al-Libi’s brother el-Fakhri.“It wasn’t because he agreed with al Qaeda or their ideologicalthoughts … absolutely not.”[378]In late 2001, Pakistani authorities apprehended al-Libi andturned him over to US custody, which transferred him to the US-run detentionand interrogation facility at Bagram.[379] AtBagram he was interrogated by FBI agents, who reportedly developed a rapportwith him to the point where he was asking for asylum in the US and agreeing totestify in other cases.[380] Afterthis, however, the CIA, believing they could obtain even more information fromhim with harsher interrogation techniques, took control of the interrogationover FBI objections.[381]Afterwards, the CIA sent al-Libi to Egypt, where he was subjected to ill-treatmentby Egyptian authorities,[382] whichproduced false information linking Saddam Hussein with al Qaeda.[383]Specifically, the interrogators questioned al-Libi about alQaeda’s connections to Iraq, a subject about which al-Libi said he knewnothing and had difficulty even coming up with a story.[384]His interrogators reportedly did not like his response. Al-Libi said he wasthen put in small box, approximately 50 x 50 centimeters (20 by 20 inches—thedepth of the box was not provided), for about 17 hours, “knocked overwith a thrust across the chest,” and then “punched for 15minutes.”[385] Afterthis, he came up with a story about Iraq having agreed to provide two al Qaedaoperatives with chemical or biological weapons training.[386]Then-US President George W. Bush used this information in anOctober 2002 speech about Iraq.[387] AndSecretary of State Colin Powell used it as a key piece of evidence during hishistoric speech to the United Nations on February 5, 2003, when he tried torally international support for an invasion of Iraq.[388]But over a year earlier, the US Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) had alreadydiscredited the information. A February 22, 2002, DIA cable stated,This is the first report from Ibn al-Shaykh [al-Libi] inwhich he claims Iraq assisted al-Qa’ida’s CBRN [chemical,biological, radiological, and nuclear] efforts.… It is possible hedoes not know any further details; it is more likely this individual isintentionally misleading the debriefers. Ibn al-Shaykh has been undergoingdebriefs for several weeks and may be describing scenarios to the debriefers heknows will retain their interest. Saddam’s regime is intensely secularand is wary of Islamic revolutionary movements. Moreover Bagdad is unlikely toprovide assistance to a group it cannot control.[389]Powell later indicatedhe regretted using the information during his UN speech.[390]Although senior Bush administration officials would likely have been aware thatthe information was not credible, they did not share this with Powell beforehis speech.[391]Indeed, in January 2004, al-Libi recanted the information, saying he“lied to the [foreign government service] about future operations toavoid torture.”[392] Noother credible evidence was ever produced confirming Iraq had trained al Qaedain the use of chemical or biological weapons.[393]For years after US forces initially detained him, al-Libiwas forcibly disappeared. Human Rights Watch and numerous other nongovernmentalorganizations called upon the US government to disclose al-Libi’slocation, as well as the location of many other “disappeared”prisoners in the “global war on terror.”[394]When President Bush finally admitted the existence of a secret CIA detentionprogram and transferred 14 formerly secret detainees held by the CIA toGuantanamo on September 6, 2006, al-Libi was noticeably missing from the list. In late 2006 and early 2007, Human Rights Watch and severaljournalists received reports from Libyans in exile that al-Libi and severalother Libyans who had been in US custody had been rendered to Libya. The exactdate of al-Libi’s transfer is not clear. During a research trip to Libyain 2009, Human Rights Watch was able to confirm that al-Libi had indeed beentransferred and was being detained at Abu Salim prison in Tripoli.[395]Human Rights Watch saw al-Libi for a few minutes and tried to interview him. Heappeared agitated and angry but he sat down with researchers and listened to ashort introduction about Human Rights Watch. However, before he could beinterviewed, al-Libi got up and said before walking away, “Where were youwhen I was being tortured in American jails?”[396]Human Rights Watch and other human rights organizations had strongly condemnedthe secret CIA detention program and had been trying for years to get access toforcibly disappeared prisoners as well as those at Guantanamo, but withoutsuccess. Two weeks after Human Rights Watch saw al-Libi at Abu Salim, Libyanauthorities reported that he committed suicide in his cell, a claim that meritsa thorough investigation.[397]There is limited information available about the USdetention of al-Libi. While researching this report, Human Rights Watch triedto develop a clearer picture with information from family members and prisonerswith whom he was held. He apparently was taken into custody near the borderbetween Pakistan and Afghanistan at the end of 2001, though different dateshave been reported.[398]Adusalam Abdulhadi Omar as-Safrani, another Libyan interviewed for this report(see above) who was apprehended in the same area around the same time, said hesaw al-Libi in detention in Kohat, Pakistan, in December 2001. He had beentaken there a day or two after the Pakistani army detained him just inside thePakistan border. He was not sure of the exact date, but by the time he hadarrived in Kohat, al-Libi was already there.[399] About300 other prisoners were also being held in the same facility. Al-Libi had beeninitially detained by tribes in the area, who then turned him over to Pakistaniauthorities.[400]  After Safrani was there for about two weeks, “theAmericans” came. They were in civilian clothes, not military uniforms,and Safrani believes they were CIA. They interrogated him and later moved him,al-Libi, and the rest of a big group from Kohat to Kandahar. In Kandahar,al-Libi was identified as a commander and split from the rest of the group.[401]That was the last time Safrani saw al-Libi. Safrani was then taken toGuantanamo, where he was held until December 2006, when the United Statesforcibly transferred him back to Libya (see above).[402]According to al-Libi’s family, after Kandahar, the UnitedStates took him to Kabul (more likely Bagram Air Base)[403]and then transferred him to Egypt.[404]Al-Libi’s family said he was in Egypt for 13 months.[405]He told his family and other detainees with whom he was detained that he wassent to Egypt “in a coffin.”[406] Duringhis time in Egypt, he told others that his Egyptian captors beat and abused himconstantly. He showed one fellow prisoner marks he said were from a drill thatwas used on him in Egypt and burns on his body that he received there.[407]He told another fellow prisoner at the time that he was cut with blades on hisskin while there and that he was hung out an open window with no clothes on.[408]His Egyptian captors also had him lie on his stomach and forced his legs backtowards his shoulder blades.[409]After Egypt, al-Libi was apparently brought back to UScustody, possibly to a CIA prison at Bagram.[410] Thisis where it seems he recanted the information he had provided earlier on linksbetween Iraq and al Qaeda. On February 4 and 5, 2004, CIA officers sent cablesto headquarters acknowledging that al-Libi’s account from 2002 was notreliable.[411]Reports vary as to where al-Libi was detained after hisreturn to US custody following his time in Egypt. His brother and nephew inLibya said they mapped out his trajectory using a combination of informationthey got from him during family visits they had with him while he was detainedin Libya as well as information from others with whom he was detained.They believe al-Libi was subsequently taken to a prison in the Panjshir Valleynorth of Kabul from June 2003 to October 2003, then Kabul again, Morocco forabout a year, Guantanamo for three to five months, Alaska,[412]a US air base in Sweden,[413] andfinally to Libya. Prisoners who were held with al-Libi told Human Rights Watchthat he told them he was detained at each of these locations,[414]except some do not include Guantanamo or Sweden[415]and others add additional places, like Syria,[416]a warship,[417] andPoland or a European country for which they could not remember the name.[418]The amounts of time they say al-Libi spent in these locations vary, and theyare less certain about this information. Human Rights Watch could notindependently confirm this information. It is not clear when Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi was returned toLibya, but the first time his family was informed that he was there was inDecember 2007.[419] He wasfirst detained in Tajoura prison and was then moved to Abu Salim, where heremained until he died.[420] Atsome point after being transferred, al-Libi had been sentenced to life in prison.[421]The last time his brother saw him was in March 2009, 40 days before he died.[422]It was the fourth time he had been able to visit him in prison. Several otherfamily members had been able to visit as well.[423]In his final weeks at Abu Salim, al-Libi was held in aseparate wing of the facility. Some said he was placed there by the prisonadministration and others said he had requested the isolation.[424]The section had about 20 cells in one corridor, with 10 cells on eachside.  The corridor began with an open entrance from a courtyard and endedwith a big metal door. Al-Libi was in one of the first two cells near theentrance by the courtyard. All of the cells were empty except Libi’s. Twoprisoners, Hazem al-Ajdal and Mohammed al-Kaib, were the prisoners closest tohim physically. They were being detained on the other side of the big metaldoor, which they said was always closed. Occasionally, though, they would seeal-Libi in a place known as “the Area,” where prisoners weresometimes taken for exposure to the sun.[425]Al-Ajdal said he was being detained in this section of the prison because hehad an operation on the cornea of his eye and needed to share a cell withsomeone who could help him. His cellmate, al-Kaib, had hepatitis, as reportedlydid al-Libi.[426] Bothgot extra exposure to the sun because of this. Whenever they saw al-Libi theysaid he was always alone; the only person near him was a guard.[427]Click to expand ImageWing of Abu Salim prison whereIbn al-Sheikh al-Libi was detained, photographed on March 28, 2012. Ibnal-Sheikh al-Libi’s cell was the first one on the left. A large metaldoor at the end of the hall separated al-Libi from all other prisoners at AbuSalim.Click to expand ImageWing of Abu Salim prison whereIbn al-Sheikh al-Libi was detained, photographed on March 28, 2012. Ibnal-Sheikh al-Libi’s cell was the first one on the left. A large metaldoor at the end of the hall separated al-Libi from all other prisoners at AbuSalim. Right: The entrance to the cell of Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi at AbuSalim prison.Click to expand ImageInside the cell of Ibn al-Sheikhal-Libi at Abu Salim prison, photographed on March 28, 2012. He died in thiscell on May 9, 2009. Libyan authorities claim he committed suicide by hanginghimself with a sheet, tied into a loop and hooked onto the corner of the edgeof the wall in the middle of his cell.   ©2012 Human Rights WatchThose with whom Human Rights Watch spoke who knew al-Libisaid he was very religious and cited this as the main reason why they weresurprised by—and disbelieved—the government’s claim that hehad committed suicide. Suicide is strictly prohibited in Islam.[428]Shoroeiya told Human Rights Watch,Nobody believed it was suicide. First of all, [al-Libi] wasa very religious man and it is forbidden in our religion to commit suicide, andsecond of all, it makes no sense that after all that he had faced he would thencommit suicide. As bad as it was in Libya, it was better than any place he hadbeen.[429]Mostafa al-Mehdi (see above) saw al-Libi two weeks before hedied. During Human Rights Watch’s 2009 visit, the Libyan authorities hadgathered all the prisoners that we had requested to see together at the clinicinside the prison. Mehdi said Abu Salim prison authorities had fixed the clinicup: “They cleaned it up and put doctors inside and an ambulance outfront.” The authorities suggested to the prisoners during this meetingthat they all tell Human Rights Watch that they did not want to cooperate withus.[430] Mehdisaid during this meeting, al-Libi “did not seem himself” and“had completely changed.… He was in very bad condition—bothmentally and physically.… It was so obviously clear.… Hecouldn’t talk clearly and was so thin. You could recognize he was notwell because, I knew this guy. His character was so friendly—he used towelcome everybody and make them laugh. We had known each other for years, sinceour time in Peshawar together, but he acted like we never met or knew eachother.”[431]At the time ofal-Libi’s death, human rights groups called on the Gaddafi government toopen a full investigation.[432] Since the fall of Gaddafi, al-Libi’sbrother and uncle have renewed this request with the new government.[433] Al-Libi’s family showed Human Rights Watchpictures taken of al-Libi date-stamped the morning of his death. They said theygot the pictures from the prosecutor’s office conducting the inquiry.[434] The photos depict al-Libi in the position inwhich guards allegedly found him in his cell on the morning of his death. In the first picture, al-Libi’s back is up against agray brick wall that separated his cell in two sections. The wall was aboutseven and a half feet high and about six inches thick. His back is up againstthe six inch edge of the wall. A sheet with ends tied together is looped aroundthe top part of the thin section of the wall and his head rests in the loopcreated. His feet are firmly on the ground and his legs slightly bent at theknee.  The next picture is taken from above him. He is lying on theground, his arms are at his side. On the inside of his left arm is a largebruise that takes up a large portion of his arm. It is dark, black and blue.His feet are very red and look swollen. Another picture shows him lying on his stomach, so his backis visible. He is shirtless. There are two long light scratches that go at anangle across his back from the middle of his shoulder blades to the middle ofhis lower back. There is also a spot, about a centimeter in diameter,that lookslike a small bruise on the top of his back near his shoulder blades. At thetime of this writing, the family was looking into having the photos analyzed bya forensic specialist. The family informed us that an autopsy was done at thetime of his death and the report is with the prosecutor. VI. Detainees Rendered From Other AfricanCountries to LibyaHRW interviewed seven Libyans with an Africa connection. Inaddition to Di’iki and Madaghi, who were both initially picked up inMauritania, and Abu Farsan (see above), sent by the Netherlands to Sudan, HumanRights Watch interviewed four other former LIFG members who were picked up inAfrica and forcibly returned directly to Libya. In these cases, there werefewer allegations of Western government involvement in their renditions toLibya, although three of the four allege they were interrogated by American andother Western agents prior to their return.[435] Aftera period of detention in Libya—in two cases the detention was accompaniedby physical abuse at the hands of the Libyans—three of the four weresummarily tried and convicted for their involvement with the LIFG and sentencedto life in prison. Ismail Omar Gebril al-LwattyHuman Rights Watch interviewed Osmail Omar Gebrilal-Lwatty (Lwatty) in Tripoli in March 2012. The following account and quotesare drawn from this interview unless otherwise noted.[436]Lwatty is from Benghazi and was 22 when he leftLibya in February 1990. He had been working as a technician in the post office.In 1989 the Libyan government detained him for five days for what he said werefalse allegations of being involved with an opposition group. “I wasdefinitely dissatisfied with Gaddafi, but I wasn’t in any kind oforganized group against him,” he said. “I was afraid because thedetentions were so random and widespread and they were executing people.…I felt as though I had to leave the country.” Lwatty first went to Saudi Arabia, thenAfghanistan, where he was part of the LIFG and fought with Afghan rebelsagainst the Soviet-installed government. In 1993 he moved with the LIFG toSudan, where he lived for the next nine years. In Sudan he got married and,with the LIFG, took part in a number of failed operations against Gaddafi. On September 12, 2002, the Sudanese arrested himand found him in possession of a number of weapons that he said were for use inoperations against Gaddafi when the Libyan leader traveled to Sudan. He saidthat while in custody, he was interrogated on two separate days by individualswho identified themselves as American. One was a white, heavyset man, about 45years old, with partially balding salt-and-pepper hair and green eyes. He describedanother as having light brown hair and a medium build, and being about 30 yearsold. They had a Lebanese interpreter with them. One interrogation began around1 p.m. and went until 8 or 9 p.m. The second interrogation ran from midnight to3 a.m. They wanted to know whether he had any information about al Qaedatargeting US interests, why he was in possession of the weapons, and whether hehad any connections to the US embassy bombings in Tanzania and Kenya in 1998.Lwatty believes he was able to make the US agents understand he was onlyinterested in Gaddafi. About a month after his arrest, on October 17,2002, he was transferred back to Libya. “This is when the nightmaresbegan. I knew I was never going to see life again,” he told Human RightsWatch. He asked the Sudanese Foreign Ministry official who informed him of histransfer why he was being returned. He said he told the official, “Youknow what is going to happen to me there.” The official responded,“I have no control over it. There is an agreement between Gaddafi, Sudan,and the US.” He was sent back to Libya on a flight with his family,including his six-year-old daughter, and was immediately separated from them onarrival. He did not see or hear from them for another two years. He was successivelyheld in Tajoura prison for about 45 days, a prison he referred to as“internal security on Sikka road” for about three and a halfmonths, Ain Zara prison for about two years, and Abu Salim prison until hisultimate release on February 16, 2011.[437] Afterabout two years in detention, he said he was charged with, among other things,joining an illegal organization—the LIFG—and fighting against afriendly government—Russia. He was initially charged jointly with about20 other people. He was appointed a lawyer who he said did little more in courtthan “rattle off the names of all the people he represented.” Lwattydenied all the charges against him.  He was convicted and sentenced tolife in prison, which was later reduced to twelve years.Click to expand ImageMafud al-Sadiq Embaya AbdullahHuman Rights Watch interviewed Mafud al-Sadiq EmbayaAbdullah (Embaya) in Benghazi in March 2012. The following account and quotesare drawn from this interview unless otherwise noted.[438]Embaya was 26 when he left Libya in 1996. He is the eldestof six siblings and had been studying at the University of Benghazi. He said heleft the country after some of his neighbors were arrested. “They werecommitted to religion, they were afraid, I was afraid,” he said. “Weknew that if someone was arrested they weren’t getting out. They werebeing detained for a long time.” He had also heard that people were beingbeaten until they gave up the names of other people who would then be arrestedas well. Embaya initially went to Chad, then to Sudan,where he was involved in trade. He said he only joined the LIFG in 2000.After that he went to Afghanistan, where he stayed until late 2001.  Hethen began moving around constantly, trying to avoid arrest. He was in Iran forsix months, Sudan, Nigeria twice, and finally back to Chad. He said he wastracked down after the Chadian authorities said they found his name and contactnumber on the computer of another LIFG member who had been detained. He was arrested on November 25, 2004 inChad’s capital, N’Djamena, and held until March 17, 2005. Duringthis time he was held in a cell that had a stone floor with no mattress orblanket. His hands were handcuffed and his feet shackled day and night. He wasonly released to go to the bathroom. He was not beaten but was provided insufficientfood and lost considerable weight. Whiledetained, several individuals who told him they were American interrogated himfor a total of about 30 days. The first time was a week after he had beenarrested and the last time was two days before he was sent back to Libya. Ofthe first two interrogators, one was an older man who could speak brokenArabic. He was a white man with gray hair. The other interrogator had darkerskin and reddish-toned hair. Later a female interrogator with an interpretercame to ask questions; she had pictures of LIFG members in Sudan for him toidentify. He said the interrogators both told him they were American, and fromwhere he was detained he could see cars as they arrived to the facility. Thecar they arrived in had diplomatic plates that Embaya said indicated they werefrom the US Embassy. He said he was also interrogated separately by Frenchintelligence. They spoke French, had an interpreter from the Chadian securityoffice, and identified themselves as being part of French intelligence. Embayasaid their car had plates indicating they were from the French embassy.Embaya said the Americans asked him all sorts ofquestions about Osama bin Laden and al Qaeda. They wanted to know, among otherthings, where bin Laden was, if he had nuclear weapons, and what sort ofattacks he was planning. He said the Americans offered him a deal: they wouldpay him money and not send him back to Libya if he agreed to collectinformation for them. He said he did not trust them so did not accept theiroffer but also tried not to refuse outright. Two days after his lastinterrogation with the Americans he was sent back to Libya. He said he expectedthat. He arrived on March 17, 2005. At first he wastaken to Musa Kusa’s offices in external intelligence, then to the al Nasserbureau, then Ain Zara prison, and finally to Abu Salim prison, where he wasdetained until his release on February 16, 2011. While in Libyan custody, his captorsslapped and kicked him on numerous occasions and threatened to tear out hisfingernails and let dogs attack him. From August 28, 2008 until his release, hewas kept in solitary confinement in small cell, about 1 x 2 meters with just abucket for a toilet. They forced him to shave his beard against his religiousbeliefs. When he and the other prisoners protested their conditions, they wouldreceive abusive treatment, sometimes beatings and other times just verbalinsults.In early 2008 he was charged with being a memberof the LIFG and participating in the war in Afghanistan against the government.He was taken to court once, when they read all the charges against him andappointed a lawyer. Others were also charged that day. He never returned tocourt but a few months later was informed that he had been convicted andreceived a life sentence. “I thought I was going to spend the rest of mylife in jail,” he said.Click to expand ImageAbdullah Mohammed Omar al-TawatyHuman Rights Watch interviewed Abdullah Mohammed Omaral-Tawaty (Tawaty) in Benghazi in March 2012. The following account and quotesare drawn from this interview unless otherwise noted.[439] Abdullah Omar al-Tawaty© 2012 Human Rights WatchAbdullahMohammed Omar al-Tawaty[440] isfrom the town of Ajdabiya, in eastern Libya. He left Libya in 1996 at the ageof 23. He was studying political science at the time at a university in © 2012 Benghazi. He toldHuman Rights Watch he left the country because at the time he was involved ingroups opposed to Gaddafi and as a result, many of his friends and colleagueshad been arrested. Many were killed in the Abu Salim prison massacre of 1996.Police ransacked his cousin’s home looking for him, so he decided toleave, fearing arrest and mistreatment.Tawaty went to a number of countries with the help of theLIFG, including Egypt, Morocco, Sudan, Mauritania, and Mali. In 2000 he gotmarried and stayed in Mauritania. On November 14, 2004, the internetcafé that he was using was raided and he was arrested.  TheMauritanian authorities detained him for about seven weeks. Three days afterhis arrest, they took him to a villa that was under intensive guard, where hewas interrogated daily for about two-and-a-half weeks straight. Those whointerrogated him represented themselves as being from “Interpol.”One man identified himself as Robert from South Africa and another said he wasDiego from Spain. They spoke Arabic with a Palestinian accent. Tawaty said that for the first six days he was handcuffedto a very uncomfortable chair and prevented from sleeping. He asked for alawyer and to speak to his family, but these requests were refused. He was notphysically abused except once when a Mauritanian officer slapped him across theface. His interrogators wanted to know about the LIFGand other groups in Afghanistan, with whom they were associated, who he knew,what LIFG members were in other countries, and what sorts of operations they wereplanning. He told them that he was part of a group opposed to Gaddafi but thathe was not involved in any military actions. He admitted that others in thegroup were but that he was not involved in that part of the organization. Theygave him a polygraph test to see if he was telling the truth. After his questioningended, he was taken back to the Mauritanian intelligence department.  Tawaty said hethen escaped from detention. He told Human Rights Watch that the Mauritanianauthorities did not have sophisticated security and it was not difficult tofind a way to break out. Tawaty fled Mauritania for neighboring Mali andmanaged to elude arrest until May 14 or 15, 2006, when the authorities arrestedhim along with Sheik Othman (see below). They knew who he was and the name hewent by—Abdul Rahman. Three days later he was sent back to Libya. He did notknow where he was going until they arrived at the airplane. He was initially detained in Tajoura, then subsequentlyat the internal security department on Sikka Road, Ain Zara, and finally AbuSalim, where he was held from December 13, 2007 until February 16, 2011. Othman Salah (Sheikh Othman)Human Rights Watch interviewed Othman Salah (SheikhOthman) in Tripoli in March 2012. The following account and quotes are drawnfrom this interview unless otherwise noted.[441]Sheikh Othman left Libya in February 1990“due to the abuses of the Gaddafi regime,” he said. Prior to thishe worked for a manufacturing association. He initially went to Saudi Arabia,Pakistan, and then Afghanistan, where he fought against the Soviet-installedgovernment. After 1992, when the government fell, he moved to Africa, first toMauritania, where he lived for about two years, then to Sudan where he livedfor about a year-and-a-half, and then back to Mauritania for another fouryears. He moved around between these places because the Libyan government waslooking for him, arresting some of his colleagues with the help of theMauritanian and Sudanese governments and then sending them back to Libya. Thenin October 2002, he went to Saudi Arabia, where he stayed until January 2005. Sheikh Othman said his main role within the LIFGwhile in Saudi Arabia was to help other LIFG members get documentation andpassports, since they could not get passports issued by the Libyan government.He left Saudi Arabia when he suspected he would soon be arrested by Saudiauthorities because of these activities. But after Saudi Arabia, he said, “therewas nowhere to go.” He went to Mali.  After about three months, theauthorities arrested him on March 14 or 15, 2006, along with another LIFGmember, Abullah Mohammed Omar al Tawaty, and a Mauritanian man.[442]He believes that monitoring of his communications byforeign governments had contributed to his arrest. Earlier his wife and familyhad flown from Saudi Arabia to Mauritania. He had called his wife twice beforeshe left Saudi Arabia to help her arrange transportation. After she arrived inMauritania, she made it through airport checkpoints, but about 100 kilometerson the road out of the airport she was stopped, detained, and questioned. Fromher they learned about his being in Mali. Shortly thereafter he was arrested. Sheik Othman was brought to the Mali intelligenceheadquarters and placed in a cell by himself. Within 10 minutes, a black 4 x 4vehicle drove into the complex and two white men, who he believed wereAmerican, got out. One was in military uniform and the other in civilianclothes. Sheikh Othman said he was then interrogated for five days. High-levelMali intelligence officers were asking the questions, but he said that othersin a room next door clearly were composing them. The Mali intelligence agentconstantly went to the room next door for clarification and more questions.Whoever was directing the questions knew everything about Sheik Othman’stime in Saudi Arabia, with whom he was associated, conversations he had had, andpeople he knew. He first denied being Libyan, but they knew his name and muchabout him so he said it was useless to deny for very long. He was shown, forexample, his residency photo from Saudi Arabia. Othman said he believed therewas no cooperation between the Mali and Saudi governments at the time. Becauseof this—and because he believed neither Mauritania nor the Maligovernment had the capacity to monitor communications in the way they did, asevidenced by his wife’s detention after she arrived in Mauritania—hebelieves that the US, UK, or other Western governments with more sophisticatedsurveillance technology were involved in his arrest, detention, andinterrogation, and ultimately his transfer back to Libya. He was sent back toLibya about five days after his arrest, around March 20, 2006.Sheikh Othman told Human Rights Watch that when herealized he was being sent back to Libya he felt a sense of dread but also asense of relief: “Of course it was not good that I was going back, I wasgoing to be handed over, to surrender, but I had been living in the unknown forso long, at least I knew my direction, I was not lost anymore.” Also, hesaid, there was some relief in knowing he was not going to Guantanamo orAfghanistan, where he knew other LIFG members had been sent and treated badly.“I knew many other Libyans who had been taken to Morocco and Bagram.Although I was not happy to be going back to Libya, at least I knew I was notgoing to any of these other places.” He was initially detained in Tajoura prison for 10months, then a prison on Sikka Road for 20 days, then Ain Zara for eightmonths, and then Abu Salim prison for the duration of his detention, nearlyfour years. While in Libyan custody, Sheikh Othman said, hewas occasionally kicked and punched.  The whole time he was in Tajoura, hewas kept in a solitary cell and not allowed to see or talk to otherprisoners.  When he had a serious infection in his abdomen, he was deniedmedical treatment. And he did not have contact with his family for two years.Other than that, he said he was treated “relatively normally,”which he said “shocked me.” He credited Saif Gaddafi’sattempts at reform for this better treatment. Several years after he was sentback to Libya, he was charged with attempting to overthrow the government andfor his role within the LIFG and sentenced to life in prison. He was released on August 23, 2012, around thetime Tripoli fell to rebel forces. He now works in the offices of the TripoliMilitary Defense Council, where one of his responsibilities is compiling dataon the number of returns of Libyans living abroad by foreign governments duringthe Gaddafi government. Before Human Rights Watch’s research mission toTripoli in March 2012, Sheikh Othman provided Human Rights Watch with the namesand contact information for 21 former prisoners who he said were returned toLibya during the Gaddafi era with US, UK, or other foreign governmentinvolvement. We were able to interview 13 of these individuals for this report.Of the remaining eight, one was no longer alive (Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi); another,the only other Guantanamo detainee to be returned to Libya besides AbdusalamAbdulhadi Omar as-Safrani (Abu Sufian Ibrahim Ahmed Hamuda Bin Qumu), refusedto speak with us; and six could not be reached. Thus we were unable to confirmor deny these other alleged transfers to Libya.  VII. InternationalLegal StandardsThe treatment of the individuals interviewed in this report violatedfundamental human rights under international law. These included theprohibitions against arbitrary arrest and detention; torture and cruel, inhuman,or degrading treatment; and enforced disappearance.[443]Those apprehended in the context of an armed conflict would also have beenprotected from torture and other ill-treatment under international humanitarianlaw, or the laws of war.The subsequent rendition (transfer) of these individuals toLibya violated the prohibition against refoulement—forcible return to acountry where they were in danger of being tortured, ill-treated, orpersecuted. The principle of non-refoulement is grounded in both theprohibition against torture and international refugee law and is protected by bothtreaty and customary international law.[444]  The prohibition against torture, as well as cruel, inhuman,or degrading treatment or punishment (referred to as“ill-treatment”) is absolute.[445] Nostate, even in times of armed conflict or emergency, may “opt out”of this obligation.[446]Specifically, under the Convention againstTorture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment(Convention against Torture), a state violates the treaty not only when itdirectly inflicts torture upon a detainee, but also when it sends a person to acountry where there are substantial grounds for believing that they may besubjected to torture.[447] Thedanger must be assessed for both the initial receiving state and for subsequentstates to which the person may be expelled, returned, or extradited.[448]The assessment of the risk must take into account the existence of a consistentpattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights.[449]The individual must be given an opportunity to contest the expulsion before aneffective, independent, and impartial body before he can be transferred.[450]The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR) also mandates that a state may not expose an individual to the dangerof torture or ill-treatment by way of “extradition, expulsion orrefoulement.”[451]Further—though not an absolute prohibition, as some exceptionsapply—the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951Refugee Convention) and its 1967 Protocol protect against refoulementtoplaces where a refugee’s “life or freedom would be threatened onaccount of race, religion, nationality, social group, or politicalopinion.”[452] TheThird Geneva Convention of 1949, applicable during international armedconflicts, requires that prisoners of war only be transferred to states thatare parties to the Convention who appear willing and able to apply its protections.The Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 provides similar protection for civilians.[453]The United States and United Kingdom are both parties to theConvention against Torture and the ICCPR, as are Libya and Pakistan, alsoimplicated in abuses against persons in custody.[454]Other countries that may have some role in unlawful renditions to Libya are theNetherlands, Chad, Mauritania, Mali, Morocco, Malaysia, and China.[455]The United States violated its international legalobligations by detaining individuals without charge or trial for as long as twoyears, subjecting them to torture and other ill-treatment, depriving them ofaccess to lawyers and family members, and then returning them to Libya inviolation of their right to non-refoulement. Other countries also helddetainees without charge or trial and subjected them to torture or ill-treatment.Governments had sufficient information to determine that LIFG members sent backto Libya faced torture—most suffered serious abuses and violations oftheir due process rights. The Netherlands gave Muhammad Abu Farsan an asylumhearing before deporting him to Sudan. However, an investigation into the rolethat intelligence from MI6 or the CIA may have played in the transfer, andwhether Dutch authorities adequately assessed the risk of ultimate transfer toLibya, should be undertaken.[456]A number of detainees in US and later Libyan custody facedlong periods of solitary confinement. The UN Commission on Human Rights noted inan April 2003 resolution that “prolonged incommunicado detention mayfacilitate the perpetration of torture and can itself constitute a form ofcruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or even torture.”[457]The UN Human Rights Committee stated that “prolonged solitary confinementof the detained or imprisoned person may amount to acts prohibited by article7” of the ICCPR on torture and ill-treatment.[458]The UN special rapporteur on torture stated in an August 2011 report that“social isolation and sensory deprivation [in solitary confinement] thatis imposed by some States does, in some circumstances, amount to cruel, inhumanand degrading treatment and even torture.”[459]The United States inparticular sought to get around the prohibition on rendition to torture throughthe use of “diplomatic assurances”—promises obtained from thereceiving government that the transferee would not be ill-treated. Requests forthese promises appear in some of the Tripoli Documents. One document from theCIA to Libya’s Musa Kusa shows the CIA trying to help the Libyans“assume control” of senior LIFG member Saadi in Hong Kong. Awarethat Hong Kong was worried about “international concerns” overhaving a Libyan-registered aircraft land in Hong Kong, the CIA offered to payfor a third party charter flight for Saadi. “If payment of a charteraircraft is an issue, our service would be willing to assist financially tohelp underwrite those costs,” the document reads. It goes on to say,“Please be advised that if we pursue that option, we must have assurances… that [Saadi] and his family will be treated humanely and that his humanrights will be respected.”[460]  Though it is unclear if the United States ever received suchassurances from Libya and, if so, in what form, diplomatic assurances areinsufficient to protect against the risk of torture or ill-treatment.[461]The United Kingdom entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with Libyain October 2005 in which Tripoli promised not to torture terrorism suspectssent from the UK. In 2007, however, British courts blocked returns of people toLibya under the MOU on the grounds that the suspects remained at real risk ofbeing tortured if sent back to Libya, despite the MOU.[462]One former CIA officer said that diplomatic assurances weremade with the knowledge that they would be ignored. “Each time a decisionto do a rendition was made, we reminded the lawyers and policy makers thatEgypt was Egypt, and that Jimmy Stewart never starred in a movie called ‘Mr.Smith Goes to Cairo,” said Michael Scheuer, a former CIA officer whoclaims to have initiated renditions to other countries during the Clintonadministration. “[The lawyers] usually listened, nodded, and theninserted a legal nicety by insisting that each country to which the agency delivereda detainee would have to pledge it would treat him according to the rules ofits own legal system.”[463]In the rare case in which diplomatic assurances have beenfound to satisfy obligations, they were much more robust than those the UnitedStates requested in the Tripoli Documents, including, among other things,post-return monitoring plans through ostensibly independent third parties.[464]But even these monitoring plans failed to adequately protect the individualsfrom the risk of torture in countries where the level of abuse is such thatthey would face a real risk of torture there.[465]Many forms of torture—such as sexual violence, prolonged solitaryconfinement, waterboarding and other mock executions, and sleep deprivation—leaveno visible marks and can therefore be hidden. Detainees are also often afraidto report abuse to outside monitors for fear of reprisal. Governments have an obligation under international law toinvestigate and prosecute those responsible for human rights violations and toprovide redress for victims of abuse.[466] TheConvention against Torture requires states to ensure that all acts of tortureare criminalized under the state’s domestic law. The United States hasdone so in its federal anti-torture statute, the War Crimes Act, and throughindividual state criminal codes.[467] TheConvention against Torture and the ICCPR obligate states to ensure that their domesticlegal systems include an effective remedy for redress and an enforceable rightto fair and adequate compensation, and that such remedies are enforced.[468]However, despite overwhelming evidence that senior officialsin the Bush administration were responsible for policies that led to tortureand abuse against numerous individuals in US custody, there has been nocriminal investigation into these alleged crimes.[469]Additionally, since the September 11 attacks, no federal court has granted ajudicial remedy to victims of alleged US torture or rendition to torture.[470]In the United Kingdom, more efforts have been undertaken toexamine the government’s role in torture and to compensate for abuse. TheTripoli Documents exposed MI6’s role in the torture and rendition of twoLibyans discussed in this report—Abdul Hakim Belhadj and Sami al-Saadi.The documents have, appropriately, led to a criminal inquiry.[471]Two earlier criminal investigations into alleged complicity in torture by MI5and MI6 were concluded without anyone being charged. In June 2010, British Prime Minister David Cameron announceda broader inquiry into policy failures that led to UK complicity in abuse,known as the “Gibson Inquiry” (after the retired judge who chairedit, Sir Peter Gibson). Human Rights Watch, which had called for such aninquiry, hoped that it would be capable of uncovering a full and accuratepicture of UK involvement in overseas abuse. But when the terms of referencefor the inquiry were published in July 2011, it became clear that the inquirylacked the necessary independence and transparency to achieve this. As aresult, Human Rights Watch and other nongovernmental organizations decided notto participate in the inquiry.[472]The British government had always intended that the inquirywould only start work after the conclusion of any criminal cases. In January2012, when the criminal investigations into the cases of Belhadj and Saadi wereannounced, the UK government stated it was shelving the Gibson Inquiry andwould hold a second judge-led inquiry at a later date once the Libya criminalcases were resolved.[473]Regarding the right to redress, the United Kingdom settledthe cases of fifteen former and one current Guantanamo detainees, who sued overUK complicity in their rendition and torture. The government initially foughtthe case but later settled, after a high court ruling that confidentialdocuments would have to be released in the court proceedings.[474]The government admitted no liability along with the settlement. The Belhadj and Saadi cases are also the subject of civilsuits against former UK government officials and the UK government itself. Buta draft law introduced by the government in May 2011, known as the Justice andSecurity bill, seeks to widen the use of secret hearings in civil courts whennational security grounds are invoked. This would mean that applicants andtheir lawyers of choice would be excluded. Their interests would instead byrepresented by a security-cleared lawyer who is barred from communicating withthe applicant about the secret evidence. Parliament is considering the bill atthis writing.[475] RecommendationsTo the United StatesGovernmentConsistent with obligations under the Convention against Torture,investigate credible allegations of torture and ill-treatment since September11, 2001 and implement a system of compensation to ensure all victims canobtain redress. Acknowledge past abuses and provide a full accounting of everyperson that the CIA has held in its custody pursuant to its counterterrorismauthority since 2001, including names, dates they left US custody, locations towhich they were transferred, and their last known whereabouts. Ensure that any person subject to rendition abroad has the right,prior to transfer, to challenge its legality before an independent tribunal,including any diplomatic assurances made; to legal counsel; and to appeal a transferbefore it is carried out. Prohibit reliance upon diplomatic assurances against torture andill-treatment (and make public the procedures used to ensure compliance) ifthere is any credible evidence the person subject to transfer faces a risk oftorture or other ill-treatment. Include in required periodic reports to the Committee againstTorture, the Human Rights Committee, and other relevant international andregional monitoring bodies detailed information about all cases in which requestsfor diplomatic assurances against the risk of torture or other ill-treatment havebeen sought or secured in respect to a person subject to transfer.To the President of the UnitedStatesDirect the attorney general to begin a criminal investigationinto US government detention practices and interrogation methods sinceSeptember 11, 2001, including the CIA detention program. The investigationshould examine the role of US officials, no matter their position or rank, whoparticipated in, authorized, ordered, or had command responsibility for tortureor ill-treatment and other unlawful detention practices, including enforceddisappearance and rendition to torture or other ill-treatment.Make publicly available the August 2009 report of the SpecialTask Force on Interrogation and Transfers (an inter-agency task force set up bythe Obama administration in January 2009).  To the US CongressCreate an independent, nonpartisan commission to investigate themistreatment of detainees in US custody anywhere in the world since September11, 2001, including torture, enforced disappearance, and rendition to torture.Such a commission should hold hearings, have full subpoena power, compel theproduction of evidence, and be empowered to recommend the creation of a specialprosecutor to investigate possible criminal offenses, if the attorney generalhas not commenced such an investigation. To the Government of theUnited KingdomSet up a new, judge-led inquiry into the United Kingdom’sinvolvement in detainee abuse and renditions to torture with full independencefrom the government and authority to allow it to establish the truth, includinga presumption in favor of publication of information and evidence, with finaldecisions on such publication to be made by the inquiry. This inquiry should beset up immediately, without any requirement to wait for criminal investigationsor warranted criminal prosecutions of UK officials.Where the United Kingdom is involved in the transfer of a personoutside British territory and British control, condition continued UKinvolvement on guarantees that the person has the opportunity to challenge thelawfulness of the transfer in an independent court prior to the transfer,including on the grounds of torture or other ill-treatment.End efforts to pass the Security and Justice bill, which wouldwiden the use of secret hearings whenever national security grounds are invokedin civil court proceedings, excluding the person affected and their lawyer fromthe courtroom and preventing disclosure of material showing UK involvement inwrongdoing by other countries.Provide a full accounting of the involvement of British securityservices in the detention or transfer of individuals to other countries withoutprocess since September 11, 2001, including the names of the victims, dates,level of involvement, locations to which they were transferred, and last knownwhereabouts. Publish without delay current and past guidance to theintelligence services on interrogation of suspects overseas. Legislate to revise the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and theIntelligence Act 1994 to clarify that superior orders or acting under “lawfulauthority” can never be a defense to complicity or participation intorture abroad.Revise or abolish section 135 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988,which permits the attorney general to prevent a prosecution on torture-relatedcharges. In the meantime, the attorney general should announce that he will notintervene in any prosecution for crimes connected with torture, but will deferall decisions on prosecutions to the director of public prosecutions.To the Government of LibyaCooperate with parties conducting investigations into therendition of individuals to Libya since 2001.Promptly investigate all allegations of torture and ill-treatmentin detention facilities run by the state and armed groups in a thorough and impartialway.Hold accountable all those responsible for using torture orill-treatment against persons in custody.Ensure that national laws provide safeguards against abuse by lawenforcement officials during arrest and detention activities, as well as safeguardsto ensure full due process rights.Ensure that confessions and other forms of evidence obtained bymeans of torture are not admissible in a court of law.Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention againstTorture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. To the Government of PakistanTake all necessary measures to end the use of torture and otherill-treatment by Pakistani military intelligence agencies and civilian lawenforcement agencies. Impartially investigate allegations of torture and other ill-treatmentof terrorism suspects and, where sufficient evidence of wrongdoing exists,prosecute those responsible, regardless of position or rank.Ensure that all Pakistani military intelligence and lawenforcement personnel at every level have received appropriate training inhuman rights law and its application in all cases, including with respect toterrorism suspects.To the Government of theNetherlandsThe Netherlands was the only government implicated in this reportthat does appear to have provided one of those profiled here with a hearingprior to sending him to another country. However it should still conduct aninvestigation into the transfer of Muhammad Abu Farsan from the Netherlands to Sudan,leading to his rendition to Libya. The investigation should determine whetherauthorities properly upheld their obligations to assess the risk of abuse orpersecution of Abu Farsan, not only in the initial receiving state to whichthey sent him, but also in the subsequent states to which he might be—andin fact was—expelled, returned, or extradited.As a part of the investigation into the transfer of Muhammad AbuFarsan, examine and disclose publicly the role that intelligence from the CIA orMI6 may have played in the Dutch government’s decision to transfer him toa country that did not offer sufficient protection against onward transfer toLibya. To the Governments of China,Hong Kong, Malaysia, and ThailandConduct an investigation into the transfers of Sami Mostefaal-Saadi and Abdul Hakim Belhadj to Libya, where there was clear risk oftorture or ill-treatment upon return, and whether authorities properly upheldtheir obligations to protect individuals against these abuses.As a part of the investigation into the transfers of Saadi andBelhadj, examine and disclose publicly the role that intelligence from the CIA orMI6 may have played in each government’s decision not to prevent onwardtransfers to countries where they feared torture or other forms of persecution.To the Governments of Chad,Mauritania, Mali, Morocco, and SudanConduct an investigation into the transfers of Muhammed AbuFarsan, Ismail Omar Gebril al-Lwatty, Saleh Hadiyah Abu Abdullah Di’iki,Mustafa Salim Ali el-Madaghi, Mafud al-Sadiq Embaya Abdullah, Abdullah MohammedOmar al-Tawaty, and Othman Salah to countries where they feared torture orother forms of persecution, and whether authorities properly upheld theirobligations to protect individuals against return to torture or other ill-treatment.As a part of the investigation into the transfers of Abu Farsan,Lwatty, Di’iki, Madaghi, Abdullah, Tawaty, and Salah, examine anddisclose publicly the role that intelligence from the CIA or MI6 may have playedin each government’s decision not to prevent transfers to Libya.  AcknowledgmentsThis report was written by Laura Pitter, counterterrorismadvisor at Human Rights Watch. It is based on research conducted in Tripoliprimarily by Pitter but also by Sidney Kwiram, former emergencies consultantfor Human Rights Watch, and further phone interview research from New York byPitter and Hanan Salah, Libya and Mauritania researcher. It is also based ondocuments found by Peter Bouckaert, emergencies director, in Tripoli in August2011, as well as independent research on unlawful rendition and secretdetention by the United States and other governments over the past decade.Stacy Sullivan, consultant to Human Rights Watch, drafted early parts of theBackground and Detention in Asia sections of the report. Mohammed al-Bahry, WagdeBargig, and Basem Tulti facilitated interviews and provided translation for thereport. The report was substantively reviewed and edited by JamesRoss, legal and policy director, Alison Parker, US program director, MariaMcFarland, US program deputy director, Andrea Prasow, senior counterterrorismcounsel and advocate, and Joseph Saunders, program director. Fred Abrahams,special advisor to Human Rights Watch’s program office, John Sifton, Asiaadvocacy director, Heba Morayef, researcher in the Middle East and North Africadivision, Bill Frelick, director of Human Rights Watch’s refugee program, Peter Bouckaert, emergencies director, andTom Malinowski, Washington advocacy director, provided additional edits andsubstantive guidance.  Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor for the legal and policyoffice, Ben Ward, deputy director for the Europe and Central Asia division, AliDayan Hasan, Pakistan director, Eric Goldstein, deputy director of the MiddleEast and North Africa division, and Corrine Dufka, senior researcher in theAfrica division, provided specialist review. Dinah PoKempner, general counselof Human Rights Watch, provided legal review. Sana Ahmed, Klatsky Fellow,provided additional research, as did interns Kimberly Colabro and JasonTauches. Adam Lewis, US program associate for terrorism andcounterterrorism, provided production assistance, as did Elena Vanko andSamantha Reiser, both US program associates, Grace Choi, publications director,Enrique Piraces, senior online strategist, Anna Lopriore, photographyspecialist, Jessie Graham, senior multimedia producer, Amanda Baily, multimediaspecialist, Pierre Bairin, media director, and Fitzroy Hepkins, productionmanager. Human Rights Watch is enormously grateful to the victims andfamilies who shared their stories and who had the wherewithal to endure hours,sometimes days, of questioning by researchers for this report. We are alsograteful to the many journalists, human rights reporters, and non-governmentalorganizations committed to reporting about these issues. We are particularlyindebted to the American Civil Liberty Union for its freedom of information actlitigation that has led to the declassification of many important documentsrevealing US abuses against individuals in the name of counterterrorism. We arealso especially indebted to the New York University Center for Human Rights andGlobal Justice for putting together the 182-page declaration of Mohammed Farag AhmadBashmilah, and Amnesty International for documenting the case of Khaledal-Maqtari, both containing key corroborating information cited as evidence inthis report.Appendix I: Tripoli DocumentsDownload Tripoli documents (PDF, 49 pages, 5 MB)Appendix II: Shoroeiya DrawingsDownload Shoroeiya drawings (PDF, 5 pages, 412 KB)[1]“Watch Libyan rendition victim Abdel HakimBelhadj talk to the European Parliament,” Reprieve.org, April 12, 2012,at 0:16 and 2:30, http://www.reprieve.org.uk/tvandradio/Belhadj_European_Parliament(accessed June 15, 2012).[2]Rendition is the transfer of an individual betweengovernments. Transferring someone to another country without providing them anadequate opportunity to contest that transfer violates basic rights underinternational human rights law. Transferring someone to another governmentwhere they would face a serious risk of torture or other ill-treatment isunlawful. Transferring an individual to the custody of another government forthe purpose of torture, usually to obtain information, is a practice commonlyreferred to as rendition to torture, which did not appear to be the intent ofUS renditions to Libya in the cases described in this report. US returns toLibya may have been motivated by the likelihood that finding another country toaccept them might have been difficult or by an effort to improve relations withGaddafi.[3]Testimony of Michael Hayden in front of the SenateSelect Committee on Intelligence, February 5, 2008,http://www.intelligence.senate.gov/pdfs/110824.pdf, p. 71-72 (accessed July 2,2012) (“Let me make it very clear and to state so officially in front ofthis Committee that waterboarding has been used on only threedetainees.”). The CIA waterboarded Khalid Sheikh Mohammed 183 times, AbuZubaydah at least 83 times, and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri twice. CIA Office ofthe Inspector General, “Special Review: Counterterrorism Detention andInterrogation Activities (September 2001 – October 2003),” May 7,2004, declassified in August 2009,http://graphics8.nytimes.com/packages/pdf/politics/20090825-DETAIN/2004CIAIG.pdf(accessed July 2, 2012), (“CIA OIG report”), p. 90-91.[4]George W. Bush, Decision Points (New York,Crown Publishers, 2012), p. 171 (“Of the thousands of terrorists wecaptured in the years after 9/11, about a hundred were placed into the CIAprogram. About a third of those were questioned using enhanced techniques.Three were waterboarded.”).[5]Donald Rumsfeld, Known and Unknown: A Memoir(New York: Sentinel, 2012), p. 585 (“To my knowledge, no U.S. militarypersonnel involved in interrogations waterboarded any detainees—not atGuantanamo Bay, or anywhere else in the world.”).[6]USState Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, “CountryReports on Human Rights Practices – 2004: Libya,”http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/2004/41727.htm(accessed August 15,2012); and“Country Reportson Human Rights Practices – 2006: Libya,”http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/2006/78858.htm, (accessed August 15, 2012). The UK was alsoconcerned about human rights abuses in Libya during this period. The 2004 humanrights report by the UK Foreign Office states, “[T]he UK remainsseriously concerned by the human rights situation in Libya, includingrestrictions on freedom of expression and assembly, political prisoners,arbitrary detention and conditions in Libyan prisons.” UK Foreign &Commonwealth Office, “Human Rights: Annual Report 2004,”http://fcohrdreport.readandcomment.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/human-rights-report-2004.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), p. 67.[7]Human Rights Watch interviews withMohammedal-Shoroeiya (Shoroeiya), Tripoli, Libya, March 18, 2012; and Sami Mostefaal-Saadi (Saadi), Tripoli, Libya, March 14, 2012.[8]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[9]Human Rights Watch interview with Adusalam AbdulhadiOmar as-Safrani (Safrani), Benghazi, Libya, March 20, 2012.[10]Human Rights Watch interview with Saadi, March 14,2012.[11]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March 18,2012; Human Rights Watch interview with Saadi, March 14, 2012.[12]Human Rights Watch interviews with Safrani, March 20,2012; and Saadi, March 14, 2012.[13]Ibid.[14]Human Rights Watch interviews with Khalid al-Sharif(Sharif), Tripoli, Libya, March 14, 2012;Shoroeiya, March 18, 2012; Muhammed Abu Farsan (Abu Farsan ), Tripoli, Libya,March 26, 2012;Sheikh Othman Salah,Tripoli, Libya, March 15, 2012;andSaadi, March 14, 2012.[15]Human Rights Watch interviews with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012; Majid al-Maghrebi (Maghrebi), Tripoli, Libya, March 16, 2012; Sharif,March 14, 2012; Osmail Omar Gebril al-Lwatty (Lwatty), Tripoli, Libya, March17, 2012; Abu Farsan, March 26, 2012; and Saleh Hadiyah Abu AbdullahDi’iki (Di’iki), Tripoli, Libya, March 18, 2012.[16]Human Rights Watch interviews with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012 (“I did not have an opportunity to talk to the lawyer. Lawyerwas a man. Spoke to him only once. Just time to introduce himself.”); andMustafa Jawda al-Mehdi (Mehdi), Tripoli, Libya, March 14, 2012 (“Yes. Iwas appointed a public defender. I didn’t see her or even speak toher.”).[17]Abdul Hakim Belhadj (Belhadj) said he wasinterrogated by Americans four times, as well as by the British, French,Spanish, Germans, and Italians. Kim Sengupta, “Libyan rebel leader saysMI6 knew he was tortured,” The Independent, September 6, 2011,http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/libyan-rebel-leader-says-mi6-knew-he-was-tortured-2349778.html(accessed August 27, 2012). See alsoChulov, “MI6 knew I was tortured, says Libyan rebel leader,” TheGuardian,http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/sep/05/abdul-hakim-belhaj-libya-mi6-torture?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487(accessed August 29, 2012).Saadi said hewas interrogated by American, British, and Italian intelligence agencies, aswell as by some agents who were speaking French, though he was not sure if theywere French. Sharif said he was interrogated by French intelligence agents.Human Rights Watch interviews with Saadi, March 14, 2012; and Sharif, March 14,2012.[18]Tripoli Document 2142refers to Madaghi by one of his aliases, “Mustafa Salim Ali ModeriTarabulsi, aka Shaykh Musa.”[19]Ian Cobain,“Libyan dissident tortured by Gaddafi to sue Britain overrendition,” The Guardian, October 6, 2011,http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/oct/06/libyan-dissident-tortured-sues-britain(accessed April 22, 2012).[20]“Watch Libyan rendition victim Abdel HakimBelhadj talk to the European Parliament,” Reprieve.org, April 12, 2012,at 1:38.[21]“Blair hails new Libyan relations,” BBCNews, March 25, 2004, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/3566545.stm[22]Ibid.[23]Cobain, “Libyan dissident tortured by Gaddafito sue Britain over rendition,” The Guardian (“[T]he casecurrently relies upon a number of documents that Human Rights Watch, the NewYork-based NGO, found last month.”); See also “Investigation intorendition welcomed,” Leigh Day & Co. Solicitors news release, January12, 2012, http://www.leighday.co.uk/News/2012/January-2012/Investigation-into-Rendition-Welcomed(Leigh Day & Co. is the law firm representingboth Belhadj and Saadi and their families; the press release states“[a]fter Gaddaffi was overthrown documents were discovered by HumanRights Watch which allegedly show how British personnel were instrumental inhis detention and rendition.” Claims filed by Leigh Day & Co. relyupon a number of these documents.); and Richard Norton-Taylor, “Libyanrebel leader sues Britain over rendition ordeal,” The Guardian,December 19, 2012,http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/dec/19/libyan-rebel-abdel-hakim-belhadj?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487(accessed April 22, 2012).[24]“Joint statement by the Director of PublicProsecutions and the Metropolitan Police Service,” Crown ProsecutionService news release, January 1, 2012,http://www.cps.gov.uk/news/press_statements/joint_statement_by_the_director_of_public_prosecutions_and_the_metropolitan_police_service/(accessed April 22, 2012).[25]  Belhadjran as a candidate under the Islamist political party Hizb al-Watan and Saadi as acandidate under the party al-Umma al-Wasat. Neither did as well asexpected. Omar Ashour, “Libya’s Defeated Islamists,” July 17, 2012,http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/libya-s-defeated-islamists(accessed on July 18, 2012).[26]In 2009 Human Rights Watch interviewed Abdul HakimBelhadj, Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed al-Shoroeiya, Majid al-Maghrebi, and Mostafaal-Mehdi in Abu Salim. Human Rights Watch also spoke briefly to Ibn al-Sheikhal-Libi during the same visit, but he refused to speak to us, saying“[w]here were you when I was being tortured in American jails?”“Libya/US: Investigate Death of Former CIA Prisoner,” Human RightsWatch news release, May 11, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/news/2009/05/11/libyaus-investigate-death-former-cia-prisoner.[27]“US/UK: Documents Reveal Libya RenditionDetails,” Human Rights Watch news release, September 9, 2011,http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/09/08/usuk-documents-reveal-libya-rendition-details.[28]Human Rights Watch, The United States’“Disappeared”: The CIA’s Long-Term “GhostDetainees,” October 12, 2004,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2004/10/12/united-states-disappeared-cias-long-term-ghost-detainees;Human Rights Watch, List of ‘Ghost Prisoners’ Possibly in CIACustody, November 30, 2005,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/11/30/list-ghost-prisoners-possibly-cia-custody;Human Rights Watch, Ghost Prisoner: Two Years in Secret CIA Detention,Vol. 19, No. 1(G), February 27, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/us0207webwcover.pdf;Human Rights Watch, Off the Record: US Responsibility for EnforcedDisappearances in the “War on Terror,”  June 7, 2007,http://www.hrw.org/legacy/backgrounder/usa/ct0607/ct0607web.pdf; Human RightsWatch, “Letter to Bush Requesting Information on MissingDetainees,” February 27, 2007,http://www.hrw.org/news/2007/02/26/letter-bush-requesting-information-missing-detainees;See also Human Rights Watch Statement on US Secret Detention Facilities inEurope, November 7, 2005,http://www.hrw.org/news/2005/11/06/human-rights-watch-statement-us-secret-detention-facilities-europe;and Human Rights Watch, “US Operated Secret ‘Dark Prison’ inKabul,” December 20, 2005, http://www.hrw.org/news/2005/12/18/us-operated-secret-dark-prison-kabul.[29]Michael Isikoff, “The Missing Terrorist,”Newsweek, May 27, 2007,http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2007/05/27/the-missing-terrorist.html(accessed July 31, 2012); Craig Whitlock, “From CIA Jails, Inmates FadeInto Obscurity,” Washington Post, October 27, 2007,http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/10/26/AR2007102602326_pf.html(accessed July 31, 2012).[30]“Libya/US: Investigate Death of Former CIAPrisoner,” Human Rights Watch news release; See also Peter Finn,“Detainee Who Gave False Iraq Data Dies in Prison in Libya,” WashingtonPost, May 12, 2009, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/05/11/AR2009051103412.html(accessed August 29, 2012).[31]Mohammed Shoroieiya, Abdullah Mohammed Omaral-Tawaty, and Mafud al-Sadiq Embaya Abdullah left Libya after 1990, Shoroeiyain 1991, and Tawaty and Embaya in 1996.[32]Amnesty International documented several serious grosshuman rights violations in Libya during the 1970s and 1980s, including“severe limitations on the rights to freedom of expression andassociation; arbitrary arrests and detentions of thousands of real or perceivedopponents of the political system; incommunicado detention; torture or otherforms of ill-treatment; grossly unfair trials; unlawful killings and summaryexecutions; and the imposition of the death penalty including for the peacefulexercise of the right to freedom of expression and association.” SeeAmnesty International, ‘Libya ofTomorrow’: What hope for human rights, MDE 19/007/2010, June 2010,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE19/007/2010/en/65e2d9ca-3b76-4ea8-968f-5d76e1591b9c/mde190072010en.pdf(accessed July 24, 2012), p. 18.[33]Ibid.[34]See Human Rights Watch, Libya—Words toDeeds: The Urgent Need for Human Rights Reform, vol. 18, no. 1(E), January2006, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/libya0106webwcover.pdf, p.48-49. Fifteen out of thirty-two individuals interviewed by Human Rights Watchthat were imprisoned in Libya between 1990 and 2006 said that Libyan securityauthorities had tortured them during interrogations, usually to extract aconfession.[35]See Human Rights Watch, Words to Deeds,p. 38-42.[36]Libyan PenalCode(1953), art. 173; See also Human RightsWatch, Words to Deeds, p. 29; and Amnesty International, ‘Libyaof Tomorrow’,p. 18(“mass arrests of suspected opponents of the political system and publicexecutions of presumed ‘counter-revolutionary’ elements”).[37]See Human Rights Watch, Words to Deeds, p. 12.[38]Human Rights Watch, Words to Deeds, p. 12. TheGreen Book is available in English athttp://www.geocities.com/Athens/8744/readgb.htm (accessed August 12, 2012).[39]Human Rights Watch, Words to Deeds, p. 13.[40]Alison Pargeter, Libya: The Rise and Fall ofQaddafi (New Haven and London, Yale University Press, 2012), p. 94-95.[41]Ibid., p. 97. See also Amnesty International, Libya:Time to Make Human Rights a Reality, MDE 19/002/2004m April 2004,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE19/002/2004/en/0f0c0416-d631-11dd-ab95-a13b602c0642/mde190022004en.pdf(accessed August 12, 2012), p. 5.[42]Amnesty International, ‘Libya ofTomorrow’, p. 18.[43]Paul Sonne andMargaret Cocker, “Firms Aided Libyan Spies,” Wall Street Journal,August 30, 2011,http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424053111904199404576538721260166388.html(accessed August 12, 2012); Ken Silverstein, “How Kadafi Went From Foe toAlly,” Los Angeles Times, September 4, 2005,http://articles.latimes.com/2005/sep/04/world/fg-uslibya4 (accessed May 20,2012).[44]Pargeter, Libya: The Rise and Fall of Qaddafi,p. 101; See also Cameron Robertson, et. al., “Libya Archive RevealsPictorial History of Gaddafi’s Brutal Reign—Video,” TheGuardian, July 18, 2011,http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2011/jul/18/libya-muammar-gaddafi(accessed July 25, 2012); andAmnestyInternational, ‘Libya of Tomorrow’, p. 18.[45]Pargeter, Libya:The Rise and Fall of Qaddafi,p.102-103.[46]Robertson,“Libya Archive Reveals Pictoral History of Gaddafi’s BrutalReign-Video,” The Guardian;Lindsey Hilsum, Sandstorm: Libya in the Time of Revolution (NewYork: Penguin Press, 2012), p. 89;Pargeter,Libya: The Rise and Fall of Qaddafi,p.101-103; AmnestyInternational, ‘Libya of Tomorrow’, p. 18.[47]Sean Kane, “The Libyan Rorschach,” ForeignPolicy, June 14, 2012, http://mideast.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2012/06/12/the_libyan_rorschach(accessed June 14, 2012).[48]Pargeter, Libya: The Rise and Fall of Qaddafi,p. 114-115.[49]Ibid., p. 116.[50]Kane, “The Libyan Rorschach,” ForeignPolicy.[51]Pargeter, Libya: The Rise and Fall of Qaddafi,p. 114-115 (“It is difficult to express just how shocking this denial [ofthe Sunnah as the second source of authority of Sunni Islam] was to SunniMuslims at the time (and indeed today)”); See also Francois Burget andWilliam Dowell, The Islamic Movement in North Africa, Center for MiddleEastern Studies, University of Texas, Austin, 1983, generally Chapter 8.[52]Ibid., p. 115-116.[53]Silverstein, “How Kadafi Went From Foe toAlly,” Los Angeles Times; See also Camille Tawil, Brothers inArms: The Story of al-Qa’ida and the Arab Jihadists (Saqi Books,London, 2011), p. 33 (“Those who escaped the mass arrests did not waitfor further evidence that the time was not yet ripe for their jihad; instead,they packed their bags and followed their Arab brothers to Afghanistan.”).[54]Pargeter,Libya:The Rise and Fall of Qaddafi,p. 113-117; Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 33.[55]Silverstein, “How Kadafi Went from Foe toAlly,” Los Angeles Times.[56]Pargeter,Libya:The Rise and Fall of Qaddafi,p. 103-105 (On one occasion, Musa Kusa,Gaddafi’s former Intelligence Chief, reportedly admitted to thesekillings, reportedly telling The Times “on 11 June 1980: ‘Wekilled two in London and there were another two to be killed… I approveof this.” On another occasion the attacker of a Libyan man killed in Romereportedly told the police that he was sent by people to kill the victimbecause he was a “traitor” and an “enemy of thepeople.”); See also these two Associated Press stories, one in theSchenectady Gazette and another in the Gainesville Sun reportingon May 18, 1984 that the Gaddafi government had taken a decision, accordingto JANA,the official Libyan news agency, to form squads to hunt down “traitors,fugitives and stray dogs,” wherever they are, and “liquidate”them without “any hesitation”: “Libya Forms Suicide Squads tokill ‘Traitors, Fugitives, and Stray Dogs,’” SchenectadyGazette, May 18, 1984,bit.ly/RK9UV2(accessed August 18, 2012); and “Libyan SuicideSquads to Chase, ‘Traitors’,” Gainesville Gazette, May18, 1984,http://bit.ly/Sx6lkn(accessedAugust 19, 2012); See alsoHilsum,Sandstorm, p. 79-83.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Mustafa Salim Aliel-Madaghi (Madaghi), Tripoli, Libya, March 26, 2012.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Abu Farsan, March26, 2012.[59]See Human Rights Watch, Truth and JusticeCan’t Wait: Human Rights Developments in Libya Amid InstitutionalObstacles, 1-56432-563-6, December 2009,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/libya1209web.pdf (accessed July24, 2012), p. 53 (“Many of the prisoners who were killed in 1996 had beenimprisoned in Abu Salim since 1989 or 1995, years in which mass arrests tookplace to crack down on perceived opposition.”).[60]Human RightsWatch interview with Saadi, March 14, 2012;See also Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 181, n. 1 and these reports formore information about the Abu Salim killings: Human Rights Watch,“Libya: June 1996 Killings at Abu Salim Prison,” June 28, 2006,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/libya2003.pdf; and Human RightsWatch, “Libya: Truth and Justice Can’t Wait,” Dec. 12, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/libya1209web.pdf, p. 46.[61]Noman Benotman, a former member of the Shura Councilof the LIFG, estimated in one account that there were between 800 and 1,000Libyan fighters of various affiliations in Afghanistan. See Tawil, Brothersin Arms, p. 165, n. 38. In another account, Benotman estimated between 900and 1,000. See Omar Ashour, “Post-Jihadism: Libya and the Global Transformationsof Armed Islamist Movements,” Terrorism and Political Violence,Vol. 23, Issue 3 (2011), p. 382. Although Gaddafi supported Islamist rebelgroups in other countries—the Philippines for instance—he did notthrow his support behind Afghan rebel groups because of Libya’s thenclose relationship with the Soviet Union.[62]Lawrence Wright, The Looming Tower: Al-Qaeda andthe Road to 9/11 (New York: Vintage Books, 2006), p. 119; Ahmed Rashid, Taliban:Militant Islam, Oil and Fundamentalism in Central Asia (New Haven: YaleUniversity Press, 2000), p. 197. Steve Coll, Ghost Wars:The SecretHistory of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin Laden, From the Soviet Invasion toSeptember 10, 2001 (New York: Penguin Books, 2004), p. 65; Ali Soufan,TheBlack Banners: The Inside Story of 9/11 and the War Against al-Qaeda(New York and London: W. W. Norton & Company,2011), p. 22.[63]Wright, The Looming Tower, p. 119.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Lwatty, March 17,2012 .[65]Wright, The Looming Tower, p. 117-18; See alsoTawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 17; and Soufan, The Black Banners, p.23.[66]Human Rights Watch interview with Saadi, March 14,2012.[67]Human Rights Watch interviews with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012; and Sharif, March 14, 2012; See also Tawil, Brothers in Arms,p. 51-52.[68]Hilsum, Sandstorm, p. 91-92.[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[70]There are several estimates that by April 1992 therewere between 800 and 1,000 Libyans fighting with the mujahidin in Afghanistan.See Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 64, n.1; Ashour, “Post-Jihadism:Libya and the Global Transformations of Armed Islamist Movements,” p.382.[71]Human Rights Watch, Afghanistan—Blood-StainedHands: Past Atrocities in Kabul and Afghanistan’s Legacy of Impunity,July 7, 2005, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/07/06/blood-stained-hands-0.[72]Omar Ashour, “Libyan Islamists Unpacked: Rise,Transformation, and Future, May 2012,” Brookings Doha Centerhttp://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2012/5/02%20libya%20ashour/omar%20ashour%20policy%20briefing%20english.pdf(accessed July 31, 2012), p. 2; See also Hilsum,Sandstorm,91-95; and Pargeter,Libya: The Riseand Fall of Qaddafi,p. 168.[73]Ashour, “Libyan Islamists Unpacked,” p.2.[74]Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 64-66; Ashour,“Libyan Islamists Unpacked,” p. 2; Hilsum, Sandstorm, 93-95.[75]Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 139.[76]See also Ibid., p. 179.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Abu Farsan, March26, 2012.[78]Ibid.[79]Ali Soufan,TheBlack Banners: The Inside Story of 9/11 and the War Against al-Qaeda(New York and London: W. W. Norton & Company,2011), p. 131.[80]Soufan, The Black Banners, p. 131.[81]Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 153 (According toNoman Benotman, former senior LIFG member, on one of these occasions“‘[Bin Laden’s] plan to create the World Islamic Front forJihad against Jews and Crusaders was put to us, just as it was to all otherjihadist groups…. We rejected the proposals of our own free will, sayingthat the plan was incompatible with our own strategy and doomed tofailure.’”); See alsoChristophe Ayad,“‘We Are Simply Muslim’: Libyan Rebel Chief Denies Al-QaedaTies,” Le Monde, translated into English and published by Time.com,September 4, 2011, http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2091744,00.html(accessed May 2, 2012) (where LIFG head Abdul Hakim Belhadj says,“when Osama Bin Laden founded the Global Islamic Front to fight againstthe Jews and crusaders, in the autumn of 1998, we refused to become members ofit. How could we want to kill all Christians? Or all Jews? That’s absurd!And why not the Chinese or Japanese? Christians and Jews are the people of theBook, we have to protect them.”); See also Tawil, Brothers in Arms,p. 179-180 (“Merging with another group would have meant the LIFG losingits freedom to operate independently in Libya: it was an idea that we rejectedfrom the outset,” Benotman said); During an interview with Human RightsWatch in Tripoli on March 14, 2012, a LIFG religious leader echoed the samesentiments as Benotman and Belhadj about this offer to join bin Laden’sorganization.[82]Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 170.[83]Ibid., p. 167-68 (“[O]f all the groups, theLIFG was the most outspoken. I myself called on bin Laden to stop, in thepresence of Abu al-Mundhir al-Sa’idi, among others. Our argument was thatattacking the US from Afghanistan would undermine the Taliban state and bringit under unbearable [international] pressure. We said all this to bin Laden’sface in Kandahar.”).[84]Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 180; Human RightsWatch interview with Saadi, March 14, 2012.[85]“…Abu Yahya al-Libi, was detainedfollowing the US invasion of Afghanistan. In July 2005 he escaped from BagramAir Base, north of Kabul, with three other high-profile detainees. Hesubsequently appeared in video recordings threatening the United States withhumiliation by the mujahidin.” Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 180, n2and p. 196.[86]“In 1996 Abu Layth al-Libi escaped with twoother LIFG members from the al-Ruways Prison in Jeddah. They had been arrestedin connection with a 1995 car bomb attack against a US-run training center forthe Saudi National Guard in Riyadh.” Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p.196, no. 1.[87]Ibid., p.180, 196.[88]Ibid., p. 196.[89]David Blair, “Extremist group announces splitfrom al-Qaeda,”The DailyTelegraph, July 9, 2009,http://bit.ly/mUx5al, (accessed May 15, 2012).[90]Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 196-97.[91]Ibid., p. 196, n. 3.[92]Ibid., p. 197.[93]Ibid.[94]Ibid.; See also Blair, “Extremist groupannounces split from al-Qaeda,” The Daily Telegraph.[95]Camille Tawil, “The Libyan Islamic FightingGroup’s revisions: one year later,” Magharebia, July 23,2010,  http://magharebia.com/cocoon/awi/xhtml1/en_GB/features/awi/features/2010/07/23/feature-02(accessed June 19, 2012); See also a text of selected translations of“Corrective Studies in Understanding Jihad, Accountability and theJudgment of People,” in Mohammed Ali Musawi, “Selected Translationof the LIFG Recantation Document,” Quilliam, 2009,http://www.solami.com/jihadstudy.pdf (accessed June 19, 2012).[96]Tawil, “The Libyan Islamic Fighting Group'srevisions: one year later,” Magharebia,[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Saadi, March 14,2012. Saadi, who was the LIFG’s spiritual leader, said he met personallywith Osama bin Laden on two occasions before September 11, 2001 to tell himthat al Qaeda’s views about killing civilians violated Sharia law and hisanti-US activities would be damaging to Islam. Another former LIFG leader,Noman Benotman, said he also travelled to Afghanistan in 2000 to personallytell bin Laden to stop his operations against the US. Paul Cruickshank,“How Muslim extremists are turning on Osama bin Laden,” DailyNews, June 8, 2008,http://articles.nydailynews.com/2008-06-08/news/17899919_1_libyan-islamic-fighting-group-al-qaeda-laden(accessed June 10, 2012); See also Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 13(“Of all the jihadist factions, the LIFG was most outspoken in rejectingbin Laden’s anti-American manifesto. Like other jihadists, theLIFG’s leaders had emigrated [sic] to Afghanistan but remained committedto combating the Libyan regime.”).[98]Silverstein, “How Kadafi Went from Foe toAlly,” Los Angeles Times.[99]John C.K. Daly, “Libya and al-Qaeda: A ComplexRelationship,” The Jamestown Foundation, Terrorism Monitor, Vol.3, Issue 6, March 23, 2005,http://www.jamestown.org/programs/gta/single/?tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=30146&tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=180&no_cache=1(accessed August 23, 2012).[100]Ibid.; See also Human Rights Watch, Words to Deeds,p. 18.[101]Human Rights Watch, Words to Deeds, p. 18; Seealso Daly, “Libya and al-Qaeda: A Complex Relationship,” TerrorismMonitor; and US Department of State, “Foreign Terrorist Organizations,”http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/65479.pdfp.210.[102]Human Rights Watch, Words to Deeds, p. 18[103]See Tripoli Documents 2164-2165. See alsoSilverstein, “How Kadafi Went From Foe to Ally,” Los AngelesTimes; andSharon A. Squassoni andAndrew Feickert, “Disarming Libya: Weapons of Mass Destruction,” CongressionalResearch Service, April 22, 2004,http://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/32007.pdf (accessed May 20, 2012).[104]See Tripoli Documents 2165, 2169, 2173, 2226, 2252,2266-2267.[105]UN Security Council Resolution No. 1506 (2003),S/RES/1506 (2003),http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/country,LEGAL,,RESOLUTION,LBY,,3f8d2e164,0.html(accessed June 13, 2012). Libya agreed to pay thefamilies of victims $10 million each—$4 million after the lifting of UNsanctions, another $4 million after the lifting of US sanctions based on theInternational EmergencyEconomic PowersAct, and the last $2 million when the US State Department took Libya off itslist of states sponsoring terrorism.[106]USDepartment of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, “Background Note:Libya,” March 9, 2012,http://www.state.gov/outofdate/bgn/libya/196690.htm (accessed June 11, 2012).[107]Tripoli Document 2169.[108]“Blair hails new Libyan relations,” BBCNews, March 25, 2004, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/3566545.stm[109]Ibid.[110]“‘Terror group’ ban agreed byMPs,” BBC News, October 13, 2005, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/4327964.stm(accessed June 13, 2012).[111]Silverstein, “How Kadafi Went From Foe toAlly,” Los Angeles Times.[112]Tripoli Documents 2141-2142.[113]Shoroeiya’sname has also been spelled “Mohammed Ahmed el Shoro’eyya,”and he has also gone by the name “Hassan Rabi’i” (alsospelled “Rabii” or “Riba’i”).The transliteration of Arabic names into the Romanalphabet follows no standard guidelines. With full Arabic names oftenconsisting of up to five parts, a name may commonly be translated to manydifferent spellings; for example, four different spellings are commonly usedfor the English version of the name Muhammad. The varied spellings of a singleindividual’s name have led to difficulty in identifying persons detainedby the US, who may be documented under several forms of their name. Individualswho were detained together may also only be able to identify others by analias, nickname, or mixed version of another detainee’s name.[114]Khalid al-Sharif’s name has also been spelled“Khaled Sherif,” “Khalid el-Sharif,” and “Khaledel-Sherif.” He has also gone by the names of “Abu Hazem”(also spelled “Hazim”), “Mohammed Daoud,” and“Amer.”[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, Tripoli,Libya, March 14, 2012.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[118]Human Rights Watch interviews with Sharif, March 14,2012; and Shoroeiya, March 18, 2012.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 18,2012.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, AbuSalim Prison, Tripoli, Libya, April 27, 2009.[121]Human Rights Watch interviews with Sharif, March 14,2012; and Shoroeiya, Abu Salim Prison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012; and telephone interview, May 24, 2012.[123]See Glenn L. Carle, The Interrogator (NewYork: Nation Books, 2011), p. 191, n. 2;Amnesty International, Belowthe Radar: Secret Flights to Torture and ‘Disappearance, April 5,2006, AMR 51/051/2006, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AMR51/051/2006/en(accessed July 30, 2012) (describing the experience of three Yemenidetainees—Muhammad Bashmilah, Salah Qaru, and Muhammadal-Assad—while in CIA custody), p. 12;Declaration of MohammedFarag Ahman Bashmilah in Support of the Plaintiffs’ Motion to Dismiss or,in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment (hereinafter “BashmilahDeclaration”), Mohamed v. Jeppesen Dataplan, Inc., 539 F. Supp. 2d1128 (N.D. Cal. 2008), (subsequently reversed by Mohamed v. JeppesenDataplan, Inc., 614 F.3d 1070 (9th Cir. 2010)(cert. denied May2011)),http://www.chrgj.org/projects/docs/declarationofbashmilah.pdf(accessed May 27, 2012),paras. 37-40; Craig S. Smith andSouad Mekhennet, “Algerian Tells of Dark Term in U.S. Hands,” July7, 2006,New York Times,http://www.nytimes.com/2006/07/07/world/africa/07algeria.html?_r=1&pagewanted=all(accessed July 30, 2012) (describing the treatment of Algerian detainee, LaidSaidi, under CIA custody); International Committee for the Red Cross,“ICRC Report on the treatment of Fourteen ‘High ValueDetainees’ in CIA Custody,” February 2007, http://assets.nybooks.com/media/doc/2010/04/22/icrc-report.pdf(accessed July 30, 2012), p. 6-7 (describing the common treatment andexperience of 14 “high value” detainees under CIA custody); HumanRights Watch,Ghost Prisoner, February 2007,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/us0207webwcover.pdf, p. 24,(describing the experience of detainee Marwan Jabour); Amnesty International, ACase to Answer: From Abu Ghraib to Secret CIA custody: The Case of Khaledal-Maqtari, March 2008, AMR 51/013/2008,http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AMR51/013/2008/en (accessed July 30,2012), p. 12; ACLU of Northern California, “Biography of Plaintiff AhmedAgiza,”https://www.aclunc.org/cases/active_cases/jeppesen/biography_of_plaintiff_ahmed_agiza.shtml(accessed July 30, 2012); and ACLU, “Witness: Khaled El-Masri-Victim ofExtraordinary Rendition,” July 14, 2006,http://www.aclu.org/human-rights/witness-khaled-el-masri-victim-extraordinary-rendition(accessed July 30, 2012).[124]Standard Minimum Rules for theTreatment of Prisoners, adopted Aug. 30, 1955, by the First United Nations Congress on thePrevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, U.N. Doc. A/CONF/611, annexI, E.S.C. res. 663C, 24 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (No. 1) at 11, U.N. Doc. E/3048(1957), amended E.S.C. res. 2076, 62 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (No. 1) at 35, U.N. Doc.E/5988 (1977), rule 33.[125]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into forceMarch 23, 1976, art. 7; Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman orDegrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture), adoptedDecember 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197,U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, arts. 1 and 16.[126]Human Rights Watch interviews with Sharif, March 14,2012; and Shoroeiya, March 18, 2012.[127]Ibid.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, AbuSalim Prison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[129]Sharif thought this because, despite the constantmusic, he said he could at times hear airplanes landing and taking off, andthey landed somewhere near where the men were detained when they arrived from Islamabad.[130]Shoroeiya based this determination on rumors he heardabout a secret CIA “black site” in Bagram before he was arrested byUS and Pakistani authorities in Peshawar; the time it took him to travel tothis location from Islamabad; and one non-verbal exchange he had with an Afghanguard. He asked the guard if he was in Bagram and the guard, though he couldnot speak to Shoroeiya, returned an expression and a smile that Shoroeiya tookto mean confirmation of that fact. Shoroeiya’s hypothesis was shared byother prisoners at the facility. Mohamed Farag Ahmad Bashmilah, a former Yemenidetainee who appears to have been held at the same facility and who knew thetwo Libyans by the aliases they were using at the time (“Hazem” forSharif and “Raba’i” for Shoroeiya), recalls hearing otherprisoners also guessing that the prison was part of Bagram Air Base.Bashmilah’s descriptions of the facility in Afghanistan and of thetreatment he received there are strikingly similar to those offered by Shoroeiya,Sharif, and others interviewed for this report. Like Shoroeiya and Sharif,Bashmilah was also later moved to a second facility where he remained until May5, 2005. See Bashmilah Declaration,http://www.chrgj.org/projects/docs/declarationofbashmilah.pdf,, para. 84-92.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[132]When we asked Shoroeiya to explain how he was able toknow the dates he was detained with precision given that he was kept indarkness for much of his confinement, he said he knew the date he was arrestedand how long he was detained in different places in Pakistan. He noted thatafter he had been held for what seemed like a long period of time, he was takenoutside for the first time to see sunlight. When this happened, he glanced athis guard’s watch and noticed it was September 5, 2003, nearly five monthssince his detention in Pakistan. Later, his captors put very small lamps in hisroom and gave them a Quran, a pencil that was flexible so that it could not beused as a weapon, and some papers. When this happened he took the opportunityto make a calendar. The date he started with was September 5, 2003. From thenon he kept track of the days with the help of the person in cell 5, someonenamed Naseem, who he described as “a sort of specialist with time”because he had a birds’ nest outside his window so when “a kind ofmovement started [in the nest] he could tell it was morning.” Shoroeiyawas fully composed up until that point of the interview, but when a HumanRights Watch researcher commented on the remarkable adaptability of humanbeings, Shoroeiya became visibly emotional, tried to continue, but then neededto stop for a break in the interview.[133]Bashmilah also described the same loud, Western musicbeing played throughout his detention. Bashmilah Declaration, para. 64.[134]Although it was dark much of the time he was held inthis facility, Shoroieya said he was able to create a sketch of the premisesbased on his occasional conversations with other prisoners over the loud musicand what he could see of the facility when he was being transported from oneroom to another. Bashmilah drew depictions of the facility where he wasdetained that are similar to Shoroeiya’s. See Bashmilah Declaration,paras. 55-78, Exhibits H, I, and N. The experience of another detainee, Khaledal-Maqtari, also corroborates the testimonies of Shoroeiya and Sharif. Afterhis release in May 2007, Maqtari described being detained at a facility inAfghanistan during the same time period and under similar conditions. Hefurther noted that, while at that facility, he spoke or came into contact withBashmilah, “Adnan al-Libi” (an alias for Maghrebi),“Riba’i” (an alias for Shoroeiya), and “Hazim”(an alias for Sharif). See Amnesty International, A Case to Answer,March 2008, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AMR51/013/2008/en, , p. 19-22.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[136]Maqtari has offered a similar list of names for thosehe was detained with. “I think Riba’i may have been Tunisian, buthe was very far away; Hazim is Libyan; Naseem is Tunisian; Adnan is Libyan ofcourse; Marwan al-Adenni is a Yemeni from Aden, he is here now [meaning inYemen], and so is Shumilla [Muhammad Bashmilah]… Riyadh Haithamal-Sharqawi—they were calling him Riyadh. And Abu Malik al-Qasemi wasanother Yemeni. Also there was Abu Ahmed, who was called Abu Ahmed ‘theMalaysian.’ Abu Mu’ath al-Suri was very near me, and Abu Yasseral-Jaza’iri was near to Ahmed.” Maqtari clarified in a laterinterview that he actually thought “Riba’i” (Shoroeiya) wasLibyan. Amnesty International, A Case to Answer, p. 19-22.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[138]A prisoner with a virtually identical name (Yassiral-Jazeeri), though identified as being Moroccan, not Algerian, was reportedlyapprehended on March 15, 2003 in Lahore, Pakistan and at some point transferredto a CIA-operated section of Bagram Air Base, Afghanistan, where he was heldfrom late 2003 through early 2004. In December 2006, another prisoner who wasin US custody in a different US-run facility in Afghanistan, Marwan Jabour,reportedly saw al-Jazeeri and was allowed to meet with him on severaloccasions. During these times, al-Jazeeri, told him that he had been in a placewith US interrogators where he had been tortured, and that he had permanentdamage to his arm as a result of being badly beaten. Jabour said, “I sawvery clearly the marks of torture on his body.” Al-Jazeeri also indicatedthat he had been subjected to loud music for four months straight. In 2003, theUS government acknowledged that Yassir al-Jazeeri had been captured or killed.On July 19, 2006 his name was included in the “Terrorists No Longer aThreat” List. Human Rights Watch, Off the Record: US Responsibilityfor Enforced Disappearances in the “War on Terror,” June 7,2007, http://www.hrw.org/legacy/backgrounder/usa/ct0607/ct0607web.pdf, p. 15.Bashmilah also heard Yassir al-Jazeeri talking while he was detained inAfghanistan. Bashmilah Declaration, para. 102.[139]Shoroeiya places Omeir from Yemen in cell 6 but Bashmilah,also from Yemen, identifies himself as the occupant of cell 6.Bashmilah Declaration, para. 53.[140]Shortened form of Majed Mokhtar Sasy al-Maghrebi, whowas also interviewed by Human Rights Watch for this report..[141]Alternate spelling for Saleh Di’iki, who wasalso interviewed by Human Rights Watch for this report and whose experience isrecounted in a later section. Di’iki said he was detained with Shoroeiyaand Sharif in the first facility and was sent back to Libya on August 22, 2004on the same plane as Shoroeiya and Majed Mokhtar Sasy al-Maghrebi. Human RightsWatch telephone interview with Di’iki, May 24, 2012.[142]Family members and others detained with Ibn Sheikh(short for Ibn Sheikh al-Libi or Ibn Sheikh from Libya), whose real name wasMohamed al-Fakheri, were interviewed for this report.[143]“Ayoub” is an alias used by Mustafa Jawdaal-Mehdi, who was also interviewed by Human Rights Watch for this report.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012. Not every cell in the facility is depicted in this diagram. Thenumbered cells continued in the direction of the arrow. Shoroeiya believed thatthose not depicted in cells on this page were in cells numbered higher up inthe direction of the arrow and that there were approximately 15 cells total inthe facility.[145]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sharif,May 24, 2012.[146]Maghrebi acknowledged going by the name of Adnanal-Libi (or Adnan the Libyan) in an interview with Human Rights Watch, Tripoli,Libya, March 16, 2012.[147]Human Rights Watch interviewed Di’iki inTripoli on March 18 and 19, 2012.[148]Family members and others detained with Ibn Sheikhal-Libi (or Ibn Sheikh from Libya), whose birth name is Mohamed al-Fakheri,were interviewed for this report.[149]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sharif,May 24, 2012.[150]Abu Faraj al Libi, at the time of this writing, wasone of four Libyans still held in Guantanamo. See “The GuantanamoDocket,” New York Times,http://projects.nytimes.com/guantanamo/country/libya (accessed May 27, 2012).Of these five named, only Abu al-Faraj al-Libi was known to be, at the time ofthis writing, ever at Guantanamo.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[152]Bashmilah described cell conditions very similar towhat both Shoroeiya and Sharif described. See Bashmilah Declaration, paras.56-60 and Exhibit I.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[154]Four of the men interviewed for this report, Mohammedal-Shoroeiya, Khalid al-Sharif, Majid al-Maghrebi, and Saleh Di’iki, saidthat for most of the duration of their detention at the first site inAfghanistan they were held in one of the three positions depicted here(referred to in this report as Positions 1, 2, and 3). They were held in thesepositions for varying amounts of time ranging from multiple days to months. Formore details regarding an individual detainee’s imprisonment refer to thesection of the report documenting his specific experience.These illustrations were drawn based on the testimonyand re-enactments of the positions by the victims. One of victims, KhalidSherif, was shown the three images and said they were very accurate depictions.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[156]Ibid.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[159]Ibid.[160]It is unclear if this is the same room or a differentroom than Sharif mentioned he was in previously.[161]Sharif said he saw one man several times in bothfacilities, who he said was American and from the “army.” He wore amilitary uniform, spoke English, and usually had an interpreter with him.Sharif described him as tall and thin. He also had a shaved head and wore a redberet. He believes he was the prison director. He described him as one of thefew Americans there with whom he used to have “actualconversations.” “We had some small talk. We would talk about thedifferences between the US and Arab countries,” Sharif said.[162]Bashmilah also said the Afghan guards were alwaysmasked and that he heard some of the other prisoners saying they overheard themspeaking to each other in Pashto and Farsi. Bashmilah Declaration, paras.82-83. Maqtari similarly stated, “all of the prison staff wore blackclothes … the guards were gloved and masked.” See AmnestyInternational, A Case to Answer, p. 16.[163]Bashmilah also described an American official with ashaved head that he concluded was responsible for the harsh torture of certainother prisoners including Adnan al-Libi (Maghrebi). Bashmilah nicknamed thisAmerican “Kojak.” See Bashmilah Declaration, paras. 69-70.[164]Waterboarding was one of 12 Enhanced InterrogationTechniques (EITs) the CIA requested permission to use. See “Department ofJustice Office of Professional Responsibility Report,” (DOJ OPR Report,July 29, 2009), July 29, 2009,http://judiciary.house.gov/hearings/pdf/OPRFinalReport090729.pdf, p. 35-36. The CIA’s requestdescribes waterboarding in the following manner: “The subject isrestrained on a bench with his feet elevated above his head. His head isimmobilized and an interrogator places a cloth over his mouth and nose whilepouring water onto the cloth. Airflow is restricted for twenty to fortyseconds; the technique produces the sensation of drowning andsuffocation.” DOJ OPR Report, July 29, 2009, p. 36. The Department ofJustice approved the use of waterboarding on August 1, 2001. “Office ofLegal Counsel, Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel of the CentralIntelligence Agency, Re: Interrogation of an al Qaeda Operative,” August1, 2002, http://media.luxmedia.com/aclu/olc_08012002_bybee.pdf (accessed August26, 2012), p. 11. See also reference to a “classified Bybee memo”also approving the techniques on pages 1-2. DOJ OPR Report, July 29, 2009, p.68.[165]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withShoroeiya, May 7, 2012.[166]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sharif,May 24, 2012.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[168]During Human Rights Watch’s interview withShoroeiya while he was in Abu Salim in 2009, he also told Human Rights Watchresearchers about this board and drew a picture of it in a researcher’snotes.[169]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012[170]Ibid.[171]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withShoroeiya, May 7, 2012[172]Malcom Nance, author, counterterrorism specialist,and former US Navy SERE (Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape) instructor,who was consulted about this case, said, “When you are on the board youhave no idea how much time is really going by, time literally standsstill.” When the procedure was being administered on him (Nance), forexample, he thought it lasted about three minutes, when in fact it was onlyabout 30 seconds. “You have no idea what is happening to you, youpanic.”[173]When asked about this comment, Nance said, “Hemight have thought that holding his breath was helping him resist but if it[waterboarding] is being administered properly holding your breath is notreally going to help. Everyone develops their own method of resistance and maybethis was part of his, but you can’t really resist waterboarding byholding your breath.” See also Department of Justice Guidance onWaterboarding from Steven Bradbury, Principle Deputy Assistant Attorney Generalat the time, explaining one thing an interrogator can do if a detainee tries toresist waterboarding by holding his breath: “In addition, you haveinformed us that the technique may be applied in a manner to defeat efforts bythe detainee to hold his breath by, for example, beginning an application ofwater as the detainee is exhaling.” Memo from Steven Bradbury, PrincipleDeputy Assistant Attorney General, to John Rizzo, Senior Deputy GeneralCounsel, CIA, May 10, 2005,http://media.luxmedia.com/aclu/olc_05102005_bradbury46pg.pdf (accessed August28, 2012), p. 13.[174]The Department of Justice, in approving the use ofwaterboarding, made reference to the fact that a doctor would be present duringthe procedure.Office of Legal Counsel, Memorandum for John Rizzo,Acting General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency, Re: Interrogation ofan al Qaeda Operative, August 1, 2002,http://media.luxmedia.com/aclu/olc_08012002_bybee.pdf (accessed August 26,2012), p. 4 (“We also understand that a medical expert with SEREexperience will be present throughout this phase and that the procedures willbe stopped if deemed medically necessary to prevent severe mental or physicalharm to Zubaydah.”).[175]Shoroeiya also described being subjected to thistreatment when he spoke to Human Rights Watch researchers in Abu Salim prisonin 2009.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[177]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sharif,May 24, 2012.[178]Ibid.[179]Sharif understands some English.[180]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sharif,May 24, 2012.[181]The use of “cramped confinement” wasanother technique on the list of EITs the CIA requested permission to use andthat the Department of Justice approved on August 1, 2002. The CIA’srequest to use this technique described it in the following manner: “Thesubject is placed in a confined space, typically a small or large box, which isusually dark. Confinement in the smaller space lasts no more than two hours andin the larger space up to 18 hours.” See DOJ OPR Report, July 29, 2009,p. 35-36. See also “Memorandum for John Rizzo,” p. 13-15, 18,approving the technique for Zubaydah,http://media.luxmedia.com/aclu/olc_08012002_bybee.pdf (accessed August 26,2012), p. 18. See also DOJ OPR Report reference to a “classified Bybeememo” also approving the technique on pages 1-2, DOJ OPR Report, July 29,2009, p. 68.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[184]“Walling” was another of the 12 EITs theCIA asked permission to use on detainees and the Justice Department approved.The request for its use was described in the following manner: “thesubject is pulled forward and then quickly and firmly pushed into a flexiblefalse wall so that his shoulder blades hit the wall. His head and neck aresupported with a rolled towel to prevent whiplash.”DOJOPR Report, July 29, 2009, p. 35-36; See also “Memorandum for JohnRizzo,” p. 11.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[186]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[187]Ibid.[188]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[189]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012. See text box, “CIA Rendition Transportation Procedures,”(above).[190]Both Bashmilah and Maqtari were moved to a secondfacility around the same time and in the same manner, but both thought thesecond detention facility might not have been in Afghanistan but somewhere elsein the Middle East or Europe. Despite the disagreement over location, Bashmilahsuggests that at least he, Shoroeiya, and Sharif had all ended up in the sameplace. He states, “My cell was part of a cluster of three cells.…There were two other detainees in my cluster whose voices I recognized from thedetention facility in Afghanistan and who I heard identify themselves as Hazem[Sharif] and Raba’i (Rib’i) [Shoreiya].” BashmilahDeclaration, paras. 84-92, 101-102. Maqtari thought nine detainees had beentransferred to the new facility from the previous site in Afghanistan, based onthe fact that he saw “nine separate body charts on the doctor’sdesk” as he was prepared by the doctor for removal. Amnesty Internationalbelieves that in addition to Maqtari, the nine included Bashmilah, Shoroeiya,and Maghrebi. Amnesty International, A Case to Answer, March 2008, p.26-27.[191]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[192]Human Rights Watch interviews with Sharif, March 14,2012; and Shoroeiya, March 18, 2012.[193]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[194]Ibid. Shoroeiya and Sharif were not the onlyprisoners who believed the facility was in Afghanistan. This belief was sharedby Marwan Jabour, a detainee who was brought to the site in June 2004 afterbeing previously held in Pakistan and who provides further corroboration ofShoroeiya and Sharif’s testimony. Not only did Jabour offer similardescriptions of the facility and the treatment he received, but he alsoidentified by name some of the prisoners who had arrived from Afghanistan withShoroeiya and Sharif. Jabour said that at one point during a break in noise atthe facility, a number of prisoners gave their names. These included“Adnan” (Maghrebi), Abu Yassir al-Jazeeri, and Ayoub al-Libi (analias for Mustafa Jawda al-Mehdi, who was also interviewed for this report).Human Rights Watch, Ghost Prisoner, p. 13-14, 21.[195]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withShoroeiya, May 8, 2012.[196]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[197]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[198]Ibid.[199]Ibid.[200]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[201]Human Rights Watch interviews with Sharif, March 14,2012; and Shoroeiya, March 18, 2012. Bashmilah also said he was chained by theankle to his cell floor during the first three to four weeks at the newfacility. Bashmilah Declaration, para. 99.[202]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012.[203]Ibid. Shoroeiya did not specify whether he had thesame.[204]Ibid. Jabour offered a similar description:“Besides the music, there was also a constant, low-level, whitenoise.… It sounded like a generator.” Human Rights Watch, GhostPrisoner, p 16.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14.[206]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withShoroeiya, May 8, 2012.[207]Ibid.[208]Ibid.[209]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, Tripoli,Libya, March 18, 2012.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya and hiswife, Fawziya, and daughter, Aisha, Misrata, Libya, March 27, 2012.[211]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, Fawziya,and Aisha, March 27, 2012.[212]Shoroeiya did not make clear with what offense he wasactually charged.[213]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[214]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif, March 14,2012. See also See text box, “CIA Rendition TransportationProcedures,” (above).[215]Sharif was released with Belhadj and Saadi on thisdate as part of their negotiated release (see “Libyan Islamic FightingGroup” part of the “Background” section above).[216]Majid Maghrebi’s name has also been spelled“Majed Mukhtar Sasi al-Maghrebi” and Majid Sassi al-Meghrebi. Healso confirmed he went by the name Adnan al Libi.[217]Human Rights Watch interview with Majid Mokhtar Sasyal-Maghrebi, Tripoli, Libya, March 16, 2012.[218]See text box, “CIA Rendition TransportationProcedures,” above.[219]Maqtari recalled that Maghrebi (Adnan al-Libi) wasone of the more vocal prisoners who made constant attempts to communicate withhis fellow detainees. “I later found out that the person calling wasAdnan al-Libi, he had a strong voice. He kept saying ‘number 19, talk tous, number 19’ but I didn’t know that I was number 19 yet.”Amnesty International, A Case to Answer, p. 20.[220]Number 10 on the list of 12Enhanced Interrogation Techniques (EITs) the CIA requested permission to usewas the “Use of Diapers.” See DOJ OPR Report, July 29, 2009, p.35-36 (The request from the CIA read: “Use of diapers: The subject isforced to wear adult diapers and is denied access to toilet facilities for anextended period, in order to humiliate him.” (emphasis added)).The Department of Justice does not appear to have approved the use of diapersas part of the 10 techniques it approved on August 1, 2002. See Office of LegalCounsel, “Memorandum for John Rizzo,” p. 11. See also DOJ OPRReport reference to a “classified Bybee memo” approving 10techniques. DOJ OPR Report, July 29, 2009, p. 68. However the use of diapers appears to have been approved at some pointaccording to a memo from George Tenet dated January 28, 2003. e CIA Office of the Inspector General, “Special Review:Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities (September 2001 –October 2003),” May 7, 2004, declassified in August 2009,http://graphics8.nytimes.com/packages/pdf/politics/20090825-DETAIN/2004CIAIG.pdf(accessed July 2, 2012), appendix E; See also, Spencer Ackerman, “TheMysterious Eleventh Torture Technique: Prolonged Diapering?” WashingtonIndependent, August 24, 2009,http://washingtonindependent.com/56394/the-mysterious-eleventh-torture-technique-prolongued-diapering(accessed August 26, 2012).[221]Maghrebi’s abuse at the facility is corroborated by Bashmilah, who wrote that he heard the screams of prisoner Adnan al-Libi (Maghrebi’s alias). “I began to hear the screams ofdetainees being tortured there, particularly the prisoner called Adnan al-Libi[Maghrebi]. On their way to the torture and interrogation room, Americanofficials, including ‘Kojak’ [because of his shaved head] wouldfirst stop by my cell with a female interpreter and tell me that when I hearpeople screaming that I should not be afraid because this treatment was justfor people who did not cooperate. They told me that they had a way of dealingwith people who did not cooperate. I concluded that it was ‘Kojak’who was so harshly interrogating Adnan al-Libi, because when he came into mycell he would be wearing surgical gloves.” Bashmilah Declaration, para.70. Maqtari said Adnan al-Libi (Maghrebi) spoke to him when he first arrived,trying to encourage the new detainee to speak. Maqtari was later was moved tothe cell adjacent to Maghrebi’s. Amnesty International, A Case toAnswer, p. 19-20.[222]See text box, “CIA Rendition TransportationProcedures,” above.[223]Saleh HadyaAbdusalam al-Di’iki’s name has been spelled “Salah” or“Saleh De’ayki” and “Abd el-Salam el-Diki.” Hehas also gone by the name “Saad” and “Abu Abdullah alZlitni,” which has been spelled “Abu Abdallah al-Zulaytini”.[224]Human Rights Watch interview with Saleh Hadiyah AbuAbdullah Di’iki, Tripoli, Libya, March 17 and 18, 2012 and phoneinterview, May 24, 2012.[225]Ramzi bin al-Shibh is currently in Guantanamo. He isone of five accused, in addition to Khaled Sheikh Mohammed, of planning andorchestrating the September 11 attacks. After his arrest in September 2002, hewas forcibly disappeared into secret CIA custody, his whereabouts not known tothe public until September 2006 when President George W. Bush announced histransfer, along with 13 other detainees, to Guantanamo. For evidence that binal-Shibh was in Morocco at this time, see Matt Apuzzo and Adam Goldman, “CIAflight carried secret from Gitmo,” Associated Press, August 6,2010,http://www.utsandiego.com/news/2010/aug/06/ap-exclusive-cia-flight-carried-secret-from-gitmo/(accessed August 22, 2012).[226]The name Abu Omar al-Maghrebi indicates in Arabicthat he is from Morocco. While al-Maghrebi means “the Moroccanone,” it does not necessarily mean he comes from there.[227]See text box, “CIA Rendition TransportationProcedures,” (above).[228]Di’iki also said some guards wore a mix oftraditional “Afghan clothes and army shirts.”[229]Once he asked one of his guards in Pashto thedirection of Mecca and the guard answered back in Pashto.[230]Bashmilah described similar “sunning”sessions, where he was placed in front of a wall outside and he could hearchildren playing and speaking Pashto nearby. See Bashmilah Declaration, paras.73-74.[231]Khaled al-Maqtari said he spoke to someone who was incell 20 during his detention in Afghanistan that appears to be Di’iki.The prisoner in cell 20 went by the name Sheikh Saleh al-Libi (a version ofDi’iki’s first name indicating he is from Libya). Maqtari said“Saleh al-Libi” told him he had been detained in Mauritius andrendered through Morocco to their current place of detention. However, it ispossible the connection with Mauritius is mistaken and was actually Mauritaniawhere Di’iki was initially detained. See Amnesty International, FromAbu Ghraib to Secret CIA Custody: The Case of Khaled al-Maqtari, p. 20.[232]See text box, “CIA Rendition TransportationProcedures,” (above).[233]See text box, “CIA Rendition TransportationProcedures,” above.[234]Human Right Watch in interview with Madaghi, Tripoli,Libya, March 26, 2012.[235]Pasted here but see also Tripoli Documents 2142.[236]Mustafa SalimAli el-Madaghi’s name has been spelled “Mustafa Salim Ali ModeriTarabulsi” (Tarabulsi meaning “from Tripoli”) and he has alsogone by the name “Shaykh Musa,” sometimes spelled “SheikhMusa.”  He served as the deputy of Di’iki in Mauritania forthe LIFG.[237]Human Right Watch interview with Madaghi, March 26,2012.[238]Abdul Mohammed Omar al-Tawaty is another Libyaninterviewed for this report who was in Mauritania at the time and went by thename of Abdul Rahman (see below).[239]This would be sometime in early March.[240]See Text Box, “CIA Rendition Transportation Procedures,”(above).[241]See text box, “CIA Rendition TransportationProcedures,” above.[242]The aircraft N8068V/N379P was owned from 2001 to atleast 2004 by a US company called Premier Executive Transport Service (Premier)and operated by pilots employed by Aero Contractors Ltd. (Aero) in Smithfield,North Carolina—companies with known ties to the CIA. JobyWarrick,“Ten years later, CIA ‘rendition’ program stilldivides N.C. town,” Washington Post, February 9, 2012,http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/ten-years-later-cia-rendition-program-still-divides-nc-town/2012/01/23/gIQAwrAU2Q_story.html(accessed August 28, 2012); See also “Europe: Pending Questions on CIAActivities in Europe,” Human Rights Watch news release, February 21,2006, http://www.hrw.org/news/2006/02/20/europe-pending-questions-cia-activities-europe.[243]The airplane N85VM has been firmly linked to therendition of an Egyptian cleric, Abu Omar, from Italy to Egypt in 2003, via theUS military base in Ramstein, Germany. Eurocontrol data reveal that theairplane traveled from Ramstein Air Base in Germany to Cairo on February 17,2003, precisely the same date that Abu Omar was transported from Germany toEgypt. See Peter Finn and Julie Tate, “N.Y. Billing Dispute Reveals Detailsof Secret CIA Rendition Flights,” Washington Post, August 30,2011,http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/ny-billing-dispute-reveals-details-of-secret-cia-rendition-flights/2011/08/30/gIQAbggXsJ_story.html(accessed July 31, 2012). The N85VM aircraft and its use by the CIA was thesubject of several earlier media investigations. See, for example, JohnCrewdson and Tom Hundley, “Jet’s Travels Cloaked in Mystery,”Chicago Tribune, March 20, 2005,http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2005-03-20/news/0503200504_1_31st-fighter-wing-suspects-abu-omar(accessed July 31, 2012).[244]Mustafa Jawdaal-Mehdi has also had his name spelled “Al Mahdi Mostafa al-MahdiGouda,” “Mahdi Jawda,” and “Al Ahdi Mostafa Al MahdiGouda.” He also went by the names“Abd al-Wahed,” “AbuAyoub,” and “Ayoub al-Libi.” Sometimes Ayoub was spelled“Ayyub” or “Ayub.”[245]Tripoli Document 2220.[246]Mehdi said it was not safe in Peshawar anymore, so hesent his family to Waziristan ahead of him and was on his way there to meetthem when he was arrested.[247]It is not clear on which of the two doors this was.[248]Bashmilah and Maqtari also describe examinations by adoctor who noted distinctive marks and injuries on a human body chart. SeeBashmilah Declaration,http://www.chrgj.org/projects/docs/declarationofbashmilah.pdf, (accessed May27, 2012), para. 84; and Amnesty International, A Case to Answer, p. 26.[249]Mehdi said in his interview that he remains concernedabout the existence of these photos.[250]See text box, “CIA Rendition TransportationProcedures,” (above).[251]Abdul HakimBelhadjalso went by the name of Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq, sometimes spelled Sadeq.[252]Christophe Ayad, “‘We Are SimplyMuslim’: Libyan Rebel Chief Denies Al-Qaeda Ties,” Le Monde,translated into English and published by Time.com, September 4, 2011,http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2091744,00.html.(accessedMay 2, 2012).[253]Ibid.; Tawil,Brothersin Arms,p. 53.[254]Ayad, “‘We Are SimplyMuslim’,” Le Monde.[255]Tawil,Brothersin Arms,p. 179.[256]Ibid.[257]Human Rights Watch interviews with Belhadj, Saadi,Abu Farsan, and others, Tripoli, Libya, March 2012.[258]“Libyan rebel leader Abdel Hakim Belhadj suesBritish Government for illegal rendition to Libya,” Reprieve newsrelease, December 19, 2011,http://www.reprieve.org.uk/press/2011_12_19_belhadj_action/[259]“Libyanrebel leader Abdel Hakim Belhadj sues British Government for illegal renditionto Libya,” Reprieve news release.[260]Ibid.; Also, Human Rights Watch interview withBelhadj, Abu Salim Prison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[261]Human Rights Watch interview with Belhadj, Abu SalimPrison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[262]Martin Chulov, “MI6 knew I was tortured, saysLibyan rebel leader,” The Guardian, September 5, 2011, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/sep/05/abdul-hakim-belhaj-libya-mi6-torture?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487(accessed June 15, 2012).[263]“Libyanrebel leader Abdel Hakim Belhadj sues British Government for illegal renditionto Libya,” Reprieve news release[264]Human Rights Watch interview with Belhadj, Abu SalimPrison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[265]Ibid.At that time, Belhadj told a Human Rights Watchresearcher that he was detained in Bangkok by the CIA from around March 3, 2004until he was sent to Libya on March 9, 2004.[266]Ibid.[267]Ibid.[268]Ian Cobain,“Special report: Rendition ordeal that raises new questions about secrettrials,” The Guardian, April 8, 2012,http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/apr/08/special-report-britain-rendition-libya[269]Human Rights Watch interview with Belhadj, Abu SalimPrison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[270]Ibid.[271]Cobain,“Special report: Rendition ordeal that raises new questions about secrettrials,” The Guardian.[272]Ibid.[273]Ibid.[274]Ibid.[275]Human Rights Watch interview with Belhadj, Abu SalimPrison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[276]Ibid.[277]Ibid.[278]Cobain, “Special report: Rendition ordeal thatraises new questions about secret trials,” The Guardian.[279]Ibid.[280]Tripoli Document 2264 appears to be a document sentby the UK secret service to the Libyan intelligence service. Human Rights Watchphotographed a copy of this document, but it is too blurry to read. A legiblecopy was also obtained by The Guardian and is available athttp://www.guardian.co.uk/world/interactive/2012/apr/08/libya-mi6 (accessedJune 14, 2012).[281]Ibid.[282]Ibid.[283]Tripoli Document 2173.[284]Tripoli Documents 2173 and 2174.[285]TripoliDocument 2173.[286]Tripoli Document 2174.[287]Tripoli document2172,a fax from the CIA to the Libyan intelligence service.[288]Ibid.[289]Tripoli Document 2171.[290]Ibid. Representatives of the British governmentdenied that Diego Garcia played any role in the global rendition program,including in meetings with Human Rights Watch, but later, after confronted withevidence, apologized and admitted that in fact two rendition flights hadrefueled there in 2002. Colin Brown, “Official apology after CIA‘torture’ jets used UK base,” The Independent,February 22, 2008,http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/official-apology-after-cia-torture-jets-used-uk-base-785596.html(accessed July 25, 2012). There was no mention at the time of the 2004 Belhadjor Saadi renditions, and the government Foreign Office has declined to commentfurther. Cobain, “Special report: Rendition ordeal that raises newquestions about secret trials,” The Guardianhttp://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9210950/Abdel-Belhadj-the-rendition-flight.html[291]Tripoli Document 2171.[292]The “Mark” who signed the letter isbelieved to be Mark Allen, former head of counterterrorism at MI6, because heis named in a number of other Tripoli Documents where other “CIA”and “MI6” issues are discussed. For example, Document 2226, datedJune 19, 2003, signed by “Mark” and “Steve” to MusaKusa, discusses an upcoming “joint CIA and SIS” “technicalvisit” by a “team of experts” to Libya to examineLibya’s “WMD” (Weapons of Mass Destruction) program. Anotherletter depicted in Document 2233 is about either the technical visit referencedin Document 2226 or a different one. It says that “Mark Allen” and“Steve Kappes” will be arriving in Libya for a “joint US/UKtechnical visit” on a Boing 737 Business Jet with tail number N313P. ABoeing 737 with registration number N313P has been linked to a large number ofCIA rendition flights. See Human Rights Watch, Double Jeopardy: CIARenditions to Jordan, April 2008,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/jordan0408_1.pdf, p. 24-25; Seealso  “Human Cargo: Binyam Mohamed and the Rendition Frequent FlierProgramme,” Reprieve, June 10, 2008,http://www.reprieve.org.uk/publications/humancargo/ (accessed July 25, 2012),p. 16, n. 35.  A “Mark Allen” was MI6’s director ofcounterterrorism at the time these letters were written and Steve Kappes is aformer deputy director of the CIA. See Richard Norton-Taylor, “Sir MarkAllen: the secret link between MI6, the CIA and Gaddafi,” The Guardian,September 4, 2011, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/sep/04/mark-allen-mi6-libya-profile(accessed July 25, 2012); Jeff Stein, “Inside Man,” Washingtonian,March 25, 2010, http://www.washingtonian.com/articles/people/inside- (accessedJuly 25, 2012); and George Tenet, At the Center of the Storm: My Years atthe CIA (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2007), p. ix, where SteveKappes is identified as senior officer in the clandestine service, and p.289-97, where Kappes’ trips to Libya with a senior British officer toevaluate Libya’s weapons WMD program is discussed in detail.[293]Tripoli Documents2266and 2267, a fax from MI6 to Libyan intelligence service.[294]Ibid.[295]“Blair hails new Libyan relations,” March25, 2004, BBC News, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/3566545.stm[296]See Tripoli Documents 2266 and 2267. Parts of thedocument are blurry, but it is dated March 18, 2004. Paragraphs 4 and 5 discussthe “present thinking” of “No. 10” and whether the“Leader” and the prime minister will have a press conference. Italso discusses how many journalists will be going (about 60).[297]See Tripoli Documents 2266 and2267; and also TripoliDocument 2226, dated June 19, 2003.[298]“Belhadj lawyers announce fresh legal action inrendition case,” Leigh Day & Co. news release, April 9, 2012,http://www.leighday.co.uk/News/2012/April-2012/Belhadj-Lawyers-Announce-Fresh-Legal-Action-in-Ren(accessed June 15, 2012).[299]“Legal Papers Served on Former ForeignSecretary,” Leigh Day & Co. news release, April 18, 2012,http://www.leighday.co.uk/News/2012/April-2012/Legal-Papers-Served-on-Former-Foreign-Secretary(accessed June 15, 2012); See also “Libyan Rebel Leader Sues BritishGovernment for Illegal Rendition to Libya,” Leigh Day & Co. newsrelease, December 19, 2011,http://www.leighday.co.uk/News/2011/December-2011/Libyan-Rebel-Leader-Sues-British-Government-for-Il(accessed June 15, 2012).[300]“Legal Papers Served on Former ForeignSecretary,” Leigh Day & Co. news release, April 18, 2012.http://www.leighday.co.uk/News/2012/April-2012/Legal-Papers-Served-on-Former-Foreign-Secretary(accessed June 15, 2012).[301]“Libyan Rebel Leader Sues British Governmentfor Illegal Rendition to Libya,” Leigh Day & Co. news release,December 19, 2011.[302]“Watch Libyan rendition victim Abdel HakimBelhadj talk to the European Parliament,” Reprieve.com, April 12, 2012,at 0:16 and 2:30,http://www.reprieve.org.uk/tvandradio/Belhadj_European_Parliament/ (accessed onJune 15, 2012).[303]“Joint statement by the Director of PublicProsecutions and the Metropolitan Police Service,” Crown Prosecution newsrelease.[304]Human Rights Watch interview with Belhadj, Abu SalimPrison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[305]“Watch Libyan rendition victim Abdel HakimBelhadj talk to the European Parliament,” Reprieve.com.[306]Cobain, “Special report: Rendition ordeal thatraises new questions about secret trials,” The Guardian.[307]Ibid.[308]“Libyan Rebel Leader Sues British Governmentfor Illegal Rendition to Libya,” Leigh Day & Co. news release,December 19, 2011.[309]Cobain, “Special report: Rendition ordeal thatraises new questions about secret trials,” The Guardian.[310]Human Rights Watch Interview with Belhadj, Tripoli,Libya, March 28, 2012.[311]Ibid.[312]Human Rights Watch interview with Belhadj, Abu SalimPrison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[313]Kim Sengupta, “Libyan rebel leader says MI6knew he was tortured,” The Independent, September 6, 2011, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/libyan-rebel-leader-says-mi6-knew-he-was-tortured-2349778.html(accessed May 2, 2012).[314]Ibid.[315]Ibid.[316]Ibid.; See also, Chulov, “MI6 knew I wastortured, says Libyan rebel leader,” The Guardian.[317]Human Rights Watch interview with Belhadj, Abu SalimPrison, Tripoli, April 27, 2009.[318]Human Rights Watch Interview with Belhadj, Tripoli,Libya, March 28, 2012.[319]“Watch Libyan rendition victim Abdel HakimBelhadj talk to the European Parliament,” Reprieve.com.[320]“Libya: 202 Prisoners Released But HundredsStill Held Arbitrarily,” Human Rights Watch news release, March 25, 2010,http://www.hrw.org/news/2010/03/25/libya-202-prisoners-released-hundreds-still-held-arbitrarily.[321]Tawil, “The Libyan Islamic Fighting Group'srevisions: one year later,” Magharebia,http://magharebia.com/cocoon/awi/xhtml1/en_GB/features/awi/features/2010/07/23/feature-02.LIFG spiritual leader Saadi and Deputy LIFG leader Sharif were released alongwith Belhadj. The three of them co-authored a document entitled“Corrective Studies in Understanding Jihad Accountability and theJudgment of the People,” in which they renounced the use of force toachieve political aims. Saadi and Sharif were both interviewed for this report(see below); See also a text of selected translations of “CorrectiveStudies in Understanding Jihad, Accountability and the Judgment of People”in Mohammed Ali Musawi, “Selected Translation of the LIFG RecantationDocument,” Quilliam 2009, http://www.solami.com/jihadstudy.pdf (accessedJune 19, 2012); See also, “Watch Libyan rendition victim Abdel HakimBelhadj talk to the European Parliament,” Reprieve.com.[322]Human Rights Watch Interview with Belhadj, Tripoli,Libya, March 28, 2012.[323]Rod Nordland, “In Libya, Former Enemy Is Recastin Role of Ally,” New York Times, September 1, 2011,http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/02/world/africa/02islamist.html?pagewanted=all(accessed August 27, 2012).[324]Aymehn Jawad al-Tamimi, “RethinkingLibya,” The American Spectator.[325]Ibid.[326]Sami Mostefaal-Saadi’s name is sometimes spelled “es-Saidi” or“Essaadi.” He also went by the names of “Abu Munder,”sometimes spelled “Abu Munthir” or “Abu Mundir,” and“Hisham Mohamaed.”[327]Human Rights Watch interview with Saadi, Tripoli,Libya, March 14, 2012.[328]Tawil, Brothers in Arms, p. 53.[329]“Claim on Behalf of Sami al-Saadi Against theHong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSARG),” June 12, 2012,http://www.therenditionproject.org.uk/pdf/PDF%20208%20%5BClaim%20for%20damages,%20al%20Saadi%20v%20Hong%20Kong,%2012%20Jun%202012%5D.pdf(accessed June 17, 2012).[330]For an account of this killing, see Hilsum, Sandstorm, p.96-97.[331]Saadi talked more expansively about this to TheGuardian. While in China in March 2004, he said he was approached byBritish intelligence officers via an intermediary in the UK and was told thathe would be permitted to return to London. First, however, he would have to beinterviewed at the British consulate in Hong Kong and would be met by Britishdiplomats on his arrival. Ian Cobain, Mustafa Khalili and Mona Mahmood,“How MI6 deal sent family to Gaddafi’s jail,” September 9,2009, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/sep/09/how-mi6-family-gaddafi-jail(accessed June 17, 2012).[332]Human Rights Watch interview with Kadija al-Saadi,Tripoli, Libya, March 25, 2012.[333]Ibid.[334]Tripoli Documents 2162-2163.[335]Tripoli Documents 2162-2163.[336]Ibid.[337]Ibid.[338]Ibid.[339]Ibid.[340]Tripoli Documents 2280-2283, 2300-2311 (only relevantpages, with the exception of the birth certificate which is not included, ofthe 32 page fax are contained herein). The document seems to have been sent tothe Hong Kong Authorities by the Libyan government, given that the letter issigned by “NCB Tripoli” (see Document2281). It was contained in thefolder marked UK. Perhaps the Libyans faxed a copy of what had been sent to theHong Kong authorities to the UK government in order to show they had compliedwith Hong Kong’s demands.[341]Tripoli Documents 2162-2163.[342]Tripoli Documents 2156-2158.[343]Ibid.[344]Human Rights Watch interview with Saadi, Tripoli,Libya, March 14, 2012.[345]Ibid.[346]Ibid.[347]Ibid.[348]“Leigh Day Represent Victim of Gaddafi Regime,”Leigh Day & Co. news release, October 25, 2011,http://www.leighday.co.uk/News/2011/October-2011/Leigh-Day-Represent-Victim-of-Gaddafi-Regime(accessed May 28, 2012).[349]“Libyan politician questioned by British policeover rendition allegations,” Leigh Day & Co Solicitors news release,July 19, 2012,http://www.leighday.co.uk/News/2012/July-2012/Libyan-politician-questioned-by-British-police-ove,(accessed August 28, 2012).[350]“Libyan rendition victim Sami al Saadi launcheslegal action against Hong Kong,” Reprieve news release, June 17, 2012.[351]Omar Ashour, “Libya’s DefeatedIslamists,” July 17, 2012,http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/libya-s-defeated-islamists(accessed on July 18, 2012) (In response to the election results Saadi stated,“We certainly did not expect the results, but ... our future is certainlybetter than our present and our past.”); see also Aymehn Jawad al-Tamimi,“Rethinking Libya,” The American Spectator, July 12, 2012,http://spectator.org/archives/2012/07/12/rethinking-libya (accessed July 25,2012).[352]Muhammed AbuFarsan’s name is sometimes spelled “Mohammed Abu Fursin” or“Abufersin.” He has also gone by the name of Abu Zinad.[353]Human Rights Watch interview with Muhammed AbuFarsan, Tripoli, Libya, March 26, 2012.[354]Tripoli document 2268.[355]Ibid.[356]The UN Committee against Torture has held that underarticle 3 of the Convention against Torture, which prohibits the return orextradition of a person to another state where there are substantial groundsfor believing that he would be subjected to torture, the risk of torture mustbe assessed not just for the initial receiving state, but also to states towhich the person may be subsequently expelled, returned, or extradited. UNCommittee against Torture, “Implementation of article 3 of the Conventionin the context of article 22,” General Comment No. 1, U.N. Doc.11/21/1997.A/53/44, annex IX, CAT General Comment No. 01. (General Comments),http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/13719f169a8a4ff78025672b0050eba1?Opendocument(accessed June 26, 2012), para. 2.[357]See above, “Libyan Islamic FightingGroup” part of the “Background” section.[358]Abdusalam Abdulhadi Omar as-Safrani also went by thenames of “Mohammed Rimi,” Abdallah Mansur al-Rimi, and Muhammad AbdAllah Mansur al Futuri.[359]Safrani is one of 10 Libyans the US detained inGuantanamo. Two, including Safrani, were sent back to Libya; one wastransferred to Albania, one to the UK, and two to the country of Georgia. Theother four continue to be held at Guantanamo. See “The Guantanamo Docket:Citizens of Libya,” New York Times,http://projects.nytimes.com/guantanamo/country/libya (accessed July 27, 2012).[360]Human Rights Watch Interview with Safrani, Benghazi,Libya, March 20, 2012.[361]Though Safrani said he was not a member of the LIFGwhen he was arrested, according to US  intelligence reports assembled inwhat is called a Risk Assessment file for Safrani, some other LIFG members andothers captured by the US and detained in Guantanamo have said that he was aLIFG member some years earlier. See “The Guantanamo Files,” RiskAssessment File for Prisoner 194, wikilieaks.org,http://wikileaks.org/gitmo/prisoner/194.html# (accessed June 22, 2012), p.5.[362]Ibid.[363]Ibid., p. 1.[364]Ibid., p. 5.[365]The first time he was in the cell was for 5 days,then 10 days. The longest amount of time was 30 days.[366]Safrani did not know his exact date of transfer, butGuantanamo records indicated it was on December 15, 2006. See “TheGuantanamo Docket,” New York Times,http://projects.nytimes.com/guantanamo/country/libya (accessed May 27, 2012).[367]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Azizel-Fakhri, brother of Sheikh al-Libi, Ajdabiya, Libya, March 22, 2012; andFaraj el-Fakhri, nephew of Sheikh al-Libi, Benghazi, Libya, March 21, 2012.[368]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Azizel-Fakhri, March 22, 2012.[369]Human Rights Watch Interview with Faraj el-Fakhri,March 21, 2012.[370]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Azizel-Fakhri, March 22, 2012.[371]Ibid. Abdul Aziz el-Fakhiri also said this waspartially because the Libyans had tried to get al-Libi to spy for them duringthis time but he refused.[372]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Azizel-Fakhri, March 22, 2012.[373]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Azizel-Fakhri, March 22, 2012.[374]Michael Isikoff and David Corn, Hubris, (NewYork: Crown, 2006), p. 119.[375]Soufan, The Black Banners, p. 132(“Khaldan predated al-Qaeda, having been established during the Afghanjihad against the Soviets.… Khaldan was known to be an independentcamp.”). See also Omar Nashiri (pseudonym), Inside the Jihad: My Lifewith Al Qaeda (New York: Basic Books, 2006), p. 102-242.[376]“Neither [Khaldan’s] external emir, AbuZubaydah, nor its internal emir, Ibn al-Shaykh al-Liby was a member of al-Qaedaand these emirs prized their independence.”  Soufan, The BlackBanners, p. 132. At one point during his interrogation al-Libi said he wasa member of al Qaeda but later in 2004, he said he only said that so that histreatment by the Americans would improve, which it did.Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI),“Postwar Findings about Iraq’s WMD Programs and Links to Terrorismand How They Compare with Prewar Assessments,” September 8, 2006,(“SSCI – Sept. 8, 2006 Report”) p. 80.http://intelligence.senate.gov/phaseiiaccuracy.pdf(accessed June 2, 2012).[377]“Al-Libi was not a member of our group,”Shoroeiya, a senior LIFG member, said during a Human Rights Watch interview inTripoli, Libya, on March 18, 2012;“[Al-Libi] toldme specifically that he thought al Qaeda was bad for Islam, that he did notagree with their philosophy, and that he especially did not agree with theattack on the US.” Human Rights Watch telephone interview with MohammedBousidra, who was detained with al-Libi in the Foreign Intelligence Building(Bousidra in cell three and al-Libi in cell seven), April 2, 2012; see alsoHuman Rights Watch interview with Abdul Aziz el-Fakhri, March 22, 2012;Whenmembers of an FBI team were interrogating al-Libi, before the CIA stepped inand before enhanced interrogation methods were used, “it emerged that[al-Libi] hadn’t actually liked bin Laden, who had tried to force him totrain only al-Qaeda fighters, not all Muslims, which was his preference.”Jane Mayer, The Dark Side (New York: Anchor Books, 2009) p. 105.[378]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Aziz el-Fakhri,March 22, 2012;“Al-Libi had very good relationships with allthe groups. He was learning, teaching, and fighting and his mantra was to beloyal to whoever he was working for, to the place where he was. For him it wasa job.” Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Bousidra, April 2,2012.[379]Mayer, The Dark Side, p. 104; Isikoff andCorn, Hubris, p. 120.[380]Some of the intelligence gathered during thesesessions was information about 1) an al Qaeda plot to blow up the US Embassy inAden, Yemen; 2) Richard Reid, the so-called “shoe bomber,” whoattempted to detonate plastic explosives during a flight from Paris to Miami onDecember 20, 2001; and 3) co-conspirator in the September 11 attacks ZacariasMoussaoui. Mayer, The Dark Side, p. 104-06; Isikoff and Corn, Hubris,p. 120-24.[381]According to FBI sources who described the incidentto some journalists, while FBI officer Russell Fincher, who had established abond with al-Libi, was questioning him, a CIA officer named“Albert” stormed in and started shouting at al-Libi.“You’re going to Egypt!” he yelled. While there, he said to al-Libi:“I’m going to find your mother and f--- her.” Isikoff andCorn, Hubris, p. 120-21. (The accounts of Isikoff and Mayer differ onlyslightly).[382]“We believed that al-Libiwas withholding critical threat information at the time, so we transferred himto a third country for further debriefing.” George Tenet and Bill Harlow,At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA (New York: HarperCollins, 2007), p. 353. Earlier in his book, Tenet says that al-Libi providedinformation to the Egyptians about a nuclear threat that he later recanted—indicatingthat the “third country” in question was indeed Egypt. Tenet, Atthe Center of the Storm, p. 269.[383]US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence,“Postwar Findings about Iraq’s WMD Programs and Links to Terrorismand How They Compare with Prewar Assessments,” September 8, 2006,(“SSCI Sept. 8, 2006 report”),http://intelligence.senate.gov/phaseiiaccuracy.pdf (accessed June 2, 2012), p.82.[384]SSCI Sept. 8, 2006 Report, p. 82. See also Isikoffand Corn, Hubris, p. 424.[385]SSCI Sept. 8, 2006 Report, p. 81. Ibid.[386]SSCI Sept. 8, 2006 Report, p. 80-81; Isikoff andCorn, Hubris, p. 424.[387]“President Bush Outlines Iraqi Threat: Remarksby the President on Iraq,” speech by President George W. Bush,Cincinnati Union Terminal, Cincinnati, Ohio, October 7, 2002, transcriptavailable athttp://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2002/10/20021007-8.html(accessed August 29, 2012).[388]Isikoff and Corn, Hubris, p. 187. See also Michael Hirsh,John Barry, and Daniel Klaidman, “A Tortured Debate,” Newsweek,June 21, 2004. Al-Libi was a principal source for Bush administration claimsthat al Qaeda collaborated with Saddam Hussein, particularly the assertion bySecretary of State Colin Powell to the United Nations that Iraq had providedtraining in “poisons and gases” for al Qaeda. See also “APolicy of Evasion and Deception: Speech to the United Nations on Iraq,”speech by Colin Powell, the United Nations, February 5, 2003, transcriptavailable at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/nation/transcripts/powelltext_020503.html(accessed June 3, 2012).[389]SSCI Sept. 8, 2006 Report, p. 77.[390]Steven R. Weisman, “Powell Calls His U.N.Speech a Lasting Blot on His Record,” Washington Post, September9, 2005, http://www.nytimes.com/2005/09/09/politics/09powell.html (accessedJune 2, 2012) (quoting Powell in an interview saying it was“devastating” to learn that some intelligence agents knew theinformation he had was unreliable but did not speak up).[391]A “well-informed Republican source familiarwith the details,” told Jane Mayer that “top CIA officials had tohave known about the warnings. ‘The entire intelligence community wouldhave had access to the DIA analysis. If you were on Intel-Link’—theclassified government computer system—‘anyone reading about thatcase would see it,’ [the Republican source familiar with the details]said.” Mayer, The Dark Side, p. 137.See also SSCI Sept. 8,2006 Report, p. 76-78; and Letter from to John D. Rockefeller IV, vice chairman,Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, to Vice Admiral Lowell E. Jacoby,director, Defense Intelligence Agency, October 18, 2005,http://www.fas.org/irp/news/2005/11/DIAletter.102605.pdf (accessed June 2,2012) (declassifying a Defense Intelligence report from February 2002 whichindicates that the information al-Libi was supplying was not reliable); andLarry Siems, The Torture Report (New York and London: OR Books, 2011),p. 337-338.[392]SSCI Sept. 8, 2006 Report, p. 80.[393]Ibid., p. 82.[394]Human Rights Watch, The United States’“Disappeared”: The CIA’s Long-Term “GhostDetainees,” October 12, 2004http://www.hrw.org/reports/2004/10/12/united-states-disappeared-cias-long-term-ghost-detainees(first on the list of 11 known prisoners missing at the time was Ibn Shiekh alLibi); Human Rights Watch, List of ‘Ghost Prisoners’ Possibly inCIA Custody, November 30, 2005,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/11/30/list-ghost-prisoners-possibly-cia-custody(first on the list of 26 known prisoners missing at the time was Ibn Sheikhal-Libi); Human Rights Watch, Ghost Prisoner: Two years in Secret CIADetention, Vol. 19, No. 1(G), February 27, 2007,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2007/02/26/ghost-prisoner (first on the list of 38of known prisoners missing at the time was Ibn Sheikh al Libi); and HumanRights Watch, “Letter to Bush Requesting Information on MissingDetainees,” February 27, 2007,http://www.hrw.org/news/2007/02/26/letter-bush-requesting-information-missing-detainees.[395]“Libya/US: Investigate Death of Former CIAPrisoner,” Human Rights Watch news release, May 11, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/news/2009/05/11/libyaus-investigate-death-former-cia-prisoner.[396]Ibid. Human Rights Watch interviewed other prisonersduring this visit who had been in CIA custody, several of whom are interviewedfor this report, including Belhadj, Shoroeiya, Maghrebi, and Mehdi (see above).Some of these interviews were included in Human Rights Watch, Libya –Truth and Justice Can’t Wait: Human Rights Developments in Libya AmidInstitutional Obstacles, December 12, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/libya1209web.pdf, p. 63-65.[397]“Libya/US: Investigate Death of Former CIAPrisoner,” Human Rights Watch news release, May 11, 2009.[398]Reporting on the exact arrest date varies. Someaccounts say he was arrested on November 11, 2001. See Dana Priest, “AlQaeda-Iraq Link Recanted: Captured Libyan Reverses Previous Statement to CIA,Officials Say,” Washington Post, August 1, 2004, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A30909-2004Jul31.html(accessed May 30, 2012); Others indicate it was “toward the end ofNovember 2001.” Soufan, The Black Banners, p.450; Others say hewas captured on December 19, 2001 by Pakistani security. Mayer, The DarkSide, p. 103-04 and Isikoff and Corn, Hubris, p. 119.[399]Human Rights Watch interview with Safrani, Bengazi,Libya, March 20, 2012.[400]Ibid.[401]Ibid.[402]Ibid.[403]Mayer, The Dark Side, p. 104; Isikoff andCorn, Hubris, p. 120.[404]Some prisoners held with al-Libi said that al-Libitold them he was actually given a choice of either Egypt or Israel and that hechose Egypt, a choice he said was a bad one. Human Rights Watch interview withShoroeiya, Tripoli, March 18, 2012; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withBousidra, April 2, 2012. Bousidra was detained with al-Libi in the foreignintelligence building in Libya, Bousidra in cell three and al-Libi in cellseven; other prisoners described something similar. Sheikh Othman Salah saidal-Libi told him that they said “if you don’t talk in 24-48 hoursand tell us your plan, you will be transferred to one of two countries thatwill have no mercy on you—Egypt or Israel.” Human Rights Watchinterview with Sheikh Othman Salah, Tripoli, Libya, Janurary 12, 2012. Al-Libitold Abdullah Mohammed Omar al-Tawaty when they were detained together in aplace called Asouk (he in cell three and Tawaty in cell 14) that when he was inthe “dark prison” in Afghanistan, someone representing himself fromthe White House came into his cell and said that if he did not tell him in thenext 20 minutes the operations that al Qaeda was planning against the US hewould be taken to either Egypt or Israel. Human Rights Watch interview withAbdulla Mohammed Omar al-Tawaty, Benghazi, Libya, March 21, 2012.[405]Human Rights Watch interview with Faraj el-Fakhri,March 21, 2012.[406]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Bousidra,April 2, 2012; Human Rights Watch interviews with Sheikh Othman Salah, January12, 2012; Tawaty, March 21, 2012; Faraj el-Fakhri, March 21, 2012; Abdul Azizel-Fakhri, March 22, 2012; and Shoroeiya, March 18, 2012.[407]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012. Shoroeiya said al-Libi showed him these marks when they were detainedin Abu Salim prison in Tripoli. All prisoners detained there said at some pointduring their detention in Abu Salim, Libyan authorities allowed prisoners toleave their cells for limited periods of time and mix with other prisoners incertain sections of the prison, though they still had to be confined to certainlocations.[408]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Bousidra,March 29, 2012.[409]Ibid.[410]Both Shoroieya and Sharif report talking to himduring their time in US detention in Afghanistan, although when is not clear,from around April 18, 2003 to between April 20 and 25, 2004. This was likelythe same place where al-Libi described being detained to al-Tawaty while theywere in prison together in Asouk in Libya. Al-Libi told Tawaty that he wastaken to the “darkness prison” in Kabul, then Egypt, then toBagram. He described the “darkness prison” as being so dark hecould not see anything. He had only a bucket to use as a toilet and there wasloud music playing all the time. These conditions are very similar to whatShoroeiya and Sharif describe (see above) and both reported talking to Sheikhal-Libi during their time in detention at this location. Human Rights Watchinterview with Abdullah Mohammed Omar al-Tawaty, March 21, 2012.[411]SSCI Sept. 8, 2006 Report, p 79-83; See also Mayer, TheDark Side, p. 138; and Michael Isikoff, “The MissingTerrorist,” The Daily Beast, May 27, 2007,http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2007/05/27/the-missing-terrorist.html(accessed May 25, 2012).[412]Some speculate that al-Libi was told he was in Alaskabut that he was actually in a secret CIA site in Poland, another cold location.See Larry Siems, The Torture Report (New York and London: OR Books,2011), p. 401.  Either way, he told a lot of other prisoners, includingBousidra, Tawaty, Othman, Shoroieya, and his family that he was in Alaska (heapparently told his mother that he was in a prison in North America that was an“icy desert”).[413]There have been allegations of forced repatriationsfrom Sweden at the request of the CIA; See Agiza v. Sweden,Communication No. 233/2003, U.N. Doc. CAT/C/34/D/233/2003 (2005),http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/cat/decisions/233-2003.html (accessed August 29,2012). However, Human Rights Watch could not confirm any information about theUS facility in Sweden to which a l-Libi’s relatives believe he was taken.[414]Mohammed Bousidra, Abdullah Tawaty, Shoroeiya, andOthman Salah all said al-Libi told them he was detained in these locations.[415]Neither Shoroeiya nor Abdullah Tawaty mentionGuantanamo or Sweden. Othman Salah mentioned Guantanamo but did not mentionSweden.[416]Mohammed Bousidra also said al-Libi told him he washeld in Syria but was not sure if it was before or after Egypt. He said al-Libitold him he was stripped naked there and handcuffed from behind and hung up byhis hands from behind.[417]Mohammed Bousidra said al-Libi told him he was heldon a warship.[418]Shoroeiya said al-Libi told him he was detained inPoland. Abdullah Tawaty and Bousidra both said al-Libi told them he wasdetained in a European country, but they did not remember whichone.[419]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Azizel-Fakhri, March 22, 2012.This also corresponds to the time that the Bushadministration began closing down secret CIA detention sites and transferringdetainees to either home or third countries.[420]Human Rights Watch Interview with Faraj el-Fakhri,March 21, 2012.[421]Ibid. See also “Libya/US: Investigate Death ofFormer CIA Prisoner,” Human Rights Watch news release, May 11, 2009.[422]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdul Azizel-Fakhri, March 22, 2012.[423]Ibid.[424]The two who said he had asked to go there himself,Abdulla Mohammed Omar al-Tawaty and Hazem al-Ajdal, said he did so because hesaw that he was attracting trouble to other prisoners who were seen with ortalking to him, so he asked for the isolation to protect them. Human RightsWatch interview with Abdulla Mohammed Omar al-Tawaty, March 21, 2012; and HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Hazem al-Ajdal, March 27, 2012.[425]“The Area” was a large walled space witha mesh roof that allowed sunlight in. Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Ajdal, Tripoli, Libya, March 27, 2012.[426]Both Hazem al-Ajdal and Mohhamed Bousidra said Sheikhal-Libi had hepatitis.[427]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ajdal,March 27, 2012.[428]Wright, The Looming Tower, p. 248. SomeIslamist militants who believe in the use of suicide bombings do not believe itis suicide, but martyrdom, and thus permissible; Soufan, Black Banners,p. 92, 94, 187.[429]Human Rights Watch interview with Shoroeiya, March18, 2012.[430]Human Rights Watch Interview with Mehdi, Tripoli,Libya, March 14, 2012.[431]Human Rights Watch Interview with Mehdi, March 14,2012.[432]“Libya/US: Investigate Death of Former CIAPrisoner,” Human Rights Watch news release, May 11, 2009; See also“Document—Libya: Amnesty International Completes First Fact FindingVisit in Over Five years,” Amnesty International public statement, May29, 2009, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE19/003/2009/en/d226b133-691d-41dc-aabf-ca89038618e7/mde190032009eng.html[433]Human Rights Watch interviews with Faraj el-Fakhri,March 21, 2012; Abdul Aziz el-Fakhri, March 22, 2012; and other prisoners whowere detained with al-Libi while in Libya and Afghanistan.[434]Human Rights Watch interviews with Faraj el-Fakhri,March 21, 2012; and Abdul Aziz el-Fakhri, March 22, 2012.[435]We obtained the names of several other Libyans whowere forcibly sent back to Libya from countries in Africa, allegedly with USinvolvement. Due to time constraints, we were unable to interview them duringour research visit to Libya.[436]Human Rights Watch interview with Lwatty, Tripoli,Libya, March 17, 2012.[437]Due to limits on time we were not able to find outabout Lwatty’s treatment in Libyan detention other than one incident.While detained at Abu Salim, he was given permission to speak to visitingrepresentatives of Amnesty International. But before the interview, he was keptin a very small container with tiny vents for several hours that did not allowin enough air. The authorities told him that if he said anything negative toAmnesty International, he would suffer consequences. After the interview withAmnesty, he was put back into the container for another five hours.[438]Human Rights Watch interview with Mafud al-SadiqEmbaya Abdullah, Benghazi, Libya, March 2012.[439]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdullah MohammedOmar al-Tawaty, Benghazi, Libya, March 21, 2012.[440]Tawaty alsowent by the name of Abdul Rahman.[441]Human Rights Watch Interview with Othman Salah,Tripoli, Libya, March 15, 2012.[442]These are the same dates that Tawaty was captured inMali, but it is not clear if he was detained.[443]See Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture),adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51)at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987;International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), entered intoforce March 23, 1976, G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52,U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, arts. 7 & 9;  Declarationon the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances, adopted by G.A.res. 47/133, December 18, 1992, 47 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 207, U.N. Doc.A/47/49 (1992).[444]UN Human Rights Committee, “Issues Relating toReservations Made upon Ratification or Accession to the Covenant or the OptionProtocols thereto, or in Relation to Declarations under Article 41 of theCovenant,” General Comment 24, CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.6 (1994),http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/0/69c55b086f72957ec12563ed004ecf7a?Opendocument(accessed June 27, 2012), para. 10 (explaining that certain human rightsprovisions that have become customary international law cannot be derogatedfrom, including the right to be free from torture, arbitrarily arrest anddetention, and the right to a fair trial); See also Restatement (Third) of theForeign Relations Law of the United States, sec. 702 (1987); Human RightsWatch, Still at Risk: Diplomatic Assurances No Safeguard Against Torture,Vol. 18, 17, no. 4(D), April 2005, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/eca0405.pdf,p. 12-13; and Sie Elihulauterpacht and Daniel Bethlehem, “2.1 The Scopeand Content of the Principle of Non-Refoulement: Opinion,” RefugeeProtection in International Law, (Erika Feller et al., eds., 2003),http://www.unhcr.org/4a1ba1aa6.html (accessed June 28, 2012), p. 143-44.[445]The Convention against Torture defines torture as“any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental,is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from himor a third person information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or athird person has committed or is suspected of having committed, or intimidatingor coercing him or a third person” and when “inflicted by or at theinstigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official orother person acting in an official capacity.” Convention against Torture,art. 2.[446]Convention against Torture, art. 2(2); UN CommitteeAgainst Torture, General Comment 2, CAT/C/GC/2 (2008), http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/publisher,CAT,GENERAL,,47ac78ce2,0.html(accessed June 28, 2012), para. 5 (noting that language in article 2 of theconvention stating that “no exceptional circumstances whatsoever may beinvoked by a State Party to justify acts of torture,” means that theprohibition against torture is absolute and non-derogable).[447]Convention against Torture, art. 3. Article 3 statesin full:1.No State Party shall expel, return (“refouler”) or extradite aperson to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing thathe would be in danger of being subjected to torture.2.For the purpose of determining whether there are such grounds, the competentauthorities shall take into account all relevant considerations including,where applicable, the existence in the State concerned of a consistent patternof gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights.[448]UN Committee against Torture, “Implementationof article 3 of the Convention in the context of article 22,” GeneralComment No. 1, U.N. Doc. 11/21/1997.A/53/44, annex IX, CAT General Comment No.1 (General Comments),http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/13719f169a8a4ff78025672b0050eba1?Opendocument(accessed June 26, 2012), para. 2 (“The Committee is of the view that thephrase ‘another State’ in article 3 refers to the State to whichthe individual concerned is being expelled, returned or extradited, as well asto any state to which the author may subsequently be expelled, returned orextradited.”); See also UN Committee against Torture, Korban v. Sweden,U.N. Doc. CAT/C/21/D/088/1997 (November 16, 1988), para. 6.5, 7.[449]Convention against Torture, article 3(2). See also UNCommittee against Torture, Tala v. Sweden, Doc. CAT/C/17/D/43/1996(March 7, 1996) para. 10.1.[450]See UN Committee against Torture, Agiza v. Sweden,233/2003 (May 20, 2005), para. 13.7-13.8 (“the absence of any avenue ofjudicial or independent administrative review of the Government’sdecision to expel the complainant does not meet the procedural obligation foreffective, independent and impartial review required by article 3 of theConvention”); See also UN Committee against Torture, Arana v. France,U.N. Doc. CAT/C/23/D/63/1997 (June 5, 2000), paras. 11.5, 12.[451]UN Human Rights Committee, “Replaces GeneralComment 7 Concerning Prohibition of Torture and Cruel Treatment or Punishment(Art. 7),” General Comment No. 20,(1992), http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/6924291970754969c12563ed004c8ae5?Opendocument(accessed June 27, 2012), para. 9. See also UN Human Rights Committee,“Nature of the General Legal Obligation Imposed on States Parties to theCovenant,” General Comment No. 31, CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004)http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/0/58f5d4646e861359c1256ff600533f5f?Opendocument(accessed June 27, 2012), para. 12 (The obligation is not to “extradite,deport, expel, or otherwise remove a person from their territory.”).[452]Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951Refugee Convention), 189 U.N.T.S. 150, entered into force April 22, 1954, art.33; and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, 606 U.N.T.S. 267, enteredinto force October 4, 1967. Exceptions apply if there are reasonable groundsfor regarding the person seeking protection as a “danger to the securityof the country in which he is, or who, having been convicted by a finaljudgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the communityof that country.” 1951 Refugee Convention, art. 33(2). However, even ifany of the exceptions apply, a person is still protected by other treaties andcustomary international law prohibitions on returning someone to a place wherethey will face torture.[453]Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment ofPrisoners of War (Third Geneva Convention), adopted August 12, 1949, 6 U.S.T.3316, 75 U.N.T.S. 135, entered into force October 21, 1950,http://www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/FULL/375(accessed June 28, 2012), art. 12; and ConventionRelative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (Fourth GenevaConvention), Geneva, adopted August 12, 1949. 6 U.S.T. 3516, 75 U.N.T.S. 287,entered into force October 21, 1950,http://www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/FULL/380?OpenDocument(accessed July 2, 2012), art. 49.  See alsoArticle 3 common to all four Geneva Conventions of 1949, which applies todetained civilians and combatants in non-international armed conflicts andprohibits torture and “outrages against personal dignity, in particularcruel and degrading treatment.”[454]The ICCPR has been ratified by 167 countries,including the US on June 8, 1992; the UK on May 20, 1976; Libya on May 15,1970; and Pakistan on June 23, 2010. The Convention against Torture has beenratified by 151 countries, including the US on October 21, 1994; the UK onDecember 8, 1988; Libya on May 16, 1989; and Pakistan on June 23, 2010.[455]The ICCPR was ratified by the Netherlands on December11, 1978; Chad on June 9, 1995; Mauritania on November 17, 2004; Mali on July16, 1974; Morocco on May 3, 1979; and signed by China on October 5, 1998(applies to Hong Kong Special Administrative Region). The Convention againstTorture was ratified by the Netherlands on December 21, 1988; Chad on June 9,1995; Mauritania on November 17, 2004; Mali on February 26, 1999;  Moroccoon June 21, 1993; China on October 4, 1988, (applies to Hong Kong SpecialAdministrative Region); The Refugee Convention was ratified by the Netherlandson  May 3, 1956; Chad on August 19, 1981; Mauritania on May 5, 1987; Malion February 2, 1973; Morocco on November 7, 1956; China on September 24, 1982;The Refugee Protocol was ratified by the Netherlands on November 29, 1968; Chadon August 19, 1981; Mauritania on May 5, 1987;  Mali on February 2, 1973;Morocco on April 20, 1971; and China on September 24, 1982.[456]See, for example, UN Committee against Torture, Korbanv. Sweden, CAT/C/21/D/088/1997 (November 16, 1988), para. 6.5, 7 (TheCommittee ruled that Sweden had an obligation to refrain from forciblyreturning the complainant to Jordan—even though it was never alleged hewould face torture there—because he ran the risk, according to theevidence, of being expelled from that country to Iraq).[457]UN Commission on Human Rights, “Torture and othercruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,” Resolution 2003/32,E/CN.4/2003/L.11/Add.4, para. 14.[458]UN Human Rights Committee, “Replaces GeneralComment 7 Concerning Prohibition of Torture and Cruel Treatment or Punishment(Art. 7),” General Comment No. 20, Compilation of General Comments andGeneral Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1 at 30 (1994), para. 6. Article 7 of the ICCPR states: “Noone shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment.”[459]UN Human Rights Council, Interim report of theSpecial Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment orpunishment, Juan Mendez, A/66/268, August 5, 2011, para. 20.[460]Tripoli Document 2162.[461]See, generally, Human Rights Watch, “EmptyPromises”: Diplomatic Assurances No Safeguard against Torture, Vol.16, No. 4(D), April 15, 2004,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2004/04/14/empty-promises; See also UN Commission onHuman Rights, “Civil and Political Rights, Including the Questions ofTorture and Detention,” UN Doc. E/CN.4/2006/6 (December 23, 2005),http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/441181ed6.html (accessed July 2, 2012), p.2 (stating that “Diplomatic assurances are not legally binding and… are ineffective and unreliable in ensuring the protection of returnedpersons”).See also casesrejecting the use of diplomatic assurances: UN Committee Against Torture,Agiza v. Sweden, 233/2003 (May 20, 2005) (Sweden’s procurement ofdiplomatic assurances from Egypt were not sufficient to protect the detaineeagainst a manifest risk of torture upon return to Egypt. Assurances containedno mechanism for enforcement and the Swedish government provided no evidence itinvestigated the flagrant and consistent use of torture against detainees inEgypt); European Court of Human Rights (ECHR), Saadi v. Italy, 37201/06(February 28, 2008); ECHR, Khaydarov v. Russia, 21055/09 (May 20, 2010);ECHR, Klein v. Russia, 24268/08 (April 1, 2010); UN Committee AgainstTorture, Pelit v. Azerbaijan, CAT/C/38/D/281/2005 (May 29, 2007); Mahjoubv. Canada, 2006 FC 1503 (December 14, 2006).[462]UK Special Immigration Appeals Commission, DD andAS v. The Secretary of State for the Home Department, Appeal No. SC/42 and50/2005 (April 27, 2007), http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/SIAC/2007/42_2005.pdf(accessed July 2, 2012); See also UN Committee Against Torture, Korban v.Sweden, CAT/C/21/D/088/1997 (November 16, 1988), para. 6.5, 7.[463]MichaelScheuer, “Exporting Detainees,” International Herald Tribune,March 12, 2005,http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/11/opinion/11iht-edscheuer.html(accessed August 29, 2012). See also Human RightsWatch, Double Jeopardy: CIA Renditions to Jordan, April 8, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/04/07/double-jeopardy-0.[464]See ECHR, Othman v. United Kingdom, 8139/09(January 17, 2012), para. 194 (In which the court found that a Memorandum ofUnderstanding (MOU) between the UK and Jordan amounts to a diplomaticassurance, provided sufficiently detailed and transparent promises from Jordanthat the detainee would not be tortured upon return, in addition to apost-return monitoring mechanism that would enforce the promises. The courtaffirmed that the MOU is “superior in both its detail and its formalityto any assurances which the Court has previously examined,” and addressedthe protections that will specifically be afforded to the applicant uponarrival in Jordan).[465]See, for example, Lai Cheong Sing and Tsang MingNa v.Canada(Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), 2007FC 361 (April 5, 2007), para. 141 (“[P]ost-return mechanisms do little tomitigate the risk of torture and have proven ineffective in both safeguardingagainst torture and as a mechanism of accountability.”).[466]The duty to investigate and prosecute thoseresponsible for grave violations of human rights has its legal basis in theICCPR (art. 2) and the Convention against Torture (arts. 4, 5, and 7).[467]See Anti-Torture Statute, 18 U.S.C. sec. 2340A,http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/2340A (accessed July 2, 2012)(enacted pursuant to the US becoming a party to the Convention againstTorture); War Crimes Act, 18 U.S.C. sec. 2441,http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/2441 (accessed July 2, 2012).[468]Convention against Torture, art. 14; ICCPR, art.2(3).[469]See, generally, Human Rights Watch, Getting Awaywith Torture: The Bush Administration and Mistreatment of Detainees, July11, 2011, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/07/12/getting-away-torture-0(accessed July 2, 2012).[470]Ibid.[471]“Joint Statement by the Director of PublicProsecutions and the Metropolitan Police Service,” Crown ProsecutionService news release.[472]See Owen Bowcott, et al., “Gibson Inquiry intoMI5 and MI6 Torture Collusion Claims Abandoned,” The Guardian, January18, 2012,http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/jan/18/gibson-inquiry-torture-collusion-abandoned(accessed July 2, 2012); for more information on Human Rights Watch objectionsto the Gibson Inquiry, see Human Rights Watch, “Submission to the UKForeign Affairs Select Committee,” May 24, 2012,http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/05/24/hrw-submission-uk-foreign-affairs-select-committee,para. 8 (Among other deficiencies, the Gibson Inquiry allowed evidence to betaken in secret, failed to provide meaningful ways to challenge evidence, andpermitted the Cabinet Office rather than an independent judge to makedisclosure decisions).[473]Bowcott et al, “Gibson inquiry into MI5 and MI6torture collusion claims abandoned,” Guardian.[474]Patrick Wintour, “Guantánamo Bay detaineesto be paid compensation by UK government,” The Guardian, November15, 2010,http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/nov/16/guantanamo-bay-compensation-claim(accessed June 30, 2012).[475]Benjamin Ward, “Secret ‘justice’ isnothing of the sort,” New Statesmen, June 16, 2012,http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/politics/2012/06/secret-justice-nothing-sort(accessed July 25, 2012).Related ContentSeptember 5, 2012News ReleaseUS: Torture and Rendition to Gaddafi’s LibyaSeptember 5, 2012News ReleaseUS: Torture and Rendition to Gaddafi’s LibyaRegion / CountryMiddle East/North Africa Libya United States National Security US Foreign PolicyProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch