Torture Archipelago: Arbitrary Arrests, Torture, and Enforced Disappearances in Syria’s Underground Prisons since March 2011 | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportSummary and recommendations in RUSSIANDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportSummary and recommendations in RUSSIANJuly 3, 2012Torture ArchipelagoArbitrary Arrests, Torture, and Enforced Disappearances in Syria’s Underground Prisons since March 2011Available InEnglishالعربيةMap showing the locations of detention centers that were identified by multiple witnesses.SummaryThe guards hung me by my wristsfrom the ceiling for eight days. After a few days of hanging, being deniedsleep, it felt like my brain stopped working. I was imagining things. My feetgot swollen on the third day. I felt pain that I have never felt in my entirelife. It was excruciating. I screamed that I needed to go to a hospital, butthe guards just laughed at me.—Eliasdescribing how he was tortured in Branch 285 of the Department of GeneralIntelligence in DamascusSince the beginning of anti-government protests in March2011, Syrian authorities have subjected tens of thousands of people toarbitrary arrests, unlawful detentions, enforced disappearances, ill-treatment,and torture using an extensive network of detention facilities, an archipelagoof torture centers, scattered throughout Syria.Based on more than 200 interviews with former detainees,including women and children, and defectors from the Syrian military andintelligence agencies, this report focuses on 27 of these detention facilities.For each facility, most of them with cells and torture chambers and one orseveral underground floors, we provide the exact location, identify theagencies responsible for operating them, document the type of ill-treatment andtorture used, and name, to the extent possible, the individuals running them.The facilities included in this report are those for which multiple witnesseshave indicated the same location and provided detailed descriptions about theuse of torture. The actual number of such facilities is likely much higher.In charge of Syria’s network of detention facilities are thecountry’s four main intelligence agencies, commonly referred to collectively asthe mukhabarat:the Department of Military Intelligence(Shu`bat al-Mukhabarat al-`Askariyya);the Political Security Directorate(Idarat al-Amn al-Siyasi);the General Intelligence Directorate(Idarat al-Mukhabarat al-`Amma); andthe Air Force Intelligence Directorate(Idarat al-Mukhabarat al-Jawiyya).Each of these four agencies maintainscentral branches in Damascus as well as regional, city, and local branchesacross the country. In virtually all of these branches there are detentionfacilities of varying size.Syria’s intelligence agencies havehistorically operated independently from each other with no clear boundaries totheir areas of jurisdiction. Relying on the country’s overbroad emergency law,the mukhabarat has a long history of detaining people without arrest warrantsand denying detainees other due process safeguards. Lifting the emergency lawin April 2011 changed little in practice. Legislationlimiting the time that a person can be lawfully held in detention withoutjudicial review to 60 days for certain crimes, simultaneously introduced inApril 2011, does not meet the requirement in international law that judicialreview should take place “promptly.” Furthermore, several former detaineesinterviewed by Human Rights Watch said that they had been held without judicialreview even longer than the 60 days permitted by Syrian law.To manage the thousands of people detained inthe context of anti-government demonstrations, the authorities also establishednumerous temporary unofficial holding centres in places such as stadiums,military bases, schools, and hospitals where the authorities rounded up andheld people during massive detention campaigns before transporting them tobranches of the intelligence agencies.All of the witnesses interviewed by HumanRights Watch described conditions of detention—extreme overcrowding, inadequatefood, and routine denial of necessary medical assistance—that would bythemselves amount to ill-treatment and, in some cases, torture. But almost allthe former detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch also said they had beensubjected to torture or witnessed the torture of others during their detention.Interrogators, guards, and officers used a broad range of torture methods,including prolonged beatings, often with objects such as batons and wires,holding the detainees in painful stress positions for prolonged periods oftime, often with the use of specially devised equipment, the use ofelectricity, burning with car battery acid, sexual assault and humiliation, thepulling of fingernails, and mock execution. Altogether Human Rights Watch documentedmore than 20 different methods of torture used in Syria’s archipelago oftorture centers.Click to expand Image© 2012 Human Rights WatchMost of the detainees interviewed said theyhad been subjected to several forms of torture, often inflicted with escalatinglevels of pain. At times detainees were forced to remain naked or in theirunderwear while they were tortured. Several former detainees interviewedfor this report told Human Rights Watch that they had witnessed people dyingfrom torture in detention. Human Rights Watch also received information aboutdeaths in custody from families or friends of the victims.A former intelligence officer described toHuman Rights Watch the various methods used at the Air Force Intelligence baseat the Mezzeh airport in Damascus:The mildest form of torture is hitting people with batonson their arms and legs and not giving them anything to eat or drink. Then theywould hang the detainees from the ceiling by their hands, sometimes for hoursor days. I saw it while I was talking to the interrogators. They used electricstun-guns and an electroshock machine, an electric current transformer. It is asmall machine with two wires with clips that they attach to nipples and a knobthat regulates the current. In addition, they put people in coffins andthreatened to kill them and close the coffin. People were wearing underwear.They pour hot water on people and then whip them. I’ve also seen drills there,but I’ve never seen them being used. I’ve also seen them using martial artmoves, like breaking ribs with a knee kick. They put pins under your feet andhit you so that you step on them. I also heard them threatening to cut off thedetainees’ penises.A 31-year-old detainee who was detained in Idlib governoratein June described to Human Rights Watch how intelligence agents tortured him inthe Idlib Central Prison:They forced me to undress. Then they started squeezing myfingers with pliers. They put staples in my fingers, chest, and ears. I wasonly allowed to take them out if I spoke. The nails in the ears were the mostpainful. They used two wires hooked up to a car battery to give me electricshocks. They used electric stun-guns on my genitals twice. I thought I wouldnever see my family again. They tortured me like this three times over threedays.While most of the torture victimsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch were young men aged between 18 and 35,interviewed victims also included children, women, and elderly individuals.Defecting members of the intelligence agencies told Human Rights Watch thatthey either witnessed or participated in the torture and ill-treatment ofdetainees, corroborating accounts by former detainees.Human Rights Watch has documented the use of torture and ill-treatment inthe following detention facilities:AgencyName of BranchCityHead of BranchMilitaryIntelligenceBranch215DamascusBrig.Gen. Sha’afiqMilitaryIntelligenceBranch227DamascusMaj.Gen. Rustom GhazaliMilitaryIntelligenceBranch291DamascusBrig.Gen. Burhan Qadour (Replaced Brig. Gen. Yousef Abdou in May 2012)MilitaryIntelligenceBranch235 (“Palestine”)DamascusBrig.Gen. Muhammad KhalloufMilitaryIntelligenceBranch248DamascusNotidentifiedMilitaryIntelligenceBranch245DaraaCol.Loai al-AliMilitaryIntelligenceAleppoBranchAleppoNotidentifiedMilitaryIntelligenceBranch271IdlibBrig. Gen. Nawfel al-HusseinMilitaryIntelligenceHomsBranchHomsMuhammadZamreniMilitaryIntelligenceLatakiaBranchLatakiaNotidentifiedAirForce IntelligenceMezzehAirport BranchDamascusBrig.Gen. Abdul Salam Fajr Mahmoud (director of investigative branch)AirForce IntelligenceBabTouma BranchDamascusNotidentifiedAirForce IntelligenceHomsBranchHomsBrig. Gen. Jawdat al-AhmedAirForce IntelligenceDaraabranchDaraaCol.Qusay MihoubAirForce IntelligenceLatakiaBranchLatakiaCol.Suhail Al-AbdullahPoliticalSecurityMezzehBranchDamascusNotidentifiedPoliticalSecurityIdlibBranchIdlibNotidentifiedPoliticalSecurityHomsBranchHomsNotidentifiedPoliticalSecurityLatakiaBranchLatakiaNotidentifiedPoliticalSecurityDaraaBranchDaraaNotidentifiedGeneralIntelligenceLatakiaBranchLatakiaBrig.Gen. Khudr KhudrGeneralIntelligenceBranch285DamascusBrig.Gen. Ibrahim Ma’ala (Replaced Brig. Gen. Hussam Fendi in late 2011)GeneralIntelligenceAl-KhattibBranchDamascusNotidentifiedGeneralIntelligenceAleppoBranchAleppoNotidentifiedGeneralIntelligenceBranch318HomsBrig. Gen. Firas Al-HamedGeneralIntelligenceIdlibBranchIdlibNotidentifiedJointCentralPrison - IdlibIdlibNot identifiedIn the vast majority of detention casesdocumented by Human Rights Watch, family members could obtain no informationabout the fate or whereabouts of the detainees and detainees were not allowedany contact with the outside world. Many of the detentions can therefore bequalified as enforced disappearances.Human Rights Watch calls on the UN SecurityCouncil to ensure accountability for these crimes by referring the situation inSyria to the International Criminal Court. Human Rights Watch also calls on theUnited Nations Security Council to ensure that the Syrian government grantsrecognized international detention monitors access to all detention facilities,including those mentioned in this report.RecommendationsTo the UN Security CouncilDemand that Syria grantrecognized international detention monitors access to all detention facilities,official and unofficial, without prior notification, including those mentionedin this report;Ensure that the UN supervisory mission(UNSMIS ) deployed to Syria includes a properly staffed and equipped human rightscomponent with staff with expertise in detention monitoring that is able toidentify the use of arbitrary detention, visit detention centers, and to safelyand independently interview victims of human rights abuses while protectingthem from retaliation. The mission should include among its personnel peopletrained to identify gender-based violence and other gender-specific humanrights violations and personnel trained to work with children;Demand that Syria enforce its commitmentunder point 4 of the Annan plan by releasing all arbitrarily detained persons, “includingespecially vulnerable categories of persons, and persons involved in peacefulpolitical activities,” and provide without delay “a list of all places in whichsuch persons are being detained”;Refer the situation in Syria to theInternational Criminal Court (ICC);Adopt targeted sanctions on officialscredibly implicated in abuses;Require states to suspend all military salesand assistance, including technical training and services, to the Syriangovernment, given the real risk that the weapons and technology will be used inthe commission of serious human rights violations;Demand that Syria cooperate fully with theUN Human Rights Council Commission of Inquiry and with the UNSMIS;Demand access for humanitarian missions,foreign journalists, and independent human rights organizations.To All CountriesActing individually, or jointly throughregional mechanisms where appropriate, adopt targeted sanctions against Syrianofficials credibly implicated in the ongoing serious violations ofinternational human rights law;Under the principle of universaljurisdiction and in accordance with national laws, investigate and prosecutemembers of the Syrian senior military and civilian leadership suspected ofcommitting international crimes;Call for the UN Security Council to referthe situation in Syria to the ICC, as the forum most capable of effectivelyinvestigating and prosecuting those bearing the greatest responsibility forabuses in Syria.To the Arab LeagueActing individually and jointly, maintainand strengthen targeted sanctions against Syrian officials credibly implicatedin the ongoing grave, widespread, and systematic violations of internationalhuman rights law in Syria since mid-March 2011;Support a strong UNSMIS human rightscomponent (as described in the recommendations above);Call for the UN Security Council to referthe situation in Syria to the ICC.To Russia and ChinaSupport UN Security Council action on Syria(as described in the recommendations above), including referring the situationto the ICC;Suspend all military sales and assistance tothe Syrian government, given the real risk that weapons and technology will beused in the commission of serious human rights violations;Condemn in the strongest terms the Syrianauthorities’ systematic violations of human rights;To the Syrian GovernmentRelease all arbitrarily detained persons, “includingespecially vulnerable categories of persons, and persons involved in peacefulpolitical activities,” and provide without delay “a list of all places in whichsuch persons are being detained” in accordance with point 4 of the Annan plan.Immediately halt the practice of enforceddisappearance, arbitrary arrest and detention, and the use of torture;Conduct prompt, thorough, and objectiveinvestigations into allegations of arbitrary detention, use of torture,enforced disappearances, and deaths in custody, including the ones described inthis report, and bring the perpetrators to justice;Suspend members of the security forcesagainst whom there are credible allegations of human rights abuses, pendinginvestigations;Annul Legislative Decree No. 14, of January15, 1969, and Legislative Decree 69, which provide immunity to members of thesecurity forces by requiring a decree from the General Command of the Army andArmed Forces to prosecute any member of the internal security forces, PoliticalSecurity, and customs police;Publish lists of all detainees;Provide immediate and unhindered access for recognized international detention monitors to all detentionfacilities, official and unofficial, without prior notification,including those mentioned in this report;Provide all UNSMIS staff with the necessarypermissions, including visas to Syria or use of UN air assets, to carry outtheir mandate;Provide immediate and unhindered access and cooperationto independent observers, journalists, and human rights monitors, including theUN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions; theOffice of the High Commissioner for Human Rights; the UN Human Rights CouncilCommission of Inquiry on Syria; and the special rapporteur on Syria.MethodologyHuman Rights Watch has documented the systematic use oftorture by the Syrian authorities since anti-government demonstrations brokeout in March 2011.[1]This report is based on more than 200 interviews with former detainees and defectorsfrom the Syrian military and intelligence agencies. The interviews wereconducted in Syria and in neighboring countries that host refugees fromSyria—Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq, and Turkey—between April 2011 and May 2012.Interviews were conducted in Arabic or in English using aninterpreter. Because of the very real possibility of reprisals we have withheldthe names of the victims and witnesses we interviewed, using instead pseudonymsto identify the sources of information.To establish the locationof the detention facilities, we asked victims, witnesses, and defectors toindicate the building where they were held, visited, or served using satelliteimagery. Some detainees were not able to identify the facility in which theywere held because they were blindfolded. Others, however, were able to do so,either because they were detained close to where they lived and knew the areawell, or because they were told by guards and fellow detainees where they werebeing held, or because they were not blindfolded when they were brought to thefacility or released. In a few cases, detainees were asked to come back to thesame detention facility for further interrogation upon release.We also asked former detainees and defectors to describe thefacilities in detail and to draw the layout of the floors where they weredetained and interrogated. This helped us to corroborate information fromdifferent witnesses.We also asked former detainees and defectors to name thosein charge of these detention facilities. In some cases, it was possible tocorroborate information through independent interviews with two or morewitnesses or public sources. However, given the secrecy surrounding the Syrianintelligence services (mukhabarat), names of commanders and others in authorityand command responsibility might be further clarified as more information comesto light.The detention facilities included in this report are those for which severalsources described having witnessed or experienced the use of torture andill-treatment. We have only provided the location of facilities that wereidentified by two or more people.I.Arrest, Detention, and Torture in SyriaArbitraryArrests and Unlawful DetentionGiven the limited accessfor independent observers and the near-complete secrecy surrounding detentionsand detention facilities in Syria, it is virtually impossible to establish howmany people have been detained since demonstrations broke out in March 2011. Asof June 22, 2012, the Violations Documentation Center (VDC), a Syrianmonitoring group working in coordination with the Local Coordination Committees(LCC), a network of Syrian activists, had documented over 25,000 detentions.[2]The actual number is likely much higher.Most of the detentions documented by Human Rights Watch werecarried out by the intelligence services (mukhabarat), oftenassisted by the military, during and immediately following anti-governmentprotests; in the course of large-scale house-to-house “sweep” operations; andat checkpoints on roads. Riot police (Hafz al-Nizam),the army, and, in some cases, pro-government militias also detained people, butoften these detainees were eventually transferred to the mukhabarat.Security forces also raided the homes of“wanted” individuals and, in some cases, when these persons were not at home,detained their relatives instead.The raids were often accompanied bylooting and destruction of property, and by beatings and other ill-treatment ofthe detainees. As documented in previous Human Rights Watch publications, theseactions were usually ordered, authorized, or condoned by the commandingofficers.[3]According to witnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watch,the security forces conducting the arrests did not introduce themselves, didnot provide any legal justification for the arrest, and did not inform thedetainees as to where they were being taken. Following thearrests, the detainees were usually brought to local detentionfacilities—police stations, local branches of one of the intelligence agencies,or ad-hoc facilities such as stadiums, schools, facilities belonging to theyouth branch of the Baath party (locally referred to as Tala’e`), or hospitals.Following initial interrogation and collection of personal data, the securityforces typically transferred the detainees to larger detention facilitieslocated in regional centers such as Damascus, Homs, Idlib, Latakia, Daraa, andHama.Most of the detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watchspent anywhere from a few days to several months in detention. In most cases,detainees were held in more than one detention facility. It was not uncommonfor detainees to be transferred to four or five detention facilities run bydifferent intelligence agencies during their detention, being subjected totorture, the deliberate infliction of severe pain, in several of them.In a typical example, security forces detainedthirty-one-year old Khalil during a protest in a town in theIdlib governorate on June 29, 2011. They first took him to the local policestation where police officers interrogated him three times during the nightfollowing his arrest, kicking and beating him. The next day security forcestransferred Khalil to the central prison in Idlib, where he initially spent 16days on the third floor, being subjected to severe torture by PoliticalSecurity officers who had taken over the floor. Political Security officersthen transferred him to a Military Intelligence facility located in thebasement of the prison, where the torture continued. After 13 days in MilitaryIntelligence custody in Idlib, Khalil was transferred to Damascus where he washeld in Military Intelligence Branch 215 for five days, in Branch 291for sixdays, and then in Branch 248 before he was eventually released, about twomonths after his detention.[4]Some detainees were released without anyformal procedure, when the interrogators eventually told them that they werefree to go; others were taken to court and seen by a judge and either chargedand released on bail, or simply released. More than half of the formerdetainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch were released without seeing ajudge or having any formal charges brought against them. Human Rights Watchdoes not know how many people were sentenced to prison terms after theirdetention.The vast majority of detention casesdocumented by Human Rights Watch can be qualified as enforced disappearances.In international law this is when state agents or other persons acting with thesupport of the state detain someone and then refuse to acknowledge thedetention, or conceal his or her fate or whereabouts.[5]In most of the cases documented by Human Rights Watch, the detainees’ familieshad no information about their fate or whereabouts for weeks or, in some cases,months following the arrest, despite their inquiries with various intelligenceagencies. The authorities did not allow detainees to have any contact with theoutside world and left their families wondering whether their detainedrelatives were alive or dead.Widespread or systematic enforceddisappearances, carried out as part of a state policy, can constitute a crimeagainst humanity.[6]Conditionsin DetentionAll of the witnesses interviewed by HumanRights Watch described conditions in these detention facilities that bythemselves amount to ill-treatment and, in some cases, torture.In all of the facilities that witnessesdescribed to Human Rights Watch, the detainees were held in overcrowded cells.Former detainees usually distinguished between what they called common cellsand individual cells. The size of the common cells varied, measuring up to 70square meters. For example, two former detainees told Human Rights Watch that acommon cell measuring about 20 square meters in Military Intelligence Branch291 in Damascus held 60-75 people.Formerdetainees explained to Human Rights Watch that what they called individualcells were often small rooms measuring one to two square meters, many with ahole in the middle of the ground for a toilet. While in some cases formerdetainees reported being held alone in such cells most of the detainees saidthat these individual cells usually held several people. Both in the common andindividual cells, the overcrowding was such that in many cases the detaineescould only stand inside their cells, or had to take turns sleeping.Click to expand ImageHatem, who was detained in late September 2011 in a branchof the General Intelligence Directorate in Kafr Souseh, Damascus, told HumanRights Watch,In the first three days I was in a group cell. We werearound 65 people in the cell which was 3.5 by 3 meters.While in that cell Istayed standing for three days. When I wanted to sleep I would lean on the walland sleep. The bathroom was in the cell. After the first three days they movedme to a solitary cell. We were five people in that cell. It was one by twometers. In the group cell that had around 65 people. Because they couldn’tsleep and had to stand all the time, people started to go crazy, to hallucinate.There was a group of five or six people in my group cell that started goingcrazy. One time some people were sitting, and sleeping in the cell, and therewas one person hallucinating who started peeing on the people as they aresleeping. Imagine![7]The majority of former detaineesinterviewed by Human Rights Watch said they were blindfolded and handcuffedmost of the time during their detentions, and some said they were kept nakedfor several days.All the former detainees interviewed byHuman Rights Watch reported being deprived of proper food (a commonly describedmeal was a piece of stale bread, half an egg, or a tomato, provided once aday), potable water, and regular access to a toilet.Samir, who was detained in Military Intelligence Branch 235 (knownas the “Palestine Branch”) in Damascus from July to September 2011, told HumanRights Watch,They brought me down to where the cells are and put me in aroom that measured 2 by 1.5 meters. The ceiling was not high. They left methere by myself. I stayed in this cell the whole time I was detained. The cellhad every kind of filth, cockroaches, fleas, the smell of dirt and mold. Therewas no toilet. There was just an old large Pepsi bottle filled with urine. Onthe floor there was a flimsy mattress with an unreal smell … There was no lightand [when I entered] no food and no water. [You would] hear the sound oftorture, beatings, people being sworn at, humiliated, it was routine. They letyou go to the toilet two times a day. You just took your Pepsi bottle andemptied it and there was another bottle for water, which you filled. There wasno showering and no soap. For 61 days I did not shower once. After a while, youget used to it.There were three meals a day, but their way of distributingit was very bizarre. They distributed the bread on the floor. In the metal doorof the cell there was a small vent for air. They threw the bread in throughthis vent. The bread was either dough or burnt entirely. We would only getstale bread. They would serve the food in old empty halaweh [a sugar andsesame sweet] containers ... The guard that distributed the bread at lunchyelled at you to stand at the door and to put out your plate to get the food.Then he throws the liquid, the bulgar wheat—it’s all dirt—through the vent. Hethrows it, some lands on the floor, some on the plate, you don’t know where.This is between 12 and 2 o’clock. At 4 p.m. you go to the bathroom. They giveeach person one potato for his dinner.At night there is no other food. Thesecond time you go to the bathroom is at 6 a.m. You go to the bathroom and theprison guard, so as not to tire himself out, has the food at the door of thebathroom and gives it to you on the way out. It is four olives and a smallspoon of jam or sometimes half an egg or some halaweh, but the worstkind of halaweh.[8]Formerdetainees also said that there was virtually no medical assistance available tothe detainees in many detention facilities, even to those who sustainedinjuries or bullet wounds during their arrest, or suffered from chronicconditions. Several witnesses told Human Rights Watch that they witnessed thedeaths of fellow detainees from complications caused by lack of medicationsthey required for diabetes or a heart condition.Jalal, a former detainee in the Central Prison in Idlib, forexample, told Human Rights Watch that one of the detainees died because of lackof medical treatment in July 2011:One guy had diabetes. We kept telling the guards to get himmedical care, but they would just take him out and beat him up. For a week hecouldn’t eat or stand up. We had to carry him to the bathroom. And then he wentinto diabetic shock. He said his prayers and then he just died. As he wassaying his prayers another prisoner realized that he was dying and startedkicking the door. But the guards just took the guy out who kicked the door andbeat him. They dropped the dead man’s body on the floor outside the cell andcalled the nurse who confirmed that he had died.[9]SystematicUse of Tortureand Deaths in CustodyAlmost all the former detainees interviewedtold Human Rights Watch that they had been subjected to torture, meaning thedeliberate infliction of severe pain, during their detention and witnessed thetorture of others. Defectors from the intelligence agencies, who eitherwitnessed or participated in the torture and ill-treatment of detainees,corroborated these accounts.The most severe torture took place duringinterrogation sessions, often in separate interrogation or torture rooms, or incorridors and hallways in some of the smaller detention facilities. Duringthese sessions, interrogators and officers usually wanted the detainees toconfess to having participated in demonstrations, provide names of otherdemonstrators and organizers, admit to owning and having used weapons, and insome cases provide information about alleged funding of demonstrations fromabroad.But many former detainees interviewed alsobelieved that a main reason for the use of torture was not just to obtaininformation, but to punish and intimidate the detainees.Interrogators,guards, and officers used a wide range of torture methods, including prolongedbeatings, often with objects such as batons and cables, holding the detaineesin stress positions for prolonged periods of time, and use of electricity andelectric shocks. At times detainees were forced to remain naked or in theirunderwear while they were tortured.Human Rights Watch has documented the useof the following torture methods:[10]Prolonged and severe beating, punching,and kicking;Beating with objects (cables, whips,sticks, batons, pipes);Falaqa (beatingthe victim with sticks, batons, or whips on the soles ofthe feet);Shabeh(hanging the victim from the ceiling by the wrists so that the histoes barely touch the ground or he is completely suspended in the air withhis entire weight on his wrists, causing extreme swelling and discomfort);Balanco(hanging the victim by thewrists tied behind the back);Basatal-reeh, or “flying carpet” (tyingthe victim down to a flat board, the head suspended in the air so that thevictim cannot defend himself. One variation of this torture involvesstretching the limbs while the victim lies on the board (as on a rack). Inanother variation described to Human Rights Watch the board is folded inhalf so that the victim’s face touches his legs both causing pain andfurther immobilizing the victim);Dulab, or the “tire method” (thevictim is forced to bend at the waist and stick his head, neck, legs andsometimes arms into the inside of a car tire so that the victim is totallyimmobilized and cannot protect him or herself from ensuing beatings);Electrocution (with electric prods orwires connected to a battery);Mock execution;Threats against the detainee (of execution,rape);Threats against family members (ofdetention, rape);Exposure to cold/heat;Sexual violence;Stress positions, such as being forced tostand upright for hours or days;Hanging upside down;“Standing on the wall” (The victimstands with his back to the wall. His hands are tied to the wall up by hishead. There is a metal pole sticking out of the wall pressing into hisback and causing discomfort but he can’t move because his hands are tied.His feet are on the ground);Pulling out fingernails;Plucking out hair/beard;Use of acid to burn skin;Burning; andProlonged nudity.Some of these torture methods, such as theuse of electric shocks, the dulab, and basat al-reeh,involved the use of objects, some of them apparently custom-made, which indicatesthat the torture was planned. Many of these torture methods had been used inSyria in the past. In 1991, Human Rights Watch documented many of these formsof torture.[11]While information from former detaineesindicates that particular detention facilities, or particular interrogationofficers, preferred certain torture methods over others, the replication oftorture methods across branches and even agencies shows that the use of torturewas systematic.Click to expand ImageShabehDetainees described being hung from the ceiling by theirwrists.Some detainees described their toes barely touching the ground,while others said they were suspended in the air with their entire weight ontheir wrists, causing extreme swelling and discomfort.While suspended, anumber of detainees told Human Rights Watch they were beaten.“They would beat me and say ‘don’t youwant to confess!’For an hour and a half I was hanging.I didn’t confessand they brought me down.At his point it was 3.30-4:00 am.My hands werered like blood.”—Male detained in the Kafr Souseh neighborhood of Damascus in September 2011.Human Rights Watch interviewed him by phone while he was inside Syria.Human Rights Watch commissioned aSyrian artist to produce sketches based on statements received from formerdetainees and security force defectors. They depict six of the most commonlyused torture methods in detention centers across Syria — shabeh, dulab, beatingwith object, falaqa, electrocution, and basat al-reeh. They are notrepresentations of any specific individuals.© 2012 Human Rights WatchClick to expand ImageDulabDetainees described being foldedat the waist and having their head, neck, and legs put into a car tire sothat they were immobilized and could not protect themselves from beatings onthe back, legs, and head including by batons and whips.Some detaineesdescribed having their arms inside the tire as well.“They fold youin half, feet first, and put you inside so that you can’t move at all.Thenthey started beating me.They had a braided electrical cable and they hit mewith it.There was no talking.It was like this for 30 minutes then theypulled me out and poured water on my legs and hands.Cold water.I wasfeeling death.”—Soldier who was detained in the Military Intelligencebranch in Latakia in June 2011.Human Rights Watch interviewed him in Hatay,Turkey in January 2012.Click to expand ImageBeating with ObjectsOn the way to and inside detention facilities detainees describedbeing bound and blindfolded while being beaten by batons, cables, whips, andother objects.“There were 20 security officers.To welcome us each startedbeating us with a whip while we were standing.We were ten people in a row[one right after the other].The officer hit me in the chest and I fell onthose behind me and they fell down.Each security officer hit us and theywere laughing.They made us lie on our stomachs and they hit the bottoms ofour feet…”—Male detained in the Central Prison in Idlib in July2011.Human Rights Watch interviewed him in Hatay, Turkey in January 2012.Click to expand ImageFalaqaDetainees described being beatenon the soles of their feet with sticks and whips to the point that their skinwas raw, their feet swollen and bleeding, making it impossible to walk.“He ordered meto raise my legs and then he started hitting me on my soles with a thickwooden baton. I started screaming “I didn’t do anything, I can’t bear thepain.” He hit me 5 times and ordered me to stand up. After standing he toldme to run in my place. I couldn’t lift my legs because of the pain.”—Male detained at the Tadumr roundabout checkpoint and taken to thePolitical Security branch in Homs.Human Rights Watch interviewed him bySkype while he was inside Syria in April 2012.Click to expand ImageElectrocutionDetainees described being bound, sometimes on a chair, having cattleprongs attached to their bodies, and being jolted repeatedly by electricalcurrents.The prongs were reportedly attached to sensitive places includinggenitalia, inside the mouth, and also on the neck, chest, hands, and legs.“I didn’t confess.The interrogator said ‘bring me theelectricity.’…The guard brought two electric prongs.He put one in my mouth,on my tooth.Then he started turning it on and off quickly.He did this 7/8times.I felt like, that’s it.I am not going to leave this branch.”— Soldier who was held at the Air Force Intelligencebranch in Latakia in June 2011.Human Rights Watch interviewed him in Hatay,Turkey in January 2012.Click to expand ImageBasat al-reehA number ofdetainees described being tortured on the “basat al-reeh”.Some indicatedthat this involved being tied down to a flat board so that they were helplessto defend themselves with their heads suspended in the air.They said theirhands and feet were tied together and that they were bound across the chestand legs. Other detainees said that their limbs were also stretched, orpulled, and others indicated that the board folded in half so that theirfaces touched their legs, both causing pain and further immobilizing them.“They folded meso my head hit my toes.Hands up above my head, with my elbows bent.Theywere hitting me with a silicon cable and something like braided electricalcable.I passed out.First he closed it.I felt all of my muscles pulled.He closed it and was beating me, and then I passed out.”— Male detained inMarch or April 2011 and held in a shabiha run detention facility in Latakia.Human Rights Watch interviewed him in Hatay, Turkey in January 2012.All the detainees Human Rights Watch interviewedsaid the interrogators verbally and physically humiliated them, and threatenedboth them and their relatives with further abuse or, in some cases, execution.Ten of the detainees interviewed by HumanRights Watch said they had been subjected to sexual abuse and three said theyhad witnessed sexual abuse of others. The sexual abuse included rape,penetration with objects, sexual groping, prolonged forced nudity, andelectroshock and beatings to genitalia.[12]Thirty-one-year-oldHalim, who was detained in Daraa governorate on August 8, 2011 and latertransferred to Branch 291 where he spent about 20 days, told Human RightsWatch:They took five of us out to the corridor. Four were waitingwhile the fifth was being interrogated. We were standing up, blindfolded, andhandcuffed. They beat me. An officer placed a gun to my head, he gave meelectric shocks with a stun-gun, and he made me sit on a stick in the ground[sexually abusing me]. There were no real questions— just accusations. But Idenied everything.[13]In most cases documented by Human RightsWatch, detainees were subjected to a combination of these torture methods,often with increasing levels of pain. Amine, a former career soldier whowas detained on April 9, 2011, showed Human Rights Watch burn marks on hiswrists and explained that they were caused by torture by electricity during his40-day detention in Military Intelligence Branch 291 in Damascus:The first day they took me out for interrogation one of theofficers punched me in the face and broke one of my teeth. Another said tosomebody who just entered the room that he should “beat the shit out of me.”They lifted my legs and beat me with sticks on the soles [of my feet]. As aresult, they broke two of my toes on the left foot. They also kicked me withtheir boots. I don’t know how long it lasted. Maybe it lasted for 12 hours.They took shifts. Every time I called for help or shouted “stop” they laughed.Then they said “connect him to electricity.” The put me ina chair and placed one cable in my hand and clipped another to my right wrist.I just didn’t have anything to tell them.I lost consciousness so I don’t know how long it lasted. Iwoke up when they threw water on me. Then they took me back to the cell. I wasnaked and received no food and no water. But I couldn’t even lie down becausethere was not enough space and there was water on the floor.A couple of hours later they brought me back forinterrogation. This time they connected me to electricity before even talkingto me. This time, the cables were connected to my lower legs. A doctor latertold me that I have lost 60% of the sensitivity in my right leg.They threatened to arrest my wife, daughter, and my oldestson. They were using my wife’s name. I took their threats very seriously. Ifainted again from the electric shocks and they must have dragged me backbecause when I woke up I was back in my cell.A couple of hours later they took me out for interrogationagain. This time they started using electric shocks to my private parts andthey threatened to give me an “acid bath.”[14]Amer, a 23-year-old man from a town in the Idlibgovernorate, described to Human Rights Watch how he was tortured during his42-day detention in the Political Security Branch in Latakia:They undressed me, tied my hands behind my back, and hit meon my private parts. They clipped my hands to a metal pipe and lifted me sothat my feet hardly touched the floor. They kept me like that for two days.When they released me I couldn’t stand, my feet were completely swollen.I then spent five days in a single cell with six otherpeople. After that 15 officers took me to a separate room. They were cursing mymother and sister and threatened to rape me. They put me on a basat al-reeh– I was lying on my back, tied to a board, and they lifted my head and legs.All this time I was undressed. They wrapped wires around my penis and turned onthe electricity. I could just hear it buzzing. They did this maybe five timesfor about 10 seconds. I passed out.When I regained consciousness they were pushing my legs andhands into a tire. My entire body was blue from beatings.[15]Several former detainees told Human Rights Watch that theyhad witnessed people dying from torture in detention. Five defectedsecurity force officers also told Human Rights Watch that they had witnesseddetainees being executed and beaten to death while in custody.[16]Human Rights Watch has documented deaths in custody in thefollowing detention facilities:Air Force Intelligence Branch in Mezzehairport, Damascus;[17]Idlib Branch of the Department of MilitaryIntelligence;[18]Homs Branch of the Department of MilitaryIntelligence;[19]Central Prison Idlib;[20]Temporary holding facility in Daraa stadium.[21]As of June 18, 2012, the Violations Documentation Center, aSyrian monitoring group collecting the names of those killed and detained inconnection with the anti-government uprising, had recorded the names of 575people who died in custody since March 2011.[22]Walid, a member of the riot police(Hafz al-Nizam), Brigade 121, Battalion 225 told Human RightsWatch:In December a protester was killed at our base in TelAl-Harra, in Daraa governorate. We had arrested him earlier at a protest andbrought him back to the base.He was handcuffed and we told him to praiseBashar [al-Assad]. He refused so others in my unit beat him. After they beathim he was still combative and responded “your leader is nothing and yourmothers are whores.” One colonel got angry and ordered that they use moreviolence against the detainee. Seven officers beat him with batons for morethan an hour that evening until he died. Later, the colonel said, “put this dogoutside” so they placed his body in an empty house. I saw the body before itwas taken away, his face was bloody – I knew it was the same person that theyhad brought in, but his face was now totally different because of thedisfiguration. Beatings are common when we detain people but not deaths.However, no one looks the same after we have arrested them and transferred themto [General Intelligence].[23]Ghassan, a defected sergeant fromBrigade 18, Battalion 627 told Human Rights Watch that on January 11 or 12 hesaw 12 corpses of men who had been brought in alive earlier that night to hisbase in Zabadani. He said,All of them were wearing civilian clothing and two of themwere wearing pajamas. None of them had beards. I saw their faces as I walked bythem and their faces were disfigured from blunt force trauma. Near the bodies,I saw shovels that had blood and what looked like brain particles.A soldierin the 4th Division who participated in their killing told me thatthey were ordered to kill them because they were all foreign terrorists. Butwhen I went into the Colonel’s office, I saw the deadmen’s identification cards in plain view on his desk. All the men were Syrians,from Sarghaya. The soldier told me that he and other soldiers had killed themen. He didn’t say how but that they were all alive when they brought them in.[24]Human Rights Watch also received information about deaths incustody from the families or friends of the victims. Family members of thevictims told Human Rights Watch they had no information about their relatives’fate or whereabouts after security forces detained them until the day they receiveda call, usually from a local public hospital, asking them to pick up the bodyof their relative. In some cases, the bodies were found dumped in the street.In all cases where families described finding their relatives’ bodies to HumanRights Watch, they said the bodies bore marks consistent with infliction oftorture, including bruises, cuts, and burns.The authorities provided families with no information on thecircumstances surrounding the deaths of their relatives and, to Human RightsWatch’s knowledge, have launched no investigations. In many cases, families ofthose killed in custody had to sign documents indicating that “armed gangs” hadkilled their relatives and had to promise not to hold a public funeral as acondition of receiving the body.The ban against torture is one of the most fundamentalprohibitions in international human rights law. No exceptional circumstancescan justify torture. Syria is a party to key international treaties that bantorture under all circumstances, even during recognized states of emergency,and require investigation and prosecution of those responsible for torture.[25]When committed as part of a widespread and systematic attackagainst the civilian population, torture constitutes a crime against humanityunder customary international law and the Rome Statute of the InternationalCriminal Court.[26]Individuals who carried out or ordered thecommission of crimes against humanity bear individual criminal responsibilityfor these crimes under international law, including the Rome Statute.[27]Military commanders and intelligenceofficials could also bear responsibility for violations committed byindividuals under their direct or ultimate command in accordance with thedoctrine of command responsibility when they knew or should have known aboutthe crimes and failed to prevent them or to submit the matter for prosecution.[28]This would apply, without exception, not only to the officials overseeingdetention facilities, but also to the heads of intelligence agencies, membersof government, and a head of state, none of whom are exempt fromresponsibility.[29]Detention and Torture of Children,Women and ElderlyWhile the majority of the former detainees interviewed byHuman Rights Watch were young men in their 20s and 30s, security forces alsodetained and tortured particularly vulnerable people such children, women, andthe elderly.As with the total number of detainees, it is virtuallyimpossible to establish how many children, women, and elderly persons thesecurity forces have detained, but local activists have recorded the detentionof 635 children and 319 women as of June 22, 2012.[30]Through interviews with children and other detainees who witnessed the tortureof children during their detention Human Rights Watch has documented thedetention and torture of children in 12 cases.[31]For example, Hossam, age 13, told Human Rights Watch thatsecurity forces detained him and a relative, also 13, in May 2011 and torturedhim for three days at a military security branch about 45 minutes by car fromTal Kalakh:Every so often they would open our cell door and yell at usand beat us. They said, “You pigs, you want freedom?” They interrogated me bymyself. They asked, “Who is your god?” And I said, “Allah.” Then theyelectrocuted me on my stomach, with a prod. I fell unconscious. When theyinterrogated me the second time, they beat me and electrocuted me again. Thethird time they had some pliers, and they pulled out my toenail. They said,“Remember this saying, always keep it in mind: We take both kids and adults,and we kill them both.” I started to cry, and they returned me to the cell.[32]It was the detention and torture of children from thesouthern town of Daraa in March 2011 that triggered the first anti-governmentprotests in Syria, and in the following months several other cases, includingthe torture and death of 13-year-old Hamza Ali al-Khateeb, caused an outcry inSyria and internationally.[33]In cases documented by Human Rights Watch, the detainedchildren were usually between 13 and 17 years old, although some witnesses anddefectors reported seeing boys as young as eight in detention. They were mostlyheld in the same cells and in the same conditions as adults, sometimes insolitary confinement, and subjected to many of the torture methods describedabove.While the vast majority of former detainees interviewed weremen, Human Rights Watch also interviewed women who had been detained.Sabah, afemale adult detainee who was held in the Military Intelligence Branch in JisrShughour in the Idlib governorate in November 2011, described to Human RightsWatch how she was beaten and groped by a guard while in detention. She said:The director asked me why I was going to demonstrations … Ididn’t lie. He asked what I said in demonstrations and I told him … Then heslapped me. I will not forget it. He told the boys to come take me … they tookme to a closed room. There were boxes in it. It was like a storage room. Therewere also broken chairs and other things. They took my abaya off. I was wearingjeans and a tee-shirt underneath, and a guard tied my hands behind my back. Isaid, “A dog like you doesn’t have a right to do anything [to touch me] …” Hegrabbed my breasts. [Eventually] he let my arms untie. I said, “Beat me, shootme, but don’t put your hand on me.” … He came to grab my breasts again and Ipushed him ... When I pushed him he fell on the boxes. Then he grabbed me bythe chest and threw me against the wall. I fell and he started beating me witha stick. On the knee and on the ankle. My ankle was also broken [along with myhand] …[34]Another female detainee, Nour, described to Human RightsWatch how she was sexually abused when she was detained in MilitaryIntelligence Branch 235 in Damascus in late 2011/early 2012 for two to threemonths:There were three other women in the cell when I arrived …Throughout our time in that cell, the four of us there were permanently in oneof four positions: They tied our handcuffed hands above our heads onto a chaincoming out of the ceiling and chained our feet together with our feet flat onthe floor. They tied us face up to a metal bed which just had two planks ofwood on it – we were in an X position so our wrists and ankles were attached tothe four corners of the bed frame. They put our entire hunched body into thehole of a big tire with our back bent forward.They tied us to a metal chairwith no bottom or back to which they sometimes attached electrodes to electrocuteus.With every new shift of the guards, they would switch ourpositions. We slept in those positions. They electrocuted us quite often … Eachtime my body and particularly my jaw and teeth would clench up for a long time– it was extremely painful …They did other things to us too … [They] raped us while wewere on the bed … [one of them] used to force the soldiers who were reluctant,saying things like “I have a sister,” to rape us. In my case they raped meabout four or five times … Twice, more than one man raped me one after theother. I cannot remember how many it was each time.[35]There were also elderly people among those detained.Seventy-three-year-old Abu Ghassan told Human Rights Watch that in the earlymorning one day in March 2012, the army came to the mosque in his town in theIdlib governorate.Abu Ghassan said that while he was praying with his71-year-old brother about 50 soldiers arrived to the mosque with tanks andother military vehicles and, after checking his documents, said that he waswanted by the authorities. Abu Ghassan said:They put me in the car, handcuffed, and kept me there allday, until seven in the evening. I told them, “I am an old man, let me go tothe bathroom,” but they just beat me on the face. Then they brought me to StateSecurity in Idlib, and put me in a 30-square-meter cell with about 100 otherdetainees. I had to sleep squatting on the floor. There was just one toilet forall of us. They interrogated me four times, each time asking why some of myfamily members joined the FSA. I didn’t deny it, but said there was nothing Icould do to control what my relatives do. They slapped me on the face a lot.[36]II. Syria’s Detention FacilitiesSyria’s network of underground detention facilities are runby the country’s four main intelligence agencies, commonly referred to as themukhabarat:the Department of Military Intelligence(Shu`bat al-Mukhabarat al-`Askariyya);the Air Force Intelligence Directorate(Idarat al-Mukhabarat al-Jawiyya).the Political Security Directorate(Idarat al-Amn al-Siyasi); andthe General Intelligence Directorate(Idarat al-Mukhabarat al-`Amma).Each of these four agencies maintainscentral branches in Damascus as well as regional, city, and local branchesacross the country, in virtually all of which there are underground detentionfacilities of varying size.In addition to the large number ofdetention centers in intelligence branches, the Syrian authorities alsoestablished numerous temporary unofficial detention centers in stadiums,schools, hospitals, and on military bases. These temporary detention facilitiesoften served as large collection points where the security forces gatheredhundreds of detainees before they screened them and transported them to otherdetention facilities.In some cases, intelligence agencies alsoused some of these newly established detention centres for longer-termdetentions, possibly because their own underground detention facilities werefull. For example, intelligence agencies assumed control of at least one floorand the basement of the Central Prison in Idlib, subjecting detainees toprolonged detention, interrogations, and torture in that facility.The following chapters provide informationabout detention facilities run by these four agencies, including, whenavailable, the names of those in charge, the location, general comments,methods of torture documented by Human Rights Watch, and statements by eyewitnessesand victims.Department of MilitaryIntelligenceDirector:Maj. Gen.Abdul Fatah Kudsiyeh[37]Branch 291 – Damascus[38]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Burhan Qadour (head of branch since May 2012)[39]Brig. Gen. Yousef Abdou (head of branch until May 2012)[40]Brig. Gen. Salah Hamad (deputy head of branch)[41]Location:Coordinates:33.50462N, 36.274799E[42]Damascuscity. May 6 Street, commonly referred to as the “Street of Branches,” on thenortheastern corner of the intersection with April 17 Street.Documented methods of torture andill-treatment:Beating;beating with objects; shabeh; electrocution; threats against detainee;exposure to cold; threats against family members; sexual abuse.General comments:Detaineesinterviewed by Human Rights Watch said that they were kept on the second orthird underground floor. At the bottom of a set of stairs there was a largeentry room. Most of the torture took place in this room or in interrogationrooms on the same floor, which were accessed through a door from the entryroom. Interrogations also took place on the ground floor. From the entry roomon the underground floor, double doors lead to a corridor with several commoncells on each side and about 16 individual cells along two shorter corridorsoff the main corridor.Thedetainees said that the cells were extremely over-crowded. Three of thedetainees said that the group cells, which measured approximately 20 squaremeters, held 60-75 people. Two detainees said that the individual cells,measuring about one square meter, held five or six people. (By using hishand, one detainee estimated that the individual cell measured 1.5 by 0.70meters.)Click to expand ImageThis map shows the locations ofdetention centers that were identified by multiple witnesses. Using satelliteimagery, Human Rights Watch asked the victims and defectors to point out thebuildings where torture took place. Former detainees and defectors corroboratedthe findings by describing the facilities in detail and drawing layouts of thefloors where they were detained and interrogated.It also sets out thenames of the known commanders. Thereport sets out where there isevidence of direct, indirect or command responsibility of the commanders, butHuman Rights Watch does not have evidence of this applying in each case.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:They tookfive of us out to the corridor. Four were waiting while the fifth was beinginterrogated. We were standing up, blindfolded, and handcuffed. They beat me.An officer placed a gun to my head, he gave me electric shocks with a stun-gun,and he made me sit on a stick in the ground [sexually abusing me]. There wereno real questions– just accusations. But I denied everything.The officer then called a soldier and told him to suspend me in the shabehposition. I didn’t know at that time what it was. They took me out to thecorridor. There was a tall double-door leading to the corridor with the cells.There was a ring installed on top of the door that doesn’t usually open. Theyhandcuffed me behind my back and then handcuffed me to the ring so that only mytoes could reach the ground, causing pressure on the wrists and shoulders.Anybody passing by hit me. They kept me like this for 48 hours. I couldn’t movefor three days after this and I needed help to go to the bathroom.—Thirty-one-year-oldHalim, who was detained in Daraa governorate on August 8, 2011, and latertransferred Branch 291 where he spent about 20 days.[43]***They made mebend over and took a piece of ice and pushed it into my anus six times. Thenthey tied me and hung me upside down for six hours. The ice-torture wasdifficult. I was ready to confess that I had owned a tank. We were six peoplein a small cell that used to be a toilet. They were running the air-conditionerso it was very cold. I started throwing up and suffered from diarrhea.—Thirty-one-year-oldKhalil, who was detained in the Idlib governorate on June 29, 2011, and spentabout two months in several places of detention, including six days in Branch291.[44]***After thefirst week they took me for questioning. They read to me what they said I hadconfessed to while in the Military Intelligence branch in Aleppo. But theinformationwas completely different [from what I told the interrogatorsthere]. It said that I had confessed to carrying weapons, that I was part ofgangs, that we communicated with other gangs and so on. I denied everything forthree hours. Then they placed me facing a wall with my hands cuffed behind myback for seven or eight hours.The next daythe interrogation continued. They started threatening me and my family. Theysaid that if I don’t confess they would bring in my mother and siblings andrape and abuse them. He was going through my phone, asking about names.They beat mewith batons and electric cables before they again made me stand for three, fourhours before they brought me back to the cell. The same routine took placethree, four days in a row.We couldhear people from other cells being tortured, including women who were screamingwhen they slapped them.Some peoplewere held standing against the wall deprived of sleep for up to seven days.They would just lose it and started confessing to everything without even beingasked.—Fawzi whowas detained for the second time on August 6 and spent about 70 days indetention, including about 40 days in Branch 291.[45]***Because they said I organized demonstrations they tortured me withelectricity. They hooked it up to my ear. I was in a cell with 40 people.Twenty-seven of them were from Idlib, 10 from Daraa, and the rest from Deiral-Zour. We were three floors underground … They beat me in the interrogationroom while I was blindfolded. I was standing and one person was beating me. Iconfessed to going to demonstrations … They took me to another guy who put theelectricity on my ears. This was in one big room. There were lots of peoplestanding there.—Ammar whowas detained in June 2011 and spent almost two months in detention.[46]Branch 235 (“PalestineBranch”) – Damascus[47]Officers in charge of facility:Brig.Gen. Muhammad Khallouf [48]Location:Coordinates:33.491501N, 36.319008EDamascuscity. Mohallak al-Janoubi (the Southern Interchange) road on the northwesterncorner of intersection with Damascus Airport Motorway.Documented methods of torture and ill-treatment:Beating;beating with objects; dulab; electrocution; shabeh; threats.General comments:Severalformer detainees said that Branch 235, or the “Palestine Branch” as it isoften called, is one of the most feared detention facilities. According toformer detainees, Branch 235 has several underground floors where detaineesare kept. Former detainees said that they were held on the second or thirdunderground floors. Detainees were interrogated both on the third undergroundfloor and on the ground floor.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:Theyinterrogated me twice. The first time they used the dulab. They put mylegs and head through the tire and beat me up with cables. The more I moved,the more they beat me. They hit me more than 100 times in an hour. My legs wereso swollen afterwards I could hardly walk. The second time they usedelectricity. I was kneeling and they used an electric stick to shock me on mystomach, back, and neck.I was placed in a small cell with no ventilation or light. There wereabout 60 people in there. The cell measured three by four meters. We took turnssleeping and we took turns taking our shirts off and waving them to move theair.—Marwan,who was detained in Daraa in June 2011 and spent about four months indetention, including about a week in Branch 235.[49]***When Iarrived at the branch they welcomed me by beating me 12 times with cables.Others were hit more. I was in the Palestine Branch for two days. They summonedme to interrogation. The other detainees said that I would not be hit if Istuck with the confession. I was hit five times with cables during thatinterrogation. During the next interrogation they told me that the crime wasvery serious and that they would send me to the General IntelligenceDirectorate. They hit me 15 times.—Twenty-three-year-oldRudi, who was detained in Aleppo on October 17 and spent 47 days in detention,including two days in Branch 235.[50]When wearrived at Branch 235 they started beating us as soon as they pulled us out ofthe bus. They gathered us in a big room and started calling out names. Thedetainees with identification cards were sent to cells. About 50 people didn’thave any papers and officers told the soldiers to “have fun with them.”I was sitting on my knees, facing the wall. They hit us on the back ofthe neck with a thick stick. When they called somebody’s name, five peoplewould be standing at the door and beat us with cable-wires, sticks, and batons.They beat us for about 30 minutes before they took us to the next room and strippedus naked. Then they started beating us with a thick belt, which we called the“five-layer-belt” because they had wrapped several belts together with plastictape.—Sixteen-year-oldTalal, who was detained in Daraa on April 1 together with his 23-year-oldbrother. He spent 11 days in detention, nine of them in Branch 235.[51]***They took myfingerprints and beat me. I was barefoot. They beat my head against the walland then they took me to the interrogation room where they continued to beat meand gave me electric shocks. After 30 minutes they took me two floorsunderground where they kept me for five days.There wasanother interrogation. It was the same thing, but this time I noticed thatsomebody was writing. Somebody beat me with their fist and chipped my tooth.They pushed me to the ground and continued to beat me. They made me fingerprintfour different documents.—Twenty-one-year-oldSamer, who was detained in Tal Kalakh on May 14 and spent five days indetention in Branch 235.[52]***On the eighth day they moved me to Branch 235 together with anotherdetainee who was there because he had been interviewed by Al Jazeera. I stayedthere for eight days and they beat me all the time. The Al Jazeera guy was keptin handcuffs all the time and he later told me that he was kept in a solitarycell. We were ten people together in a four-by-four meter large cell. We wereall from different places.—Twenty-nine-year-oldWael, who was detained in Tal Kalakh on May 14 and spent eight days indetention in Branch 235.[53]***I was thereten to fifteen days. Right away there was violence. They put me in a solitarycell after 30 minutes of beating. I was in the cell for five days. The onlyfood I got was bread. There was water in the cell, from a faucet, but it wasdirty. It ran yellow and sometimes red. During the interrogation they would askme if I carried weapons and I said no. They hung me from my wrists, shabeh,so I was just on my toes. They would throw water on me and hit me with anelectrical cable. They would throw hot water – it wasn’t boiling, but hot – onus when we passed out to wake us up ... There was torture every day except thelast two.—Nabih,who was detained in Latakia in June 2011.[54]***After we arrived at the branch they put me in a room, where from thesounds of voices it seemed like more than 15 people beat me … I was in the roomfor a while, they left me on my knees for three hours. It was like a corridorwith people coming and going. As they came and went they would beat me with theirhands, legs, Kalashnikovs [assault rifles], and electrical cable, andthey were swearing. Then they put me in a room with an interrogator …Theinterrogator is not a human being. He is not normal. He was giving orders tofour other people in the room. They put me on the ground. It is a beating youcannot describe. They beat my back and feet with a big electric cable. Icouldn’t sleep on my back for 25 days. There are still scars on my back.Theythreatened to bring my mother. They asked whether I wanted them to bring mywife here and have all the guys sleep with her. Let your God come release you …I reached a point where I could not feel at all …Then he tookme down to the prison … Two guards met us behind a big metal door … These twountied my hands and blindfold and started beating me again. They beat me in anunimaginable way. It was just with their hands and just on the face.You don’t understand how difficult it is to bear the beating from theprison guards. They know better than anyone how to swear, humiliate, and beat.You can’t take it … It takes you away from anything called humanity.—Samir,who was detained in Damascus in July 2011.[55]Branch 248 – Damascus[56]Location:Coordinates: 33.507938N, 36.274066EDamascus city. “Street of Branches.”Documented methods of torture and ill-treatment:Beating; beating with object; electrocution; dulab.General CommentsBranch 248 has detention facilities underground.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:When Iarrived at Branch 248 I was screaming from pain because my legs were broken[from gunshot injuries]. They laid me down in an underground corridor. Afterfive minutes five guys came and started to beat me. I was still blindfolded,but I was able to see a bit under the blindfold. They punched me in the face soI started bleeding from the nose. They left me alone when I pretended to beunconscious. Afterwards another guy came and smacked my head into the ground.Finally an officer came. They wanted to transfer me to a cell, but there was noroom for anybody with broken legs so they transferred me to hospital 601instead. After six days in the hospital they took me back to 248. In the cell,two guards held my legs apart and beat me in the groin.—Thirty-two-year-oldHussein, who was detained in Daraa at the end of April after he was shot in bothlegs.[57]In Branch248 we were five in a cell that was 3.5 meters by 150 cm. I knew the size fromthe tiles. There was no blanket, nothing. There was no bathroom in the cell. Wehad a bottle of water which we would fill from the bathroom. I spent 20 days inthe cell before they moved me back to Branch 291.—Ammar, who was detained in June 2011.[58]***When Iarrived [from the military intelligence facility in Homs to Branch 248] thetreatment was also very bad. They took my clothes off and blindfolded me. Theywere beating me while I was naked, in front. They beat me with whips all overmy body. My whole body swelled. They took me to a solitary cell. The torturenoises were much worse here. It was forbidden to sit or to sleep. I was chainedand standing the whole time. For more than three days I didn’t sleep. Icouldn’t close my eyes. The next day they took me to the head of the branch. Hesaid, look, you confessed. He showed me my finger prints and said that the oldinterrogators would testify against me.They took meto the torture room and I would hear noises that were just unreal. When theytook me to this room they were mostly beating me with a whip. I wasblindfolded. They used electricity, how am I going to tell you, in sensitiveplaces. Now it is four months later and there are still marks on my body. AfterI was tortured they put me in my cell. For three days I was just tortured. Nointerrogation, nothing. No one spoke with me. After three days of torture theytook me to interrogation. I was here for six [days]. I was not allowed tosleep, not allowed to sit. If they saw me sitting they would put me in the tireand would hit me with a whip.—Munir,who was arrested in May 2011 in Homs.[59]Branch 227 – Damascus[60]Officers in charge of facility:Maj. Gen. Rustom Ghazali (head of branch)[61]Location:Coordinates: 33.510586N, 36.274689EDamascus city. May 6 Street on the corner with Omar BinAbdulaziz Street, near the Ministry of Higher Education.Documented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; falaqa; shabeh; exposure to cold;stress positions.General CommentsBranch 227 is the Military Intelligence branch responsiblefor Damascus governorate outside of Damascus city. One former detainee saidthat the underground detention facility included both individual cells and abig room measuring about 100 square meters, which held about 400 people whenhe was there. At some point, according to this detainee, some of the olderdetainees were transferred to a different cell with slightly betterconditions.[62]Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:They brought me to confess on August 12. There weren’t really anyquestions – mostly beatings. They used falaqa and shabeh on meand soaked me with cold water. I passed out twice during the interrogationsession. They used cold water to wake me up both times. The torture took placein the corridor. They also brought 14/15-year-old boys there. When I went backto the cell, the other people in the cell were crying. They had heard myscreams. The skin on my right foot broke because of the swelling from thebeating.—Fifty-seven-year-old Mustafa, who wasdetained in early August 2011 and spent almost two months in detention. HumanRights Watch saw scars on Mustafa’s right foot, allegedly from swelling afterthe beating.[63]***From thearmy base they took us to Branch 227 where we arrived around noon. Theytortured us until 9 p.m. In the beginning they kept us standing on our toeswith our hands up in the corridor, blindfolded. Anybody walking by would hitus. Then they pushed us down the stairs – about 15-20 steps – and we wereplaced in a cell measuring about two by six meters with 50-60 detainees.On the fifth day the guards summonedus for interrogation. The interrogator was kind, but then three officers tookme to the torture room. They hit me a lot, but didn’t say anything. After tendays in detention they released me, but gave me a paper saying that I shouldcome back to Branch 227 for further interrogation.—Twenty-year-oldLutfi, who was detained in his military unit after an officer accused him andfour others of planning to defect.[64]Branch 215 – Damascus[65]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Sha’afiq[66]Location:Coordinates: 33.507379N, 36.274010EDamascus. On “Street of Branches,” next to the CarltonHotel.Documented methods of torture and ill-treatment:Beating; beating with object; shabeh.General Comments:Branch 215 has detention facilities underground. One formerdetainee said that there were 76 people in a cell measuring 11 by 3.80meters.[67]Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:When we arrived they started punching, kicking, andbeating us with cables. The next morning they started interrogating us. Wereceived no food for four days. They brought water only on the third day. Thoseasking for food were beaten.On the fifth day it was my turn to be interrogated. Theytook me to a different room and started reading the statement from Idlib. WhenI said that they had forced me to confess about the Kalashnikov somebodyhandcuffed me to a pipe below the ceiling. This was around 2 p.m. I could justbarely reach the floor with my toes. The next day a kind guard loosened thehand-cuffs a bit so I could stand on my feet. I was kept like this for threedays. I was not even allowed to go to the toilet.—Thirty-one-year-old Khalil, who was detainedduring a protest in a town close to the Turkish border on June 29 and spentfive days in Branch 215. Khalil showed Human Rights Watch marks from thehandcuffs on his wrists.[68]***They moved us to a cell measuring 11 by four meters with76 people. There was no air-conditioner, no bathroom. We were allowed to go tothe toilet three times per day. Food was very bad. Many people were about todie because of medical problems such as heart, diabetes, high blood pressure,asthma, and allergies. During the 40 days I spent there, I showered only two orthree times. There were lots of lice. The guards would hit us when we went tothe bathroom, but they didn’t take me out for interrogation.—Yamen, who was detained in the Daraagovernorate on July 3 and spent two months in detention, including 40 days inBranch 215.[69]Branch 245 – Daraa[70]Officers in charge of facility:Colonel Loai al-Ali (head of branch)[71]Location:Coordinates: 32.627697N, 36.09988EDaraa city. Hanano street.Documented methods of torture and ill-treatment:Beating; beating with object; hanging upside down; dulab.General Comments:Former detainees said that they were kept underground,usually for a relatively short time, before they were transferred todetention facilities in Damascus. Witnesses described the detention facilityas having ten cells along a two-meter-wide corridor, that torture took placein the corridor, and that there is an interrogation room at the end of thecorridor.Click to expand ImageStatements by victims and eyewitnesses:As we walked down the stairs people on both sides werehitting us with cable-wires and other objects. You didn’t know where the blowswere coming from. Then they took us to the interrogation room.It was brutal. They didn’t ask any questions. They justhit us. You didn’t know when you would be hit or hit a wall.They took us out of the interrogation room and made usface the wall, standing on our knees. If somebody moved, relaxed, or tried toadjust their position, somebody would hit them. We were blindfolded. We stayedthere until a new shift arrived, perhaps for one day.We only spent 15-20 minutes in the interrogation room.They used the tire method on us. At first an officer interrogated and torturedme, then another came. They kept accusing me of having killed two people.—Mohsin, who was detained in Daraa near theOmari mosque on March 23.[72]***They removed ourblindfold when we arrived and then they took us underground. They made us standup against the wall. The cells were packed. They took us one by one forinterrogation. They asked about armed people. When I said that I didn’t knowanybody, they told me to “just pick somebody.”They insulted us, calling us “traitors” and cursing us.They took us to a yard outside, made us lay down, and started beating us. Theytold us that they didn’t torture people in Daraa, so we’d better confess beforethey transferred us to Damascus.—Ayoub, who was detained in Daraa in Apriltogether with his brother.[73]Aleppo Branch[74]Location:Coordinates: 36.199165N, 37.108498EDocumented methods of torture and ill-treatment:Beating; beating with object; basat al-reeh; shabeh, electrocution, falaqa;threats.General comments:Former detainees said that detainees were keptunderground, but that at least some interrogations took place on the secondfloor. One detainee estimated that there were about 400 people in theunderground facility when he was there in August 2011.[75]Click to expand ImageStatements by victims and eyewitnesses:They first beat me for a day with just some very basicquestioning. At night they started the interrogation. I was in a big hall.There were many other people there. I was in my underwear, blindfolded so Icouldn’t tell exactly how many people and guards were beating us. They tookaway our possessions and took more info.They took me to a one by 1.5 meter cell. I was therealone for about four, five hours, and then they took me for interrogation.When they found out that I was a pharmacist they startedbeating me more, saying that as a government-educated professional I shouldsupport the government. I had also lived in Saudi Arabia, so they beat me morefor that. It lasted for five, six hours. They just kept accusing me ofdifferent things and forcing me to confess, asking for names.Then I went back to the cell. It was four days ofinterrogations. Ten days in total. They didn’t take me out for the last sixdays.On the first night of interrogations they also took meinto a torture room. I was blindfolded with hands tied behind my back. Theytied me, put me on the ground, and started beating me. They used a type ofrack, some board under my legs and a cable that they turned to crack and twistmy legs back. And they beat me with a cable.—Fawzi, who was detained in Aleppo during ademonstration on April 20 and spent ten days in detention in the MilitaryIntelligence branch in Aleppo. [76]***It was the same routine as the first time, but this timethey used a different torture method, the shabeh, hanging by the wristsfrom the ceiling, while being beaten by cables, batons, and electric batons.There were other people hanging next to me, maybe four or five.They beat me until I fainted or passed out. It hurts tothe point when you can’t feel it anymore. They tested it out by putting out acigarette on me. If you can’t feel it, they stop because there is no point inbeating you further.Then after six or seven hoursthey poured water on me and put me into a single cell for several hours whilethey were working on the others. We could hear people being tortured like thatall the time. There are people there who torture like that all the time.Then they took me for interrogation. I was stillbleeding. They asked the same questions. They remembered me from my firstdetention so the beating increased with punches, slaps, and batons for aboutone and a half hours.By this time there were some 400 people [detained] thereso they didn’t have time for lengthy interrogations. The guards kept hitting usall the time, when bringing food, taking you to the bathroom, etc.The next time I was interrogated by a “committee” ofinterrogators. They asked about our “organization.” They got into my e-mail andsaw my communication. The interrogations took place the first three days. Theykept me for another four days.—Fawzi, who was detained for a second time inAleppo during a demonstration on August 6. He spent 70 days in detention.[77]***They took me to the second floor for interrogation. Theyasked about phone numbers, e-mail, and Facebook accounts. They claimed that Ihad two accounts, but I denied it.The next Friday they took me at 8 a.m. and interrogatedme until 9 p.m. They used falaqa. They used a wooden stick and leatherto tie my legs together and then they hit me on the soles of my feet. It hurt.They hit me a lot.They then hung me up in shabeh while they used acable to hit me on my back. They kept me like this the whole day. They justtook me down five times to give me the falaqa. They also gave me electricshocks. They placed wires on each leg. When they threatened to attach the wiresbetween my legs I admitted to everything that they wanted. The interrogationcontinued the next day, but by then I was not able to stand on my own.—Rudi, who was detained for the second time inAleppo on October 17 and spent 47 days in detention, including about five daysin the Military Intelligence branch in Aleppo.[78]Branch 271 – Idlib[79]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Nawfel al-Hussein (head of branch)[80]Location:Coordinates: 35.922901N, 36.634163EIdlibcity. On the same street as the statue of Ibrahim Hananu, around 300 metersto the south of the statue, in front of the Political Security branch.Documented methods of torture and ill-treatment:Beating;beating with object; shabeh.General Comments:Formerdetainees said that detainees were kept both underground (four or five stepsdown) and on the ground floor. One former detainee estimated that there were200 to 300 detainees in the detention facility.[81]There were about 20 single cells onthe underground floor.Click to expand ImageStatements by victims and eyewitnesses:They started torturingme immediately. They started hitting me with cables, but I couldn’t seeanything because I was blindfolded. They hit me on the head and shoulders. Theydidn’t hit me as much as the others because my family had paid them money,which I found out afterwards. Two guys were standing behind me and hit me whenthere were no questions. They allowed me to rest for two hours, then theybrought me in for a second interrogation. It was the same questions. I gavethem names of people who had died to not get anybody in trouble, but they knewthat they had been killed and hit me again.—Thirty-seven-year-old Yousef, who wasdetained in Jisr al-Shughour on September 14. He was detained for two months,including one month in the Military Intelligence branch in Idlib.[82]***From the first day of the detention they started takingme to interrogations, every day for a week, but for different lengths of time,from half an hour to eight hours. They found some revolutionary songs on mymobile, so they were beating me for that.Then they took me to the corridor and hung me up in shabeh.Whoever walked by could beat me. The longest time I stayed there was three hours,but others stayed even longer – up to six or seven hours.After seven days they moved me to a better cell andbrought me better food to make me change my mind and call my brother [toconvince him to turn himself in]. The cell was five by eight or ten meters andthere were 250-300 detainees there. The cell smelled like shit so even thesingle cell felt better.On the 13th day I called my brother. I just couldn’t takeit anymore. They told me to ask him to come. But my brother didn’t pick up. Heknew I was detained. Then they took me to the [Idlib] Central Prison.—Isam who was detained from his shop in a town near the Turkish border onJuly 31 because his brothers had participated in demonstrations. He spent 53days in detention, including 13 in Branch 271.[83]***When we arrived at the Military Intelligence branch inIdlib they started interrogating us, asking us the same questions aboutsmuggling. When I told them that I had confessed under torture they startedbeating me until I again agreed to confess to anything.They putme into a big room with perhaps 70 people. There was no room to sleep. It wason the same floor as the interrogation room. They just gave us little pieces ofbread with potatoes and labneh [strained yoghurt]. Several prisoners hadinfections and problems breathing. I stayed there for one night and then theymoved us to the Criminal Investigative branch.—Hassib,who was detained in the town of Bdama during the last week of Ramadan.[84]Homs BranchOfficers in charge of facility:Muhammad Zamreni[85]Location:Coordinates: 34.719236N, 36.708575EAl Hajj Atef Square in the Al-Mahatta neighborhood.Documented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object; electrocution; shabeh; dulab;falaqa, balanco.General Comments:Former detainees told Human Rights Watch that detaineeswere kept in two buildings in the Military Intelligence branch in Homs. Oneformer detainee estimated that there were about 300 other detainees in thecell where he was kept..Click to expand ImageStatements by victims and eyewitnesses:They brought us inside the base and marched us betweentwo lines of soldiers who were beating us with cables. In a corner of an openspace they handcuffed me to a guy who had a broken leg. Then they brought me toan interrogation room. On the way I could hear people screaming. I know I wasinside a building even though I was blindfolded. I could hear the interrogation.Once they got to me they started saying that I was theleader of the revolution and asking me what was going on in my battalion. Isaid I didn’t know so they used an electric stun-gun on me and beat me withcables. They handcuffed me to a pipe in the ceiling so I couldn’t touch thefloor. I was hanging like this for six hours. Three people kept beating me,asking questions. They threw water at me and used stun-guns. When I didn’t talkthey moved me to a cell. It was three by three meters and they packed about 25people in there. We were squeezed and kneeling on the floor. We spent the nightlike that. The next day they started the interrogation again.They pushed my legs and head through a tire, flipped meon my back, tied my legs, and started beating me on the soles of my feet. Theykept torturing me for seven days. On the eighth day they moved me to thePalestinian Branch in Damascus.—Twenty-one-year-old Samer, who was detainedin Tal Kalakh on May 14 and spent eight days in detention in the MilitaryIntelligence branch in Homs.[86]***In the morning on the second day they brought me up,blindfolded, to torture me. There were a lot of them, perhaps 10 people,hitting me in the face, stomach, and legs. They used the balanco methodon me – it is like a chain that they hang meat on.They raised me from my legs so that all my weight was onmy hands and legs. The cable cut off my circulation. There is a wooden beam inthe ceiling and they hung me from it with just my toes touching the floor. This was the hardest torture, worse thanelectricity. I told them, “I will confess to everything. Just bring me down.” Itold them, “For God’s sake, take me down.” There were three to four people nextto me in the same state. I could tell from the sounds next to me and theyelling, and I said, “Let me down, let me down.”They took me to an office with an officer. He had a whip– sort of like an electrical cable; and they raised my legs and he startedbeating me on my whole body. He was interrogating me, saying that they had mycamera and that they knew that I was sending material to Al Jazeera. They tookmy head, pulled my hair, and hit my head on the table. The next day they beatme with a whip.—Munir, who was arrested in May 2011 in Homs.[87]Latakia Branch[88]Officers in charge of facility:Maj. Gen. Riad al Ahmed (head of branch)[89]First Ass. Abu Ali Masri, (head ofinterrogation)[90]Location:Coordinates: 35.52067N, 35.794256EMashrou` Al Awqaf, in front of the Yassine Mosque.Documented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object; stress positions(standing); basat al-reeh.General CommentsThe Military Intelligence branch in Latakia has adetention facility underground, about ten steps down a staircase.Click to expand ImageStatements by victims and eyewitnesses:An hour after I arrived they took me to the interrogationroom. The room had just a lamp. They told me not to move and that if I movedthey would hit me. My hands were tied and I was blindfolded. I just stoodstraight. This lasted for about eight hours. I was ready to say anything to getme out of there, but they wouldn’t listen and told me to shut up. Eventually Ifell over.Then they tied my hands and feet to a wooden stick. Theyput a tire around my knees and flipped me over so that my face was on the floorand two of them stepped on the stick on both sides. They beat me with a cable.They released the handcuffs twice to make the blood flow back in my legs andthen they put me back. They didn’t ask any questions for about four hours.Afterwards I couldn’t stand on my feet so they dragged me back to the cell. Ican’t say how many days I was in that cell. I could hear the voices of otherdetainees, but I couldn’t talk to them. At some point they took me to the majorgeneral who was in charge of the branch. He wanted me to work for them, but Irefused.—Kamal, who was detained in Latakia on April22.[91]***[After arriving to the facility] they told me to call mydad and to tell him to pick me up from a particular location. I called my dadand told him I was detained and then they started beating me. They beat me withan electrical cable on my kidneys, chest, and feet. They put me on the flyingcarpet. They had a wooden stick. They put it in the rear, but they didn’t useit with me. The officer wouldn’t let them. I stayed there for six days andstill have back pain. I was in a single cell. They left me for three days withno food. Finally, they gave me a piece of bread, that’s it. There was water from a faucet that hitsyour knee when you are sitting in the cell. It was a low ceiling, you can’tstand. You have to sit with your knees to your chest. The bathroom was outside.You knock on the door to ask them to take you to the bathroom and they beatyou. There was no light inside.—Nabih, who was detained in Latakia in June2011.[92]Air ForceInte­­lligence DirectorateDirector: Maj. Gen. Jamil Hassan[93]Mezzeh Airport Branch –Damascus[94]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Abdul Salam Fajr Mahmoud(director of investigative branch)[95]Location:Coordinates: 33.484886N, 36.223209EMezzeh military airport, southwest of central Damascus.Documented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object; shabeh; electrocution;threat to detainee; dulab; falaqa, burning with hot water and acid.General COmmentsThe Mezzeh airport branch of the Air Force Intelligencecontains at least three detention facilities, including a hangar. Formerdetainees described one of the detention facilities, possibly the building ofthe investigative branch, as a large, white, one-floor, flat building, withbarbed wire on surrounding walls. There were two underground floors with lowceilings. The first underground floor held collective cells, while the secondunderground floor held at least twelve individual cells and a large room usedfor torture. Former detainees and defectors said that detainees were usuallygathered in a yard before they were taken to the detention facilities. Theyard was also used as a place for torture.Many of the former detainees at Mezzeh airport camefrom Damascus city suburbs or nearby towns such as Douma and al-Mu`damiyyeh.But Human Rights Watch has also documented the presence of detainees inMezzeh airport from other areas, such as Daraa. Several former detainees saidthat they were transferred to or from the army’s 4th Division base, which islocated close by.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:I saw people being tortured there both when I wasdetained and when I worked there. The mildest form of torture is hitting peoplewith batons on their arms and legs and not giving them anything to eat ordrink. Then they would hang the detainees from the ceiling by their hands,sometimes for hours or days. I saw it while I was talking to the interrogators.They used electric stun-guns and an electroshock machine, an electric currenttransformer. It is a small machine with two wires with clips that they attachto nipples and a knob that regulates the current. In addition, they put peoplein coffins and threatened to kill them and close the coffin. People werewearing underwear. They pour hot water on people and then whip them. I’ve alsoseen drills there, but I’ve never seen them being used. I’ve also seen themusing martial arts moves, like breaking ribs with a knee kick. They put pinsunder your feet and hit you so that you step on them. I also heard themthreatening to cut off the detainees’ penises.—Rami, who was an officer at the Air ForceIntelligence base at the Mezzeh Airport and was later detained there. Hedefected in August 2011.[96]***I participated in escorting detainees from the proteststo the yard at the Air Force Intelligence base, and then to the detentionfacilities. In the yard we started beating people randomly, without asking themany questions. We brought wounded people to the same yard and beat them aswell. We had one doctor in the branch. Somebody would ask the guards to takeone of the detainees to the doctor, and the guards would be beating him on theway. In the gym area [close to the investigation branch] the guards used tohang detainees by their hands, give them electric shocks, or beat them withwhips. I could see it when I dropped off the detainees. I couldn’t even sit inmy office, which was close to the gym, because of the sounds of torture.—Jad, who served on the Air Force Intelligencebase in Mezzeh for 1.5 years before he defected in August 2011.[97]***They hung me up in the shabeh position threetimes. The first time I was hanging for eight hours, handcuffed to the wall andpulled up. After a while I lost consciousness. The two other times they hung mefor two to three hours.They hit us with electric prods and cable wires. Theyalso threw acid from a car battery on my leg. They made me lay down, handcuffedto the table. Then they would bring the feet to my face and beat the soles of myfeet. They also used the tire method. They forced my feet, hands, and headthrough the tire, they flipped me on the back and beat the soles of my feet.They also handcuffed my hands under the knee and used a stick to hang me upbetween two beds. They kept me like this for one or two hours, once or twice aday for four days.—Forty-eight-year-old Zakhya, who was detainedin the Damascus governorate on May 28. Human Rights Watch saw scars on hislegs, allegedly from the use of acid.[98]Bab Touma Branch – Damascus[99]Location:Coordinates: 33.517811N, 36.313969EBetween Al Manama Street and Gibran Khalil Street,close to Tahrir Square.Documented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object; electrocution; dulab; balanco;shabeh; burning with cigarettes.General Comments:According to a former detainee who spent five months inthe old department building in the Bab Touma branch of the Air ForceIntelligence, the facility consists of 43 individual cells, each holding upto three people, and two group detention rooms, each holding up to 90 people.[100]Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:Three days after I was detained they took me to see theinterrogator. Before entering the interrogation room they slapped, beat, andkicked me with their black boots, used an electric stun-gun on me, extinguishedcigarettes on my back, and stepped on me.During my detention I once fainted because I was verythirsty. A nurse who barely knew how to provide medical care came to check onme, but instead of helping me he started beating and slapping me to wake up.The nurses always had a wooden stick in their hands in case the officers neededsupport to torture the prisoners. I saw officers torturing over 30 men withthick wooden sticks, electric stun-guns, and balanco while I was tied inthe courtyard. They tied and hung me from my hands with my legs lose and mytoes were half a centimeter above the ground. They also tortured me with thetire method.—Bashir, a medical student who was arrested atDamascus University on August 22 and spent five months in detention.[101]Daraa Branch[102]Officers in charge of facility:Col. Qusay Mihoub (from Damascus; sent toDaraa at the beginning of protests to oversee operations there)[103]Location:Coordinates: 32.622852N, 36.124829EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object.General comments:The Air Force Intelligence Branch in Daraa has anunderground detention facility with at least one cell measuring about 16square meters. One detainee estimated the cell contained 130 people when hewas detained there in June 2011.[104]Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:I went to the funeral at the cemetery. After the securityforces let us out of the cemetery, they opened fire. I just laid down. Theshooting continued for 10 to 15 minutes. Afterwards, when I stood up somebodyhit me in the back of my head with a stick. I fell down, but they continued tobeat me. They hit me over the eye with a stick.When I woke up I wasin the Air Force Intelligence branch. There were four people in the cell. I wasthen taken out of the cell and beaten in the corridor. They then took me to anopen yard outside where they beat me for two hours before they brought me backto the cell and then transferred me to another branch.Twenty-three-year-old Fahim, who was beaten until he lostconsciousness at a funeral in Daraa on August 8. He spent three days indetention.[105]For a couple of hours we waited and then they startedinterrogating us one by one in a solitary cell with two other people. They thentook me to a torture room.It was a room underground. There was a chair where theinterrogator sat, and a table. Two people in the room were beating me with aone-meter long cable with metal wire inside and plastic on the outside,accusing me of taking part in the protests and of carrying weapons. I was on myknees with hands behind my back. The other one was using his boot to beat me onthe mouth. I was bleeding. They showed me a picture of Bashar Assad and askedwho it was? I said, “The president.” They said, “No, it is God.” One of themput a boot on my neck and the other shoved the photo under my nose. This lastedfor about an hour.Then they took me back to the cell where there were about130 people. The cell measured four by four meters. People were on top of eachother, standing, lying, etc. About 10 of the 130 were not severely beaten.Clearly one of them was a spy, but we didn’t know which one. They told us,“Welcome to the Air Force Intelligence. Here you will lose your faith in God.”—Marwan, who was arrested at his house in theDael town in the Daraa governorate in June. He stayed one night in the AirForce Intelligence branch before he was transferred to another detentionfacility.[106]Homs branch[107]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Jawdatal-Ahmed[108]Location:Coordinates: 34.750208N, 36.714788EBy the Jawiya Roundabout, in frontof the Ministry of Agriculture.Documented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object; threats to detainee;stress positions; dulab.Statements by victims and eyewitnessesThey took us to the Air Force Intelligence branch [inHoms]. We were six in one cell. The bathroom was outside and we were allowed touse it twice a day. They would count, “One, two, three,” and you had to finish.If not, you would get the dulab. They put you in the tire and beat youwith a baton. It is unreal. It can’t be explained. Even today, three monthslater, my legs still have marks. They started beating me and accusing me ofshooting at the school. They tie you and pull you with a rope and they beatyou. You can just move your head, and you are blindfolded. They werethreatening me, saying I should confess that I was carrying weapons, shooting atthe army and checkpoints.—Toufiq, who was arrested on August 22, 2011.[109]Latakia Branch[110]Officers in charge of facility:Col. Suhail Al-AbdullahLocation:Coordinates: 35.529489N, 35.799074EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object; electrocution; falaqa;dulab; threats; sexual abuse.General Comments:The Air Force Intelligence Branch in Latakia has adetention facility underground.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:The interrogatorordered me to tell him everything. I told him I don’t know anything, but if hehas questions I will answer. He asked the officers to take me away to teach mea lesson and then bring me back. The officers took me to the adjacent room.They started hitting me until I fell on the ground. They made me lie on my backand put my legs inside the tire and then pushed my head and my hands inside thetire as well. They then started hitting me with an iron stick on my knees.Afterwards they poured water on my legs and took me to see the interrogator. Ilater found out that they poured the water in order for the blood to circulateagain through my legs.I don’t know for how long they hit me. There were twopeople hitting me. The interrogator repeated the same questions which I didn’thave answers for. He told the guards to take me to the cell and told me to askmy cell mates what will happen to me if I don’t tell him everything I know.They took me to the prison cell without my clothes and poured water on theground so that I couldn’t sit or sleep.—Chahid, who was arrested at his house on May20, 2011.[111]***We went upstairs one floor to the office of the directorof the branch. His deputy started asking me questions. Why was I there? Heaccused me of going to demonstrations and said that someone was paying me moneyto go to demonstrations. That I work in weapons smuggling and for Hariri [SaadHariri, former prime minister of Lebanon]. I denied it.Then they took me down to the interrogation room fortorture. It was one floor underground. They tied me to an electricity chair.They were asking the same questions and cursing and beating me. They hit mewith their hands and feet and there was a battery with a cable that wasconnected to my finger.[Later] they hit the bottoms of my feet with a stick. Therewas a thick belt tied around my legs so that I couldn’t move them. I was lyingwith my face on the ground and my feet up. There were two people beating mewith a silicon stick. One was standing on my neck. You prefer death. You hopeto die. The entire time I was in detention my family knew nothing about me. Theydidn’t know whether I was dead or alive.—Fadi, who was detained around April 2011 whenhe went to the Air Force Intelligence branch seeking information about hismissing relative.[112]***[At the Air Force Intelligence branch in Latakia] theytook me downstairs, two sets of stairs with a turn. Each 15 steps … I couldn’tsee and my hands were tied [I was naked]. We were in the interrogation room.They were beating me for the first hour with their hands. Then they used a woodbaton. I didn’t confess. The interrogator said, “Bring me the electricity.”...The guard brought two electric prongs. He put one in my mouth, on my tooth.Then he started turning it on and off quickly. He did this seven or eighttimes. I thought, this is it. I am not going to leave this branch.Then they startedasking, “Will you confess now?” I said I had nothing to confess to. Theyremoved the electricity from my tooth and put it on my knees. Here they usedthe electricity the longest. It is still marked. They would put it on for along time and then take it off. They started torturing me here (gesturingtoward his genitalia) [with the electricity]. They were also beating me andthere was a guard behind me turning the electricity on. I passed out. They werebeating me and shocking me. The interrogator was beating me with a cable overmy whole body. I still didn’t have any clothes on … They asked me every thirtyminutes if I would confess. I said no. At a point they said “We will kill you,”and I said, “Ok, ok. Kill me. Death is better than the torture you are puttingme through.” When he shocks you the electricity hits your whole body. I wasthere for hours. They had to carry me on a mattress to the cell. I couldn’twalk after that.—Salim, who was arrested in June 2011 while ona two day break from his military service.[113]Political SecurityDirectorateDirector:Mohamed Dib Zeitun[114]Mezzeh area –Damascus[115]Location:Coordinates: 33.498932N, 36.239601EGeneral Comments:Former detainees told Human Rights Watch that thePolitical Security branch in the Mezzeh area contained detention facilitiesunderground. One detainee said that he and 25-30 other detainees were held ina cell with the number 21 on the door.Documented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; shabeh; electrocution; threats to family;burning with cigarettes.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:An officer accused me of taking money from Lebanon tobring down the regime. After calling an assistant they beat me up, took me to aroom close to where they torture people and hung me up with a long chainhandcuffed to my wrists so that only my toes touched the floor. They kept mehanging like this for three hours.Back in the cell I couldn’t sleep because it was close tothe torture room. They were beating people and using electric sticks. I couldhear the screams.The next day they hung me up again. Many people werehanging like this – in the shabeh position. Every 30 to 45 minutessomebody came to hit me. There were six or seven people hanging like this atany given time.Everybody was beaten up. Some could not bear the pain sothey collapsed and lost consciousness. They didn’t concentrate on me. When Ifell asleep they threw water on me demanding that I stand up.On the third day, the officer threatened to bring myfamily and torture them. One prisoner was beaten up in front of me. Heconfessed. The officer told the others to take him back to the cell and treathim well. Then two of his assistants held my legs up and the officer used astick to beat me on the legs and on the rest of the body. They extinguishedcigarettes on my hands and feet. They also placed me in front of a wall. Theagents would have fun by banging my head into the wall or hitting me in thegroin.On the fourth day, they transferred me from an individualto a regular cell. Newcomers were always put in individual cells. We were notallowed to talk. We would just sit next to each other in silence. When officerscame near the cell, everybody was supposed to stand up, even those who weresleeping. If not, they would beat us up.Some had black spots from electrocution. Some couldn’twalk to the bathroom on their own. Some who had written slogans had their handsburned with cigarettes. My hands were burned as well. I eventually confessed,but was then beaten again for the crimes that I confessed to.—Farid, who was detained for 25 days.[116]Idlib Branch[117]Officers in charge of facility:Atef Najib (head of branch; former head of Political Security in Daraa)[118]Location:Coordinates: 35.926529N, 36.629993EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating;beating with object; electrocution; basat al-reeh.General Comments:ThePolitical Security Branch in Idlib has a detention facility underground,consisting of five common cells on the left side of a corridor and singlecells and a restroom for the officers on the right side. There is an investigationroom on the same floor. Two former detainees said independently thatdetainees were tortured with electricity in the corridor.[119]Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:They brought us to the head of the branch, Atef Najib,the one who was transferred from Daraa. He asked our names and then told theothers that they should take us down and “show us their hospitality.”They took us one floor underground and started beating uswith cables and electric sticks. They put us on a rack device. They kept beatingand insulting us until eight o’clock in the morning. My body was all black frombeatings. At that point they didn’t ask any questions.They put 25 of us in a cell measuring four by fourmeters. Five of them were arrested with me. Every time they opened the doorthey would beat us.—Sultan, who was detained on May 15 on theroad between Latakia and Jisr al-Shughour.[120]***One of the detainees in our cell was taken out forinterrogation because they found the name of an activist on his phone. Theytortured him with the flying carpet and beat him with cables. They electrocutedhim six or seven times on different parts of his body. He was unconscious whenthey brought him back to the room. He was peeing blood for three days. When wewere released he still stayed in the prison.—Jalal, whowas arrested on June 25 from his village in the Idlib governorate and spent 45days in detention, including 19 days in the Political Security branch in Idlib.[121]They brought me to theinterrogation room along the same corridor. They tied my hands, but didn’tblindfold me. One officer was sitting at a desk and another was standing nextto him. He addressed me in a very insulting way. When I didn’t answer he got upand just kicked under the chin with his foot. I fell and he kicked me again.They accused me of participating in the uprising, but I said that I just wentto the funeral of the martyrs. He said that they are not martyrs, but pigs. Hecalled someone else and told him to “teach me” because I called the deadprotestors martyrs.He took me to the corridor, tied me to the door, andstarted giving me electric shocks. I couldn’t tell what they used to give methe shocks. I stayed there for an hour. They gave me shocks about every fiveminutes, each one lasting for a few seconds. My head was just hanging. Icouldn’t hold it up. I passed out, but then they poured cold water on me.When they released my hands I fell on my face. I couldn’tstand up so they started kicking me. I ended up crawling back into theinterrogation room. The interrogator asked me whether I still thought of thedead as martyrs. I answered that I didn’t anymore and that they are just deadpersons.—Abdallah who was detained for one day inmid-April after having attended a funeral in Jisr al-Shughour.[122]HomsBranch[123]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Hussam Luqa (Since April 2012)[124]Brig. Gen. Nasr Al-Ali (Until April 2012,Al-Ali then assumed the position of head of Daraa branch)[125]Location:Coordinates: 34.721644N, 36.708581EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object; shabeh; dulab;electrocution; balanco.General Comments:The Political Security branch in Homs has a detentionfacility on the second underground floor. According to one former detainee,the facility consists of nine individual cells and an interrogation room andtorture room on the same floor.[126]Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:They pushed me down the stairs to the basement where theinterrogation room is. They took my ID and locked me in a two [meters] by one[meter] cell. There were about nine individual cells. After two hours I went[was taken] to see the interrogator. He had a paper in front of him that saidthat I sent videos to Al Jazeera. I denied [it]. As a result, I stayed forseven days suspended from my hands. They let me down three times per day toeat. They used to beat me just for fun.The basement was two floors underground. In front of theinterrogation room there is another room that had all the torture machines.They accused me of inciting protests and possession of weapons. They torturedme several times. I saw one of the machines that looked like a table withstraps to strap you on. There is one from under the back and other ones on thelegs. After seven days, they moved me into solidarity confinement. The next daythey put me in the tire. They put both legs in the tire and then they push myhead inside the tire. I didn’t confess so they put me three times on theelectricity chair. They would torture me and put be back in the cell.After 16 days, they transferred me from the cell to aroom 20 by 15 meters that had around 60 people. Every day they release [some]and bring new people in.—Twenty-five-year-old Ziad, who was detainedon June 25, 2011 and released on November 12, 2011.[127]Latakia Branch[128]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Taha Taha[129]Location:Coordinates: 35.527367N, 35.804268EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; sexual abuse; threats; dulab; shabeh; basatal-reeh.General Comments:The Political Security branch in Latakia has anunderground detention facility with an interrogation room on the same floor.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:They started beatingus (40 persons) before they asked any questions. We were blindfolded andhandcuffed. They kicked us with their boots and knocked out several of myteeth. They placed us in single cells and then took us out for hours at thetime to beat us.With the unmarried guys they made them strip and beatthem on their private parts.After about three days they put us in cells, seven peoplein each. We were all naked, so when they came back we could see that they werebeaten and they were crying and peeing blood.The cell was located four flights of stairs underground.It was cold and wet. The food was a piece of bread with some yoghurt. We stayedin that cell for five days, naked all the time.They interrogated me four times. Every time they torturedme, with punches, kicks, and hitting me with cables. They put me in a tire.They wanted me to confess to carrying arms and being a member of armed gangs.They forced me to fingerprint some paper, but I’milliterate so I don’t know what it said.Afterwards I was hiding in a private hospital. I hadseveral broken ribs so I couldn’t move. They released me in connection with thepresidential pardon.—Ghalib, who was arrested in mid-April after aprotest in Latakia.[130]***They undressed me, tied my hands behind my back and hitme on my private parts. They clipped my hands to a metal pipe and lifted me sothat my feet hardly touched the floor. They kept me like that for two days.When they released me I couldn’t stand, my feet were completely swollen.I then spent five days in a single cell with six otherpeople. After that 15 officers took me to a separate room. They were cursing mymother and sister and threatened to rape me. They put me on a flying carpet – Iwas lying on my back, tied to a board, and they lifted my head and legs. Allthis time I was undressed. They wrapped wires around my penis and turned on theelectricity. I could just hear it buzzing. They did this maybe five times for about10 seconds. I passed out.When I regained consciousness they were pushing my legsand hands into a tire. My entire body was blue from beatings.—Twenty-three-year-old Amer, who was arrestedin March 2011 in Idlib province.[131]Daraa Branch[132]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Nasr Al-Ali (Since April 2012.Used to be head of the Political Security Branch in Homs)[133]Location:Coordinates: 32.630235N, 36.108123EDocumented methods of torture and ill-treatment:Beating.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:They put me in a car and drove me to the PoliticalSecurity branch in Daraa. There were about 50 other detainees there as well[who had just arrived]. I know because they listed all the names. Then theypushed us all on the floor with our faces down. We stayed like this for severalhours. Anybody walking by would hit us and step on us. Then the placed us in alarge vehicle and drove us to Damascus. Inside the vehicle, they used electricstun-guns on us if we talked.—Jihad, who was arrested in Daraa on April 4,2011.[134]General Intelligence DirectorateDirector: AliMamlouk[135]Branch 285 –Damascus[136]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Ibrahim Ma’la (head of branch,since late 2011)[137]Brig. Gen. Hussam Fendi (head of branch,until late 2011)Location:Coordinates: 33.499805N,36.291313EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with objects; electrocution; basatal-reeh; stress position (prolonged standing); sexual abuse (prolongednudity).[138]General Comments:Branch 285 is part of the complex housing the GeneralIntelligence Directorate Administrative Branch. According to a defector fromBranch 285, the detention center is located under a garage. There are fivefloors above ground and two underground. The five floors above the ground areoffices. On the underground floors there are interrogation rooms and about250 solitary confinement cells. There were 17 interrogation rooms, but thenthe number increased. There are also five large group cells on each floor. Theentrance is located on the ground floor. The defector estimated that theremight have been 1,500 detainees in Branch 285.[139]A former detainee said that he was kept in a cell measuring about 25 squaremeters together with 74 other detainees.[140]Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:We detained men there and some children aged 13 andolder. I myself probably arrested 40 children who attended demonstrations.There were maybe 1,500 detainees there, coming and going.They would torture with electricity. They would tiesomeone on an all-metal military bed and electrocute the bed or put water onthe floor and make the person lie on top of it and use the electricity. I wouldsometimes go into the interrogation rooms, although I was not usually there,and this is where I would see this [torture in general] … [another method was]they would make the detainee, with his hands tied by his head, and a metal polesticking out of the wall digging into his back, stand on the wall. It causespain to the back. Sometimes they would leave them naked, and the usual slapsand punches. You would see detainees passing out from this …The order [to interrogate] is irrelevant. You understandfrom the people around you what you are supposed to do. No one says, “Why areyou shooting.” They say, “Shoot!” If you don’t beat or torture you fear foryourself. One time someone said to me, “Why aren’t you beating him. Hit him.” Ididn’t want to defect. My dad told me to. The things he was seeing, I wasn’tseeing [while I was serving].—Twenty-four-year old Fakhri,whoused to serve in Branch 285 before he defected.[141]***They didn’t ask any questions, but started torturing meright away. They took me underground, blindfolded and handcuffed. Once Istepped into a room, somebody kicked me from behind. I fell. They startedbeating me with everything they could find – sticks, cables, their fists, andlegs. It lasted for about an hour. Afterwards, they took me to a different roomfor interrogation.They asked me why I protested, what did I want. I didn’ttell them anything. An officer ordered a soldier to give me electric shocks.They sat me down. I was still blindfolded, but I could see under the blindfoldthat they put a clip on my left big toe. I then lost consciousness immediately.—Twenty-seven-year-old Firas, who was detainedon July 7 and spent 23 days in detention in Branch 285.[142]Al-Khattib Branch –Damascus[143]Location:Coordinates: 33.520416N, 36.311783EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with objects; stress positions;falaqa; electrocution; threats.General Comments:The Al-Khattib branch consists of three buildings. Atleast one of the buildings has an underground detention facility consistingof seven common and four individual cellsStatements by victims and eyewitnesses:I was called out for interrogation twice. Theinterrogation room was on the second floor. Everybody beat us up on the way. Wewere still blindfolded. During the interrogation I sat on my knees. They werepunching and kicking me everywhere. It was more of an accusation thaninterrogation. On the way back they made me roll down the stairs. If theydidn’t like it, they made me do it again.—Thirty-year-old Bassam, who was detained justbefore a protest in Damascus in mid-July.[144]***All night and day we heard the sounds from men beingtortured. One person who helped organizing protests was forced to stand on hisknees the entire time in the prison cell. During the investigation theythreatened me that they would strip my clothes off and torture me with the dulab.We didn’t know what time it was so we couldn’t know when prayer time was. Wecouldn’t sleep because of the sounds of torture. The other girl with us in theprison cell told me that they slapped her several times and kicked her in thestomach.I saw security forces slapping a 12 year old boy in thecorridor. They also brought him to say that he saw us at the protest. But theboy swore that he has never seen us before; they believed him. [T]he cells arevery close to each other and there was a peephole I used so I could see whatwas happening outside.—Twenty-five-year-old Marwa [woman], who wasarrested with her friend near a demonstration in Damascus in January 2012.[145]***When we arrived at the Al-Khattib branch we saw menblindfolded, being tortured. I saw blood on the floor. They put us in a roomand then a woman came and searched us after she ordered us to take off ourclothes. We were three girls in the room. The first night there was nointerrogation.We could see the rooms around us because there was asmall peephole with a net. We lost track of time. We were able to see how guyswere being beaten and interrogated. Some men were not wearing any clothes andthey were sitting in a prayer position. It was unbelievable how they werebeating them with the electrical batons.The next day they took us separately to see theinterrogator. I was the first one to go. The interrogator asked me again to confessand give the names of my friends. If I did, he said, he would let me go rightaway. They took the details of my Facebook account and started to search it. Hesaw that I was friends with one guy from Hama and started asking me questionsabout him. He asked me how I knew him and what was going on between the two ofus. I explained we were only friends. Then he ordered me to tell him the guy’sreal name or else he would use the falaqa. Then he asked me if I’m aconservative or liberal, I told him I am neither this nor that. Then he askedme if the guy from Hama belongs to the Muslim Brotherhood. I told him of coursehe does not.After he finished we went back to the room with my friendand the other girl. While we were in the room we heard someone screaming fromthe outside because he was in agonizing pain. He confessed the names of five ofhis friends. The same guy was brought in to the interrogation room and theinterrogator asked him if he saw me at the protest and he said yes. They tookthe third girl for interrogation; we started hearing a woman screaming. Weasked her when she came back but she said it wasn’t her who was screaming. Theywere beating a child who was at the protest. It was I think the same child thatthe interrogator brought in and asked if he saw me at the protest. He said hedidn’t see us.While we were there they brought in more than 50detainees. On Friday they made us fingerprint a piece of paper that said wewere in a protest chanting sectarian slogans, that we cursed the President anddemanded the overthrow of the regime, and that we carried posters for the FSA.I fingerprinted the paper and two other blank ones.—Twenty-two-year old Selma [woman], arrestedwith her friend in Damascus.[146]Latakia Branch[147]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. Khudr Khudr[148]Location:Coordinates: 35.529572N, 35.803867EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; electrocution.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:I was on my knees inthe interrogation room. I felt two people beating me. They were kicking andslapping me. The interrogator said there were witnesses against me saying thatI organized demonstrations. He was saying that I encourage people to go out anddemonstrate. I said no. They put me to one side and brought in another guy whocame and said I paid him to go to demonstrations. I didn’t recognize his voice.I signed a white paper saying I will not go to demonstrations or say AllahuAkbar. I was in detention for 15 days. I was in a solitary cell and didn’t seeanyone.[There were kids there] and they were beating them. Iheard them saying, “We don’t know, uncle.” One sounded like he could have been13 years old.They used electricity on me in places I can’t talk about.They did it more than once. This was in the interrogation room. Every day therewas an interrogation. Their questions were based on my answers. They wanted meto work with them but I refused and that’s when they used the electricity.—Twenty-eight-year-old Malik, who was detainedin Latakia in late April 2011 and kept in detention for 15 days.[149]Aleppo Branch[150]Location:Coordinates: 36.211922N, 37.134705EGeneral Comments:Underground.Documented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beating with object; falaqa; electrocution; balanco.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:They tookme to the State Security branch where they took my clothes off. My hands weretied with plastic cuffs behind my back. I was naked sitting on my knees. Wewere underground. They were beating me with their hands, and batons, and kicks.There were also people next to me being beaten.There was one child who was eight years old who was with us and he wasbeing beaten. I heard the soldiers asking each other, “Where is the kid?” Hewas in the mosque with us when we were picked up. As they were putting us inthe van one of the security officers said to the driver [talking about theboy], “This one is a gift for you today.” I don’t know what happened to him.Theyseparated us by neighborhood. Those from Hama and Homs got the worst treatment.There was no food there. The next day they took me to [another facility].—Twenty-three-year-old Suleiman, a student atAleppo University, who was detained in August 2011 at a mosque.[151]***The interrogator accused me of being associated with“terrorists.” I denied it. He also wanted me to confess to being the organizerof demonstrations. I refused. Then another person entered the room and startedbeating me with a whip. A third person joined. They pushed me on the floor,made me raise my feet, and started beating me on the soles of my feet. Afterhalf an hour they took me back to the cell, saying I should think about what tosay. They beat me like this two more times before they put me in a car and tookme to the Air Force Intelligence branch.—Nidal, who was detained in Aleppo on July 4,2011.[152]Idlib Branch[153]Location:Coordinates: 35.923065N, 36.633038EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; beatings with object; electrocution; pullingnails; stress positions; falaqa, shabeh; threats.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:They asked me if I went to demonstrations and I said,“Yes”. They asked how many, and I said, “A lot”. They didn’t beat me. Theytried to discuss with me. I was blindfolded and there were three interrogators.During the interrogation my hands were tied.The fourth day I went to interrogation and they startedasking me about photos, I said no, I didn’t take photos, and he said they had someonewho had informed on me. They started giving me names and I said no I didn’tknow the people and they said in that case I would confess in their way.Four of them were hitting me. They were hitting me on myfeet from above, on my toes with a wooden baton. Another was hitting me with anelectric baton and the other two were hitting me with their hands. I fell onthe ground. I didn’t confess.Then they tied my hands to a point high above my head. Icould stand, but my hands were above my head. I was standing like this for fourhours. I had to stand on one leg. When I lowered a foot they beat me. I wasblindfolded.Then they took me to a torture room, to give me electricshocks. They beat me with a whip and electrocuted my toes. I didn’t confess toanything. If you don’t answer a question they shock you. It was like this forsix hours every day. On the eleventh day there was a new interrogator whoplaced me on the ground, tied my hands, and beat me. He had a whip. My eyeswere blindfolded. He was sitting on a chair and I was under him. He beat me withthe metal whip on the bottom of my feet and on my thighs, and also above … Hepulled me by my toes. I thought, I’ve reached the end. He pulled my beard withpliers, pulled my nails. Half of the nail is still gone. Then they took me andhung be in the shabeh position from the door for six or seven hours.They threatened to bring my mom and my younger brothers. I didn’t confess toanything except for going to demonstrations.—Tarik, who used to photograph demonstrationsand was arrested in Idlib on August 27 and spent 24 days in the GeneralIntelligence branch in Idlib.[154]Homs Branch[155]Officers in charge of facility:Brig. Gen. FirasAl-Hamed[156]Location:Coordinates: 34.734963N, 36.698434EDocumented methods of torture and ill-treatment:Beating; beating with object.Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:Three guards took me to a cell and started beating me onthe back, asking me what types of weapon we had and where we got them from.When I asked “what weapons?” they beat me again. Eventually I started agreeingto everything, to save my life. There was no place on my body that had not beenbeaten. They beat me with batons and cables. I would have agreed to owning atank.—Assi, who was arrested in Homs on July 1,2011, and was kept in detention in the General Intelligence branch in Homs forsix days.[157]***There were many detainees with me. They were beating uson the head with the butt of their rifles. I couldn’t move my legs for ten daysafter I was released. I was in a cell measuring three by three meters with 40detainees. It was so crowded we had to take turns sleeping. They made mefingerprint a document, but I didn’t see what was written on it. I stayed inthis place for two months.—Chafik, who was arrested near the town ofTalbiseh in April 2011.[158]***They interrogated me the same day that I arrived but theyalready had all the information from the interrogations in the last branch infront of them. They were asking me questions and hitting me with the electricalcables on my back. They put me in a bigger individual cell. There were around12 people in it. I stayed there for seven to eight days with nobodyinterrogating me. There was one guy with me in the cell who suffocated anddied. It was very dark and speaking was prohibited. When we couldn’t breatheanymore we would hit on the door really hard until one of the officers opensthe door for a couple of minutes and then closes it again.When they took me for interrogation I saw around 14 menstanding in the corridor and officers were hitting them with the back of theirguns. They used the balanco … with which they would hang me from thefeet and my head down and they would beat me. He asked me the same questions.When he finished they took me to the cell.—Twenty-five-year-old Ziad, who was detainedon June 25 2011 and released on November 12, 2011.[159]Ad Hoc and Joint Detention FacilitiesCentral Prison –Idlib[160]Officers in charge of facility:Bassel Bilal (police officer directlyinvolved in torture)[161]Ahmad Kafan (police officer directly involvedin torture)[162]Bassam al-Misri (police officer directlyinvolved in torture)[163]Location:Coordinates: 35.926587N,36.636158EDocumented Methods of Torture and Ill-TreatmentBeating; falaqa; basat al-reeh; electrocution; sexualabuse.General CommentsThe IdlibCentral Prison consists of five floors, including the basement. According toa former prison guard, security forces took over the third floor and thebasement of the prison at the end of April and started bringing detaineesthere because the other detention facilities were full.[164]Most of the former detainees fromthe Central Prison interviewed by Human Rights Watch had been detained inconnection with a massive arrest campaign following the killing of 120members of the security forces in early June.[165]Several former detainees emphasizedthat there were children among the detainees and that they were beingtortured as well.[166]Theformer guard and detainees explained that a “security committee” ofrepresentatives from the main security and intelligence agencies was incharge of the third floor and the basement, but they also had seen the headof the prison there. Some detainees said that Political Security was mainlyin charge of the third floor while Military Intelligence was in charge of thebasement.Thethird floor contained at least one big common cell, measuring about 50-70square meters. While the number of detainees in the cell varied, it oftencontained 120-130 people. The third floor also contained several torturerooms with metal doors, interrogations rooms with wooden doors, and a medicalroom.[167]The basement was one big space –one former detainee estimated it to measure 400 square meters – which wasdivided into cells with partitions.Securityforces tortured detainees both on the third floor and in the basement.Several detainees and one former guard provided detailed descriptions of howthe three police officers listed above were directly involved in much of thetorture on the third floor.[168]Theformer prison guard, who was in charge of ordering food for the detainees,said that there were about 900 detainees in the basement and more than 300 onthe third floor in October 2011. Former detainees provided similar estimates.[169]Statements by victims and eyewitnesses:After we arrived on the third floor, the guards startedcalling people. They had to be carried back to the cell on a blanket because ofthe torture. Some people’s feet were red and swollen from the beating.The next day they called my name. I couldn’t walk becauseof the beating from the day before, but one of the guards hit me with a cableand I jumped to my feet.They dragged me to a room with two benches. They put meon one of them and raised my legs and then they hit me 32 times on the soles ofmy feet. I couldn’t speak. I would have told them anything.Then they took me back to the cell, carrying me on ablanket because I couldn’t walk. I put my feet in water and then I startedcrying.After about 25 days [being tortured several times] theysent me down to the basement where they interrogated me three times. It waseven worse in the basement. They told me that they would not torture me if theybelieved me. “But if we don’t,” they said, “we will kill you.” They put me inthe flying carpet and said that they would hit me 130 times and that I shouldcount. They said that they would start over if I didn’t count correctly. When Ihad counted to 99 the interrogator used an electric prod on my back to make mestand and forced me back to the cell.—Thirty-one-year-old Yazid, who was detainedon June 9 and spent 69 days in the Central Prison in Idlib.[170]***They forced me to undress. Then they started squeezing myfingers with pliers. They used a stapler to put nails in my fingers, chest, andears. I was only allowed to take them out if I spoke. The nails in the earswere the most painful. They used two wires hooked up to a car battery to giveme electric shocks. They used electric stun-guns on my genitals twice. Ithought I would never see my family again. They tortured me like this three timesover three days.—Thirty-one-year-old Khalil, who was detainedin the Idlib governorate on June 29 and spent about two months in several placesof detention, including about one month in the Idlib Central Prison.[171]AcknowledgementsThis report was researched and written by Ole Solvang,researcher in the Emergencies division, Anna Neistat, associate director forProgram and Emergencies, and a researcher in the Middle East and North Africa(MENA) division who preferred not to be named. Other staff members and aconsultant, who also preferred not to be named, provided valuable researchassistance.Nadim Houry, deputy director of the MENA division; CliveBaldwin, senior legal advisor; and Tom Porteous, deputy program director,edited the report. Portions of the report were reviewed by Samer Muscati,researcher in the Women’s Rights division, and Priyanka Motaparthy, researcherin the Children’s Rights division. This report wasprepared for publication by Adam Coogle, coordinator in the MENA division;Grace Choi, publications director; and Fitzroy Hepkins, production manager. AmrKhairy coordinated Arabic translation and provided production assistance.Accompanying multimedia was produced by Pierre Bairin, multimedia director;Amanda Bailly and Mariam Dwedar, assistant producers; and AnnaLopriore, multimedia producer.We are deeply grateful to the individuals who shared theirpersonal stories with us despite concern that they might face repercussionsfrom the authorities. Their commitment to get their stories out despite therisks and challenges is an inspiration.[1]See “Syria: Sexual Assault in Detention,” HumanRights Watch news release, June 15, 2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/15/syria-sexual-assault-detention;Human Rights Watch, “They Burned My Heart”: War Crimes in Northern Idlibduring Peace Plan Negotiations, May 2012, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2012/05/02/they-burned-my-heart-0;“Syria, Stop Torture of Children,” Human Rights Watch news release, February 3,2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/02/03/syria-stop-torture-children;Human Rights Watch, “We Live as in War”:Crackdown on Protesters in the Governorate of Homs, Syria, November2011, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/11/11/we-live-war-0;Human Rights Watch, “We’ve Never Seen Such Horror”:Crimes against Humanity by Syrian SecurityForces, June 2011. http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/06/01/we-ve-never-seen-such-horror-0;“Syria: Rampant Torture ofProtesters,” Human Rights Watch news release, April 15, 2011,http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/04/15/syria-rampant-torture-protesters.[2]See Center for Documentation of Violations in Syria,Statistics for the Number of Detainees, http://vdc-sy.org/index.php/en/ (accessed June25, 2012).[3]Human Rights Watch, “By All Means Necessary!”:Individual and Command Responsibility forCrimes against Humanity in Syria,December 2011, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/12/15/all-means-necessary-0.[4]Human Rights Watch interview with Khalil, January 8,2012.[5]International Convention for the Protection of AllPersons from Enforced Disappearance (ICCPED), adopted December 20, 2006, G.A.Res. 61/177, U.N. Doc. A/RES/61/177 (2006), entered into force December 23,2010, art. 2 [Syria has not ratified the ICCPED].[6]RomeStatute of the International Criminal Court, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.183/9, July 17,1998, entered into force July 1, 2002,art.7.[7]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Hatem,November 18, 2011.[8]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Samir,December 14, 2011.[9]Human Rights Watch interview with Jalal, January 8,2012. The detainee who was beaten because he kicked on the door corroboratedthe account in a separate interview in a different location. Human Rights Watchinterview with Yazid, January 9, 2012.[10]See also Amnesty International, “Syria: ‘I Wanted to Die’: Syria’s TortureSurvivors Speak Out” A.I. IndexMDE 24/016/2012,March 14, 2012, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/MDE24/016/2012/en(accessed June 25, 2012).[11]Human Rights Watch/Middle East, Syria Unmasked:The Suppression of Human Rights by the Asad Regime (New Haven: YalesUniversity Press, 1991), pp. 54-57.[12]“Syria: Sexual Assault in Detention,” Human RightsWatch news release, June 15, 2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/15/syria-sexual-assault-detention.[13]Human Rights Watch interview with Halim, November 3,2011.[14]Human Rights Watch interview with Afif, November 2,2011.[15]Human Rights Watch interview with Amer, January 10,2012.[16]Human Rights Watch Interview with Walid, April 13,2012; Ghassan, April 15, 2012;.Ghassan G., October 29, 2011; Mohamed M.,October 27, 2011;[17]Human Rights Watch interview with Habib, October 26,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Yazan, October 26, 2011; Human RightsWatch interview with Ramzi, November 1, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview withZakhya, October 29, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Mahdi, November 3,2011.[18]Human Rights Watch interview with Zahi, January 7,2012.[19]Human Rights Watch interview with Fathi, July 30,2011.[20]Human Rights Watch interview with Zahi, January 7,2012; Human Rights Watch interview with Jalal, January 8, 2012.[21]Human Rights Watch interview with Fares, May 23,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Ayman, May 23, 2011.[22]According to the Violations Documentation Center, 428of the 575 died from torture, 76 were executed without being tortured, and 71were executed after having been tortured. People who were executed in thefield, and executions and torture in the absence of evidence of stateinvolvement are excluded. For each death, the VDC collects the name, age, timeof death, and place of death, see Center for Documentation of Violations inSyria, Statistics for the Number of Martyrs, http://vdc-sy.org/index.php/en/ (accessed June25, 2012).[23]Human Rights Watch Interview with Walid, April 13,2012.[24]Human Rights Watch Interview with Ghassan, April 15,2012.[25]InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966),999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, acceded to by Syria onApril 21, 1969, arts. 4, 7. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhumanor Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture), G.A. res.39/46, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, acceded toby Syria on August 19, 2004.[26]Rome Statute. Syria has signed, although notratified, the Rome Statute and so is obliged to refrain from acts that would‘defeat the object and purpose of [the] treaty’. See Article 18 of the ViennaConvention on the Law of Treaties, 1969, United Nations, TreatySeries, vol. 1155, p. 331, acceded to by Syria in 1970. Syria signedthe Rome Statute on November 29, 2000.[27]Rome Statute,art. 25(3), which stipulates, in part:“Inaccordance with this Statute, a person shall be criminally responsible andliable for punishment for a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court if thatperson:(a) Commitssuch a crime, whether as an individual, jointly with another or through anotherperson, regardless of whether that other person is criminally responsible;(b) Orders,solicits or induces the commission of such a crime which in fact occurs or isattempted.”[28]Rome Statute, art. 28.[29]Rome Statute, art. 27.[30]Center for Documentation of Violations in Syria,Statistics for the Number of Detainees, http://vdc-sy.org/index.php/en/ (accessed June25, 2012).[31]“Syria, Stop Torture of Children,” Human Rights Watchnews release, February 3, 2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/02/03/syria-stop-torture-children;Human Rights Watch.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with Hossam, January 28,2012.[33]Liam Stack, “Video of Tortured Boy’s Corpse DeepensAnger in Syria,” New York Times, May 30, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/31/world/middleeast/31syria.html(accessed June 25, 2012).[34]Human Rights Watch interview with Sabah, January 10,2012.[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Nour, June 23,2012.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with Abu Ghassan, April26, 2012.[37]The Council of the European Union imposed travelrestrictions and an asset freeze on Abdul Fatah Kudsiyeh (also spelled AbdAl-Fatah Qudsiyah) on May 9, 2011, for being “involved in the repressionagainst the civilian population” in Syria. “Council I No. 442/2011 of 9 May2011 concerning restrictive measures in view of the situation in Syria,”Official Journal L 121/1, May 10, 2011, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:121:0001:0010:EN:PDF(accessed June 25, 2012).[38]Human Rights Watch interviewed nine people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[39]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sayid,June 20, 2012.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with Amine, November 2,2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sayid, June 20, 2012.[41]According to Amine, Brig. Gen. Salah Hamad personallyparticipated in his torture. Amine, a former career military officer, hadpreviously served with Hamad and immediately recognized his voice. According toAmine, Hamad admitted that it was he when Amine asked. Human Rights Watchinterview with Amine, November 2, 2011.[42]All coordinates are given in the format Latitude,Longitude using the decimal system.[43]Human Rights Watch interview with Halim, November 3,2011.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with Khalil, January 8,2012.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Fawzi, January 6,2012.[46]Human Rights Watch Interview with Ammar, January 9,2012.[47]Human Rights Watch interviewed ten people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Ghadi, January 7,2012. Media reported that Muhammad Khallouf defected in January, 2012, butHuman Rights Watch has not been able to verify this. See for example, Shaher`Ayyad, “Khaddam Reveals to Al-Masry Al-Youm Details of the Failure of theAssad Family’s Attempt to Flee,” Al-Masry Al-Youm, January 30, 2012, http://www.almasryalyoum.com/node/629086(accessed June 25, 2012).[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Marwan, November 1,2011.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Rudi, January 6,2012.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Talal, November 4,2011.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Samer, July 28,2011.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Wael, July 28,2011.[54]Human Rights Watch Interview with Nabih, January 7,2012[55]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Samir,December 14, 2011.[56]Human Rights Watch interviewed eight people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Hussein, November2, 2011.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Ammar, January 9,2012.[59]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Munir,November 21, 2011.[60]Human Rights Watch interviewed three witnesses whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[61]Mustafa told Human Rights Watch that he was broughtbefore Rustom Ghazali and that Ghazali was the one to give orders to beat him.Human Rights Watch interview with Mustafa, October 27, 2011. See also HumanRights Watch interview with Fares, May 23, 2011; Ghadi, January 7, 2012. TheCouncil of the European Union imposed travel restrictions and an asset freezeon Rustom Ghazali (also spelled Rustum Ghazali) on May 9, 2011, for being“involved in the repression against the civilian population” in Syria. CouncilRegulation (EU) No. 442/2011 of 9 May 2011.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Mustafa, October27, 2011.[63]Ibid.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Lutfi, January 8,2012.[65]Human Rights Watch interviewed four witnesses whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[66]Human Rights Watch interview with Omar, June 11,2012.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Yamen, November 2,2011.[68]Human Rights Watch interview Khalil, January 8, 2012.[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Yamen, November 2,2011.[70]Human Rights Watch interviewed six people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Halim, November 3,2011. The Council of the European Union imposed travel restrictions and anasset freeze on Loai al-Ali (also spelled Lu’ai al-Ali) on November 14, 2011,for being “responsible for the violence against protesters” in Daraa. “CouncilImplementing Regulation (EU) No 1151/2011of 14 November 2011implementingRegulation (EU) No 442/2011 concerning restrictive measures in view of thesituation in Syria,” Official Journal L 296/3, November 15, 2012, http://www.damaskus.diplo.de/contentblob/3335114/Daten/1737139/COUNCIL_IMPLEMENTING_EU_REGULATION_No_1151_2011_of_14Nov11_Syria_eng.pdf(accessed June 25, 2012).[72]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohsin, November 3,2011.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Ayoub, November 4,2011.[74]Human Rights Watch interviewed three people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Fawzi, January 6,2012.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Fawzi, January 6,2012.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Fawzi, January 6,2012.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Rudi, January 6,2012.[79]Human Rights Watch interviewed seven people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with Isam, January 7,2012; Ghadi, January 7, 2012; Imad, January 8, 2012; Najib, January 10, 2012.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Isam, January 7,2012.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Yousef, January 9,2012.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Isam, January 7,2012.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Hassib, January 7,2012.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Ghadi, January 7,2012.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Samer, July 28,2011.[87]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Munir,November 21, 2011.[88]Human Rights Watch interviewed five people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with Talib, January 10,2012.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Salim, January 12,2012.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Kamal, January 10,2012.[92]Human Rights Watch Interview with Nabih, January 7,2012.[93]The Council of the European Union imposed travelrestrictions and an asset freeze on Jamil Hassan on May 9, 2011, for being“involved in the repression against the civilian population” in Syria. CouncilRegulation (EU) No 442/2011 of 9 May 2011.[94]Human Rights Watch interviewed nine people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Sayid, June 20,2012; Rami, October 28, 2011.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Rami, October 28,2011.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Jad, November 1,2011.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Zakhya, October 29,2011.[99]Human Rights Watch interviewed two people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Bashir, January 25,2012.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Bashir, January 25,2012.[102]Human Rights Watch interviewed three people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Sayid, June 20,2012.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Marwan, November 1,2011.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Fahim, November 3,2011.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Marwan, November 1,2011.[107]Human Rights Watch interviewed two people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with Sayid, June 20,2012.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Toufiq, November23, 2011.[110]Human Rights Watch interviewed three people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Chahid, October 27,2011.[112]Human Rights Watch interview with Fadi,January 10, 2012.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Salim, January 12,2012.[114]The Council of the European Union imposed travelrestrictions and an asset freeze on Mohamed Dib Zeitun (also spelled Zaytun andZeitoun) on May 9, 2011, for being “involved in the violence againstdemonstrators” in Syria. Council Regulation (EU) No 442/2011 of 9 May 2011.[115]Human Rights Watch interviewed four people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with Farid, October 27,2011.[117]Human Rights Watch interviewed nine people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Sultan, January 7,2012.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Wadih, January 7,2012; Abdallah, January 8, 2012.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Sultan, January 7,2012.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Jalal, January 8,2012.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdallah, January8, 2012.[123]Human Rights Watch interviewed two people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamad, April 25,2012; Omar, June 11, 2012.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Omar, June 11,2012.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with Ziad, January 25,2012.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with Ziad, January 25,2012.[128]Human Rights Watch interviewed six people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Ghalib, January 7,2012; Salim, January 12, 2012.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with Ghalib, January 7,2012.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Amer, January 10,2012.[132]Human Rights Watch interviewed three people whosuffered or witnessed torture and ill-treatment in this branch.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Sayid, by phone,June 20, 2012.[134]Human Rights Watch interview with Jihad, May 22,2011.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with Fakhri, January 11,2012. The Council of the European Union imposed travel restrictions and anasset freeze on Ali Mamlouk (also spelled Mamluk) on May 9, 2011, for being“involved in the violence against demonstrators” in Syria. Council Regulation(EU) No 442/2011 of 9 May 2011.[136]Human Rights Watch interviewed three people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Omar, June 11,2012.[138]Human Rights Watch Interview with Fakhri, January 11,2012.[139]Human Rights Watch Interview with Fakhri, January 11,2012.[140]Human Rights Watch interview with Firas, November 3,2011.[141]Human Rights Watch Interview with Fakhri, January 11,2012.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Firas, November 3,2011.[143]Human Rights Watch interviewed four people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Bassam, November 1,2011.[145]Human Rights Watch interview with Marwa, January 25,2012.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Selma, January 24,2012.[147]Human Rights Watch interviewed two people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[148]Human Rights Watch interview, June 18, 2012.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Malik, January 10,2012.[150]Human Rights Watch interviewed two people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with Suleiman, January8, 2012.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with Nidal, January 6,2012.[153]Human Rights Watch interviewed three people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with Tarik, November 18,2011.[155]Human Rights Watch interviewed three people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Sayid, June 20,2012.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Assi, July 26,2011.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Chafik, January 7,2012.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Ziad, January 25,2012.[160]Human Rights Watch interviewed six people whosuffered or witnessed torture in this facility.[161]Three former detainees and a defector who used towork in the Idlib Central Prison told Human Rights Watch that the three namedofficers were directly involved in the torture and provided details about thetorture methods used. Human Rights Watch interview with Isam, January 7, 2012;Imad, January 8, 2012; Jalal, January 8, 2012; Khalil, January 8, 2012.[162]Ibid.[163]Ibid.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with Isam, January 7,2012. A former detainee who was detained on June 9 told Human Rights Watch thatthe security forces first took him to the Military Intelligence branch and thento the Political Security branch in Idlib, but because both were full they thenbrought him to the Central Prison. Human Rights Watch interview with Yazid,January 9, 2012.[165]See, for example, “Syria Vows ‘Decisive’ Response inJisr al-Shughour,” BBC News, June 6, 2011, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-13677200(accessed June 25, 3012).[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Jalal, January 8,2012.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Jalal, January 8, 2012; Yousef, January 9, 2012.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with Isam, January 7,2012; Imad, January 8, 2012; Jalal, January 8, 2012; Khalil, January 8, 2012.[169]A detainee who was held in the Idlib Central Prisonbasement in August estimated that there were 800 detainees there. Human RightsWatch interview with Isam, January 7, 2012. A detainee estimated that therewere 300 people on the third floor in mid-July. Human Rights Watch interviewwith Khalil, January 8, 2012.[170]Human Rights Watch interview with Yazid, January 9,2012.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Khalil, January 8,2012.Related ContentJuly 3, 2012News ReleaseSyria: Torture Centers RevealedFor 27 Detention Sites: Locations, Commanders’ Names, Torture MethodsJuly 3, 2012News ReleaseSyria: Torture Centers RevealedRegion / CountryMiddle East/North Africa SyriaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch