INVESTIGATE= =working 
withU.S.
Agricultural Migrant 
Workers (jornaleros) What is the Jornaleros 
SAFE Project?
What is the 
H2A visa?Since May
1.Sonora 
2.Baja California3.San Luis Potosí4.Aguascalientes5.Guanajuato6.Hidalgo7.Mexico State8.Guerrero9.Veracruz10.OaxacaVISA 
H2A
VISA 
H2AVISA 
H2AVISA 
H2A
VISA 
H2AVISA 
H2AVISA 
H2AThe causes of 
LABOR RIGHTS 
AND HIRING 
VIOLATIONS that 
The lack of useful 
information and the difficulty of accessing that information are some of the main problems agricultural workers
face when trying to 
identify problems or defend themselves in situations of abuse.Control mechanisms used by recruiters and supervisors, such as black lists and threats of excluding workers from the selection process, lead workers not to ask questions and not to do anything that would keep them from reaching their main objective (which is to support their families and improve their lives) rather than defending their rights.CRS/
MéxicoCITA
Bi-national  ORGANIZATION 
Objective Is to establish a contracting 
and work model for U.S. 
agricultureStrives to promote protections for temporary agriculture workers with an H-2A temporary visa
Migrant Worker Populations in Mexico
GWJAGlobal Workers 
Justice Alliance 
The MISSION is to 
ENSURE that migrant workers in the U.S.
can obtain justice or reparations for harm suffered when their labor rights are violated.GWJA has created a CROSS-BORDER network of advocates and their organizations in the workers’ countries of origin.DPMHThe Pastoral 
Dimension of Human Mobility 
Is the part of the Mexican 
Bishops’ Commission for 
Social Ministry that deals 
with pastoral work withmigrants.  Catholic Relief 
Services
International 
Humanitarian Aid AgencyUFWUnited Farm 
Workers
50 
añosLargest agricultural 
workers union in the United States for more 
Has been at the forefront of the struggle to ensure a more just treatment of farm workers. 
It has become a recognized voice on migration issues, as well as, migration policy inside Mexico 
Has been a leader in promoting some of the most important proposals for changing current migration law. jornaleros
safeIs part of the U.S. Catholic 
Church’s work internationally 
Works on both migration policy issues between Mexico and the U.S., as well as, within Mexico. CRS Mexico has nine years of experience with UFW CITA
DPMH CRSGWAJ
 jornaleros
safe
GLOBAL WORKERS            
            JUSTICE ALLIANCE
2010 
 538
135Jornaleros SAFE has worked on documenting 
experiences in 10 jurisdictions of the country:
Records from interviews 
with agricultural workers1
2
43
5
76
9
810 jornaleros
safe
Communities in Mexico
Jornaleros  
SAFEIt is a TEMPORARY 
VISA that allows for 
recruitment of foreign 
guest workers for 
agricultural WORK 
IN THE U.S.
U.S.
VISA 
H2A
VISA 
H2A
VISA 
H2AVISA 
H2AVISA 
H2AVISA 
H2A
VISA 
H2AVISA 
H2A VISA 
H2A 
 only intervention in the 
application process 
(within Mexico) is for  
the provision of visas.
The Mexican governmentMexican agricultural workers receive 
83% of the visas issued under the H-2A program.
agricultural 
were hired through 
the H-2A programEUA 
201083% PROGRAM 
H2A 
Mexican
Mexican17% 
Other 
nationalities
Other 
nationalities93.5% PROGRAM 
H2A 
6.5%  IS NOT 
INVOLVED
 at all in the regulations 
related to the H-2A 
visa program.The government´s
more than
55,000
of them WORKERS as long as there 
are not enough 
sufficient workers 
in the U.S.The H2A visas
 allow U.S. employers
 to hire foreign 
agricultural 
workers 
Employers 
in the U.S, who 
cannot find or retain
 local workers 
apply with the U.S. 
government to 
hire foreign workers.
PROBLEMS 
FOUNDFraud.
Fees for getting on a waiting list.
Fees for being selected as an H-2A worker
Never received a contract or the contracts were only in English
Workers were required to pay for their own transportation
Wage violations
Inadequate housing conditions1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.Of those interviewed were not aware of their rights as agricultural workers.53% 
95% 
95% 29% 5% Of the workers experienced one or more violations of their labor rights.
Did not have a work contract or did not understand what it said.
79% Of the temporary agricultural workers did not know which employer they were working for.
28% 31% 
Did not report any kind of violation.1% 
99%  Received information from the Mexican government.Of the temporary agricultural 
workers interviewed said they have received information from the government of the United States.
42.6% Of the workers paid to receive a work offer or to obtain a job.
Illegal fees range from   31 to   350
35% of the workers took out loans 
in the amounts of    300 to    1,000 to pay for these fees or the costs of the trip.Do not know the name of the recruiter, in spite of the fact that the information about the employer is on the visa itself.21% Of the workers had a work contract that they could understand.
Jornaleros  found four 
models of recruitmentTypes of fraud where found 
where workers had to 
pay anywhere from 
Payment to be put on 
waiting lists
Fees for being selected 
as H-2A workers
Fraud related to illegal 
recruitment fees
Fraud related to “free visas” o 
“visas libres”
Fraudulent promises of workSAFE
The predominant 
model in Mexico is that of the 
Of those interviewed used this model, which is rife with fraud and illegal fees.Contractor 
Recruiter
Of the workers would like to return to the U.S. to work again even if they have been subject to some type of abuse.Given the total lack of employment opportunities and the low wages in their own countries, agricultural migrants are even willing to be victims of fraud, to pay illegal commissions, or deal with poor working conditions as long as they can get paid work that will help them support their families.Documenting and 
providing basic information about recruiters
Locations where 
recruitment is occurring
And the people 
involved in the process, can help prevent fraud
Mexico and the United 
States should create mechanisms to require more information from employers when they request permission to hire foreign workers.It is necessary to create a national or bi-national mechanism that can inform workers
about their rights and 
channel their reports of abuse for appropriate action.
That Mexico protect the conditions of employment and recruitment of farm workers to ensure their rights.It is the joint 
effort of five non-governmental organizations
Centro 
Independiente de Trabajadores Agrícolas (Independent Agricultural Workers Center)
for low wage 
agricultural work
The visas Do not allow either permanent residency or 
citizenship to the US for temporary workers
Workers are only brought in to workH2A 
40 to   1,000
The recruiter or 
contractor model 
Annexes, footnotes pageThis is the dominant model in 
which an employer hires the 
services of a recruiter  
who ﬁnds, hires, and brings 
workers to the United States. 
1 The number of fraud victims comes from the 
testimonies of those interviewed.  Fraud has become a huge issue and many people from the same community are victims, so each informant reported other cases of workers from their communities who had been victims of fraud. The number of victims and the quantities given were calculated by projecting the information of those interviewed.
2 This amount is approximate. We do not have exact 
numbers and rely on the testimonies of those interviewed. A large part of the money given to the contractors came from small loan programs or from family members. The exchange rate used here was 12.8 pesos per dollar.
3 Updated numbers in April 2013. The community 
initiative model
Workers from a community have direct 
communication with the employer. The community 
decides which workers will go, they take care of 
their own paperwork in Mexico, and the employer 
takes care of the necessary procedures on the US 
side. (There is a close relationship of trust 
between the employer and the worker community 
and so they do not use intermediaries.)The community 
self-protection model
RECOMMENDATIONSCommunity authorities meet with 
recruiters. They establish the 
recruitment parameters and hold 
contractors responsible for labor 
rights violations. If the recruiter does 
not accept the community’s 
conditions, they are banned from 
recruiting in that community.How the Project 
Works?
Date
People 
Interviewed# of Fraud 
victims1 Amt of 
money2Type
of fraud
Total
Detected3222$ 20,725,800 mil pesos
(US    1,658,064)3,335 12
events