Human Trafficking on Temporary 
Foreign Work Visas in the U.S.A.23A Sample of Federal Cases with Guestworkers1 
Claiming Human Trafficking 
Human trafficking, the use of force, fraud, or coercion to obtain some type of labor or 
commercial sex act, afflicts millions of men, women, and children around the world, including in 
the United States. Traffickers often target potential victims who are vulnerable for any number 
of reasons, including economic precarity, lack of a social network, and irregular immigration 
status. In the US, trafficking victims are not limited to US citizens, legal permanent residents, 
nor  undocumented migrants, but also encompass guestworkers, legally present in the US, who 
are subject to extreme exploitation that often amounts to human trafficking. Inherent weakness 
in US temporary foreign worker programs, such as poor program oversight, immigration 
status tied to a single sponsoring employee, and a hidden workforce, expose guestworkers 
to the abuse of unscrupulous employers. Trafficking occurs on every temporary work visa  
and temporary foreign workers make up a disturbing portion of the identified victims of  
human trafficking.
Several sources over the past few years have described the pervasiveness of human trafficking 
on temporary foreign work visas. In April of 2018, Polaris, operator of the National Human 
Trafficking Hotline, released a report detailing human trafficking of non-immigrant visa holders. 
From 2015 through 2017, Polaris identified 797 victims of trafficking who held a work visa at 
the time of their abuse. During the 2016 calendar year alone, the National Human Trafficking 
Hotline and the BeFree Textline identified 1,067 labor trafficking victims in the United States, 
and 342 (representing 32% of the total) were holders of temporary non-immigrant visas.2
Data published by the Human Trafficking Legal Center indicates a significant number of 
federal human trafficking cases involved victims holding non-immigrant work visas. From 2003 
through 2017, 261 civil suits containing claims of human trafficking were filed in federal court. 
Of those, 122 alleged the trafficking of a non-immigrant visa holder. According to this data, 
1 U.S. guestworker programs are also called temporary foreign worker programs, and participants can be referred to as 
guestworkers, temporary foreign workers, or non-immigrant visa holders. All three designations are used here to refer to 
the participants in legal, temporary work programs overseen by the U.S. Government. 
2 Crowe, S. (2018, June). Human Trafficking on Temporary Work Visas: A Data Analysis 2015-2017. Polaris. Retrieved from 
https://polarisproject.org/sites/default/files/Polaris%20Temporary%20Work%20Visa%20Report.pdf2nearly half of the civil human trafficking federal lawsuits filed counted non-immigrant work visa 
holders as victims. These victims worked legally under one of eleven visa classifications, from 
the more commonly known H-2A agriculture visa to the lesser known A-3 and G-5 domestic  
worker visas.3 
In 2014, the Urban Institute and Northeastern University studied 122 closed labor trafficking 
victim service records from service providers in four United States cities. The vast majority 
of trafficking survivors sampled (71 percent) entered the U.S. on a temporary visa. The most 
common temporary visas were H-2A visas for work in agriculture and H-2B visas for jobs in 
hospitality, construction, and restaurants. The study also identified female domestic servitude 
victims who had arrived in the United States on diplomatic, business, or tourist visas.4
The Visa Transparency Anti-Trafficking (VTAT) Act would create a standardized reporting 
system across nonimmigrant visa categories that authorize work, and require that this 
information be made public. Anti-human trafficking organizations could then identify where 
traffickers are operating abroad, develop targeted outreach campaigns to prevent human 
trafficking, and warn vulnerable workers and U.S. embassies in source countries. U.S. non-
governmental organizations could identify U.S.-based traffickers, inform law enforcement, 
and educate workers about their rights. Researchers and policymakers could use the data to 
identify systemic failures in U.S. worker visa programs and correct them, thus protecting both 
foreign and U.S. workers. Robust data reporting on and transparency in U.S. non-immigrant 
visa programs are important tools for combatting human trafficking in the U.S.
3 The Human Trafficking Legal Center. (2017) Database of Federal cases containing claims of human trafficking. Report 
generated January 2017.
4 Owens, C., Dank, M., Farrell, A., Breaux, J., Banuelos, I., Pfeffer, R., et al. (2014, October 21). Understanding the Organization, 
Operation, and Victimization Process of Labor Trafficking in the United States. Urban Institute, Justice Policy Center. 
Retrieved from https://www.urban.org/research/publication/understanding-organization-operation-and-victimization-
process-labor-trafficking-united-states/view/full_report3
Case Studies Across the U.S.
California  
Pg. 4
Oklahoma
Pg. 5Louisiana
Pg. 12 Georgia
Pg. 9
Florida
Pg. 13Oregon  
Pg. 7
New York  
Pg. 11Minnesota  
Pg. 8
Missouri
Pg. 6Kentucky
Pg. 10
Michigan
Pg. 144CALIFORNIA
A-3: Domestic Workers Employed by Diplomats
U.S. v. Penzato et al. 
Giuseppe Penzato, an Italian Consulate official in California, and his wife, Kesia Penzato, 
sponsored the entry of a domestic worker from Brazil on an A-3 visa. The couple promised 
the woman free room and board, as well as $1500 per month to clean their home and care 
for their children. Instead, she was kept as a virtual prisoner; according to the prosecution, 
the Penzatos paid her only $500, withheld food, and abused her physically and verbally. The 
woman escaped after several months and sued her employers for human trafficking and labor 
law violations. The couple pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of conspiring to possess an 
illegal identification document and agreed to pay $13,000 to the victim.5
Potential impact of VTAT:  The data required by the bill will reveal the country the domestic 
worker came from and the zip code and nationality of the employer. This information will allow 
anti-trafficking advocates to reach out to the Italian consulate to provide technical assistance 
and training to their employees about the rights of domestic workers and enlist the embassy’s 
assistance to build effective oversight protocols. If patterns of human trafficking are detected 
from the same countries of origin, then efforts can be coordinated around A-3 recruitment in 
that specific country.
5 Egelko, B. (2013, April 18). Plea deal for ex-Italian consular worker, wife. San Francisco Gate. Retrieved from https://www.
sfgate.com/crime/article/Plea-deal-for-ex-Italian-consular-worker-wife-4446446.php5OKLAHOMA
B-1: Business Visitors 
U.S. v. John Pickle Company 
“John Pickle of Tulsa, Oklahoma and owner of John Pickle Company (JPC), an oil industry 
parts manufacturer, was sued by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
for fraudulently recruiting 52 male foreign workers under the B-1 Temporary Business Visa 
[specifically, the B-1 in lieu of H-3 training visa]. JPC contracted with Al-Samit International 
to handle the overseas recruitment of skilled welders from India who were promised travel, 
accommodation, medical insurance, overtime, and the opportunity for salary increases. Instead, 
these workers were subjected to contract fraud, wage abuse, forced to live on their worksite 
in substandard conditions, falsely imprisoned, subjected to phone tapping, food rationing, 
restrictions on their religious freedom, and repeated threats. Their passports, visas, and return 
airfares were confiscated under the guise of ‘safekeeping’ and they were denied further access 
to these documents. They were forced to perform janitorial work and other menial tasks not 
previously outlined in their contracts. The EEOC case was joined with related civil actions filed 
by the workers that alleged false imprisonment, minimum wage violations under the Fair Labor 
Standards Act (FLSA), deceit, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. In the case ruling, 
the federal judge ordered the JPC to pay $1.24 million to 52 foreign workers.”6
Potential impact of VTAT:  The B-1 in lieu of H-3 training visa is a visa that the public and 
policymakers know little about—it is virtually hidden in plain sight. There is no publicly reported 
information on this B-1 subcategory. Under the VTAT, the workers will have access to previous 
year’s information if available and allow them to verify a job offer with previous workers and the 
employer. Local anti-trafficking organizations will also know B-1 workers are present and be 
able to conduct know-your-rights efforts.
6 Scaperlanda, M. A. (2005). Human Trafficking in the Heartland: Greed, Visa Fraud, and the Saga of 53 Indian Nationals 
“Enslaved” by a Tulsa Company, Loyola University of Chicago International Law Review, 2(2), 219. Retrieved from https://
lawecommons.luc.edu/lucilr/vol2/iss2/56MISSOURI
B-1: Business Visitors (continued)
U.S. v. Liu 
This trafficking case involved two domestic workers with B-1 visas. Hsien-Hsien Liu, a Taiwanese 
envoy based in Kansas City, Missouri, was indicted for fraud in foreign labor recruiting in 
2011. After bringing two Filipina nationals to the United States on B-1 visas to work as her 
housekeepers, Liu only paid them a portion of their contracted salary and forced them to work 
long hours without holidays or breaks. Additionally, Liu used surveillance cameras to monitor 
the two trafficking victims who were unable to leave the residence. Federal prosecutors held 
Liu in custody for 78 days after her arrest and she was not granted diplomatic immunity. She 
waived her right to grand jury and pled guilty on the lesser charges. That year, she was ordered 
to pay $80,044 in criminal restitution to these victims and a judge ordered her deportation 
after she paid over $11,000 in fines. The federal government determined that the two Filipina 
nationals were labor trafficking victims and they received certification from Health and Human 
Services, which granted them eligibility to access public benefits and services to the same 
extent as refugees.7
Potential impact of VTAT:  The B-1 personal servant subcategory is another “hidden” visa. 
The bill requires disclosure of the nationality of the employer and her zip code, which at least 
notifies local anti-human trafficking organizations of the presence of the domestic workers and 
their countries of origin. Domestic workers can receive help earlier when their presence is 
known. Advocates can discern patterns of trafficking by cross-referencing VTAT data with lists 
of employers known for exploiting workers.
7  Morris, M. (2011, November 18). Taiwanese envoy admits guilt in labor fraud case. Kansas City Star. Retrieved from 
https://www.kansascity.com/news/local/article299750/Taiwanese-envoy-admits-guilt-in-labor-fraud-case.html7OREGON
E-2: Investor Visa
U.S. vs. Jumroon
In February of 2018, Paul Jumroon pled guilty to forced labor and other charges after Federal 
prosecutors exposed his E-2 visa scheme. The E-2 visa program is reserved for foreign nationals 
that invest significant funds in a U.S. business and for employees critical to the operation of that 
business. Jumroon fraudulently obtained visas for Thai nationals with the purpose of requiring 
them to labor in his Oregon restaurants for little or no wages. In addition to confiscating travel 
documents and threatening workers with deportation, Jumroon also created a situation of debt 
bondage by making his victims believe that they owed him considerable amounts of money 
to cover their travel and living expenses. Using these threats and inflated debt, he obligated 
workers to labor 12 hours a day, six or seven days a week, with little compensation.8
Potential impact of VTAT:  Tens of thousands of E-2 Investor Visas are granted each year, yet 
little is known about the investments and employers that bring non-immigrants to the US under 
this visa. Investors bring employees from their home country that perform an executive or 
supervisory role, or are skilled workers with special qualifications that are essential to the efficient 
operation of the US investment. The wage data required by the VTAT will reveal potentially 
exploitative employers. Law enforcement and advocates can examine wage data related to 
the particular employers and businesses that bring in non-immigrants under the investment 
categories and compare it to comparable positions in similar enterprises. Comparatively low 
wages could signal potentially fraudulent investment schemes and exploitation of workers.
8 Russell, M. (2018, February 27). Thai restaurant owner pleads guilty to forced labor, visa fraud. The Oregonian. Retrieved 
from https://www.oregonlive.com/news/index.ssf/2018/02/thai_restaurant_owner_pleads_g.html8MINNESOTA
F-1: Students
U.S. v. Sukhtipyaroge
Sukhtipyaroge, 71, of Maplewood, Minnesota, was charged with the forced labor of a teenager 
whom Sukhtipyaroge held in the basement of his restaurant. The victim, who was 18 years 
old when he arrived in 2015 from the Dominican Republic on a student visa, came to the U.S. 
on promises of schooling and a better life but was obligated to work for Sukhtipyaroge under 
a “debt-bondage arrangement.” He met the victim through an organization that connects poor 
families in the Dominican Republic with Americans who can sponsor their children to go to 
school on a student visa. Though the victim attended high school for a time, Sukhtipyaroge 
told him shortly after his arrival that he could no longer attend classes and that he had to work 
in Sukhtipyaroge’s restaurant. The young man was promised $500 a month for working as 
a dishwasher, but in fact was paid less than $1 per hour. Sukhtipyaroge also told the victim 
that he had to engage in sexual acts. The victim feared immigration consequences after he 
stopped attending school and worried for the safety of his family in the Dominican Republic if he 
didn’t do as he was told by Sukhtipyaroge. Federal prosecutors allege that Sukhtipyaroge used 
“coercion, psychological abuse, intimidation, and threats of legal process to maintain control” 
of the alleged victim, both as “forced laborer” and “a continued victim of Sukhtipyaroge’s  
sexual assaults.”9
Potential impact of VTAT:  This legislation requires that the government report the business 
name and location of any employer that uses non-immigrant workers. This information, 
combined with details on employers with a history of exploitation, will help students  
identify potentially risky opportunities and allow advocates and law enforcement to investigate 
potential traffickers.
9 Covington, H. and Browning, D. (2017, August 4) Feds charge owner of popular Thai restaurant with forced labor. 
Star Tribune. Retrieved from http://www.startribune.com/feds-charge-owner-of-popular-thai-restaurant-with-forced-
labor/438559513/9GEORGIA
H-1B: Specialty Occupations
U.S. v. Kalu
Kizzy Kalu of Highlands Ranch, Colorado and Philip Langerman of McDonough, Georgia owned 
and operated Foreign Healthcare Professional Group (FHPG), which recruited foreign nationals 
to be employed as teaching professionals with high paying salaries at the unaccredited Adam 
University. The victims paid $6500 up front in order to secure their H-1B guestworker visas, and 
once they arrived in the U.S., they were forced to work in nursing homes and long-term care 
facilities rather than as nurse instructor supervisors. Additionally, they were paid considerably 
less than what they had been promised and in some instances, Kalu terminated the contract 
of these victims while forcing them to seek employment elsewhere, while requiring them to 
continue paying a monthly fee to FHPG. When the nurses refused, Kalu threatened them with 
deportation and said he would notify U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) of his 
withdrawal of their visas. Langerman pled guilty to conspiracy charges and cooperated with 
the government to receive three years’ probation. Kalu was convicted on 89 counts including 
mail fraud, visa fraud, human trafficking, and money laundering and was sentenced to 13 years 
in federal prison. Both defendants are responsible for $3.8 million in restitution owed to the 
victims involved in this case.10
Potential impact of VTAT:  The bill will make it easier for potential future H-1B workers and local 
anti-trafficking organizations to verify information about employers and confirm whether U.S. 
job offers are legitimate. Wage transparency will also let workers compare what the recruiter is 
offering to what the employer told the U.S. government the wages would be. A gross difference 
could be an indicator of a human trafficking scheme.
10 McGhee, T. (2013, June 4). Kizzy Kalu lured nurses to U.S. with promises of high pay, prosecutors say. Denver Post. 
Retrieved from https://www.denverpost.com/2013/06/04/kizzy-kalu-lured-nurses-to-u-s-with-promises-of-high-pay-
prosecutors-say/10KENTUCKY
H-2A: Agricultural Workers
Gutierrez Morales et al. v. Planck et al.
In this human trafficking case, nine Mexican workers were brought to the U.S. on H-2A 
agricultural visas to work on tobacco farms in Kentucky. On arrival, their employer confiscated 
their passports, restricting their movement and effectively trapping them. The victims were 
subjected to abysmal housing conditions infested with fleas and bedbugs. In addition, rather 
than receiving a legal wage, they were paid on a piece rate basis, earning on average only $6 
per hour. The victims found assistance with a legal aid organization, and the employers and 
victims reached a settlement agreement.11
Potential impact of VTAT:  H-2A is one of the visas that offers at least a minimum amount of 
public information regarding workers and employers participating in the program. However, we 
know very little about which employers actually get the visas and hire H-2A workers. At present, 
anti-trafficking groups must be proactive to review the clearance orders that are posted on the 
DOL’s online i-certification portal before they are removed or FOIA the local State Workforce 
Agency to find out what farms requested workers and where they are (farmworker organizations 
regularly do outreach based on this data). This bill will make access to that information easier 
and more precise, since it will also include DOS data which reveals the visas that were actually 
issued to employers.
11 Knaub, K. (2017, February 6) Trial Nixed Following Settlement In Mexican Farm Worker Case. Law360. Retrieved from 
https://www.law360.com/articles/888781/trial-nixed-following-settlement-in-mexican-farm-worker-case11NEW  YORK
H-2B: Non-Agricultural Workers
Vazquez et al. v. Karageorgis
Food vendor Pantelis (“Peter”) Karageorgis was accused of abusing H-2B workers from Mexico 
that he recruited to sell his products at fairs and carnivals throughout the Northeastern U.S. 
Several workers filed a class action lawsuit against Karageorgis and his business “Peter’s 
Fine Greek Food Inc.” alleging wage theft and severe abuse amounting to human trafficking 
during the summer of 2010. When the workers were recruited in Mexico, they were promised 
wages of nearly $11.00 per hour plus overtime for any hours worked in excess of 40 per week. 
However, the Plaintiffs claimed that they regularly worked for Karageorgis in excess of 40 hours 
per week, sometimes more than 17 hours in a day for weeks at a time, received little regular 
rest, and were in fact paid only $1-3 per hour of work that they performed. The workers were 
also forced to stay in small and bedbug infested travel trailers, were given inadequate food and 
water, and had their travel documents withheld from them while they worked. It was only after 
a few workers became so sick from insect bites, exhaustion, and dehydration at the NY State 
Fair in Syracuse, NY that they sought out medical attention and the abuse was discovered. The 
workers sued Karageorgis and his company for wages and recompense for human trafficking. 
They were able to reach a settlement with the Defendants in federal court.12
12 O’Brien, J. (2010, November 18). NY state fair vendor is accused of human trafficking for underpaying migrants. Syracuse 
Post-Standard. Retrieved from https://www.syracuse.com/news/index.ssf/2010/11/ny_state_fair_ vendor_is_accuse.html12LOUISIANA
H-2B: Non-Agricultural Workers (continued)
David, et al. v. Signal International LLC, et al. 
Following Hurricane Katrina, the shipbuilding company Signal International recruited over 500 
guestworkers from India to work in Louisiana for construction and rebuilding projects under the 
H-2B guestworker program. These workers were recruited for good-paying jobs with career 
potential, falsely promised green cards, and charged exorbitant broker fees of up to $20,000. 
Once in the U.S., these workers were subjected to unsafe living conditions in trailer camps and 
charged extremely high fees for rent and food. The Indian workers’ belongings were confiscated, 
they lived in crowded trailers in a closed campground, and they were not allowed to leave the 
camp or receive visitors. The situation came to light after a worker attempted suicide following 
retribution for seeking outside counsel to learn about his rights. The U.S. Equal Opportunity 
Employment Commission (EEOC) pursued a civil suit against Signal International under the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination based on national origin, because only 
the Indian guestworkers endured the exploitative conditions. In February 2014, a federal jury 
found Signal International guilty of labor trafficking, fraud, racketeering, and discrimination. The 
five plaintiffs were awarded $14 million in compensatory and punitive damages.13
Potential impact of VTAT:  The bill will have a similar impact on H-2B workers as on the H-2A 
visa holders as described above.
13 Finn, K. (2015, February 18). Indian workers win $14 million in U.S. labor trafficking case. Reuters. Retrieved from https://
www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-louisiana-trafficking-idUSKBN0LN0382015021913FLORIDA
J-1: Exchange Visitors 
U.S. v. Cooper 
Jeffrey Jason Cooper, 46, recruited a group of female university students from Kazakhstan on 
J-1 Summer Work Travel visas by promising them work at a yoga studio in Miami, Florida. The 
young women were told that they would work as receptionists, setting up appointments and 
answering phone calls while enjoying cultural immersion in Miami. When they arrived, however, 
they found that the yoga studio did not exist; instead, they were forced to run an erotic massage 
parlor from Cooper’s condo and perform sex acts for customers. Cooper, who was operating 
under a false name, advertised the women as “gorgeous” and “drama free” on Backpage.com. 
He told them that if they did not obey his orders, their visas would be revoked and they would 
not be paid. The students were rescued by law enforcement after several months, and Cooper 
was convicted of 11 sex trafficking-related charges and sentenced to 30 years in prison.14
14 U.S. Attorney’s Office, Southern District of Florida, U.S. Department of Justice. (2016, November 18). Florida Man 
Convicted of Sex Trafficking in Connection with Human Trafficking Scheme Targeting Foreign University Students. United 
States Department of Justice. Retrieved from https://www.justice.gov/usao-sdfl/pr/florida-man-convicted-sex-trafficking-
connection-human-trafficking-scheme-targeting14MICHIGAN
J-1: Exchange Visitors (continued) 
U.S. v. Aleksandr Maksimenko
Aleksandr Maksimenko and his co-defendants were ringleaders in a conspiracy to bring women 
from Eastern Europe to work as exotic dancers in strip clubs in Detroit, Michigan. Posing as 
a legitimate business, Beauty Search Inc., the defendants promised participants through the 
J-1 Cultural Exchange Program an opportunity to learn English and work at local restaurants. 
These young women were forced to dance at strip clubs by threats of physical violence and 
deportation, document confiscation, debt bondage, and confinement. In particular, one woman 
was forced to dance for 12 hours a day, six days a week, and forced to meet a daily quota of 
$1,000 a day, or face physical and sexual abuse. Similarly, the victims were made to believe 
that they incurred significant debt for travel and entry into the U.S. The defendants pleaded 
guilty to involuntary servitude, money laundering, and immigration conspiracies. Maksimenko 
was sentenced to 14.5 years in prison and ordered to pay $1.5 million in restitution and his co-
defendants received similar sentences.15
Potential impact of VTAT: Summer Work Travel is one of the many J-1 work programs about 
which there is little publicly available information; others include the Au Pair, Camp Counselor, 
Intern, and Trainee programs. The bill will require disclosure of all of the J-1 work programs, as 
well as information on the employers that hire J-1 workers. In this specific case, the sponsoring 
employer businesses did not even exist. Workers or local anti-trafficking organizations can look 
at VTAT required J-1 data from previous years to see if the employer had hired J-1 workers in 
the past. If no records are found, advocates and potential visa holders then know that further 
research is necessary to confirm whether or not the job offer and employer are legitimate.
15 U.S. Attorney’s Office, Eastern District of Michigan, U.S. Department of Justice. (2007, June 25). Livonia Man Sentenced 
To 14 Years In Prison And $1.5 Million In Restitution For Forcing Eastern European Women To Work At Detroit Area Strip 
Clubs. United States Department of Justice. Retrieved from https://www.legislationline.org/documents/id/676515789 Washington Ave., Brooklyn, NY 11238 (646) 351-1160 info@justiceinmotion.org justiceinmotion.org