Shining new light on the                 
UN MIGRANT WORKERS CONVENTION
edited by
Alan Desmond
2017Shining new light on the UN Migrant Workers Convention
Published by:
Pretoria University Law Press (PULP)
The Pretoria University Law Press (PULP)  is a publisher at the Faculty of Law,
University of Pretoria, South Africa. PULP endeavours to publish and make
available innovative, high-quality scholarly texts on law in Africa. PULP also
publishes a series of collections of legal documents related to pu blic law in Africa,
as well as text books from African countries other than South Africa. This bookwas peer reviewed prior to publication.
For more information on PULP, see www.pulp.up.ac.za
Printed and bound by:
BusinessPrint, Pretoria
To order, contact:
PULPFaculty of Law         
University of Pretoria
South Africa0002
Tel: +27 12 420 4948
Fax: +27 86 610 6668pulp@up.ac.za
www.pulp.up.ac.za
Cover:
Yolanda Booyzen, Centre for Human Rights
ISBN: 978-1-920538-73-6
© 2017iii TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgments v
Contributors vii
Foreword xiv
François Crépeau
Introduction: The continuing relevance of the 
UN ICRMW 1
Alan Desmond
Part I: Obstacles and opportunities 
The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention 24
Antoine Pécoud
Making rights in times of crisis: Civil society                         and the Migrant Workers Convention 45
Lisa Simeone and Nicola Piper
Part II: The ICRMW in inte rnational human rights law
The Migrant Workers Conven tion: A legal tool to 
safeguard migrants against arbitrary detention 72
Mariette Grange 
Indirect success? The impact and use of the                      ICRMW in other UN fora 101
Stefanie Grant & Beth Lyon  
Putting things into perspective: The added value                   of the substantive provisions of the ICRMW 129
Athanasia Georgopoulou, Tessa Antonia Schrempf                                     
& Denise Venturi
Working together to protect migrant workers:                          
ILO, the UN Convention and its Committee 151
Ryszard Cholewinski
Part III: Application of the ICRMW in selected state parties 
Universal citizens globally , foreign migrants          domestically: Disparities in the protection of                         the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador 176
Daniela Salazar 1
2
3
4
5
6
7iv Guatemala's implementation of the ICRMW:                
Emerging efforts 204
Cathleen Caron, Kathleen Griesbach, Ursula Roldan                               
& Roxana Sandoval
Mexico and the ICRMW: Protecting women                 
migrant workers            229
Gabriela Díaz Prieto and Gretchen Kuhner
The ICRMW and Sri Lanka 249
Piyasiri Wickramasekara
Part IV: Relevance notwithstanding non-ratification
The ICRMW and the US: Substantive overlap,                 political gap 278
Beth Lyon 
A vexed relationship: The ICRMW vis-à-vis                         the EU and its member states 295
Alan Desmond 
Bibliography 322
Index 36998
10
11
12v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost, I am indebted to my parents and to my uncle, Con
Desmond. For their encouragement and good counsel I wish to thank
Graziano Battistella, Linda Bosnia k, Paul De Guchteneire, Franck
Düvell, Veronica Gomez, Stefan ie Grant, Ray Jureidini, Magnus
Killander, Michele LeVoy, Beth Lyon, Siobhán Mullally, ManusO’Callaghan, René Plaetevoet, Colin Rajah, Susan Slyomovics, Kristina
Touzenis, Denise Venturi and Andrea Vi lán. I would like in particular to
thank Mariette Grange and Nicola Piper whose support for and
participation in this project from the outset has been invaluable. Both have
been a constant source of insightful ideas and sound suggestions. I am also
extremely grateful to François Crépeau for so generously offering to writethe foreword.
This book has its genesis in a conference I organised under the auspices
of the Global Campus at the European Inter-University Centre for Human
Rights and Democratisation (EIUC) in  July 2014 at which a number of the
contributors to the present volume deli vered presentations. I am grateful to
Valentina Abita of the Global Camp us and to Florence Benoît-Rohmer,
then Secretary-General of EIUC, for making that conference possible.
Each chapter in this collection und erwent a double-blind peer review
process involving evaluation by two ex ternal reviewers. I would therefore
like to express my gratitude to the following individuals, each of whomreviewed at least one chapter: 
Particular thanks go to Jan Klabbe rs who reviewed three chapters and
to Mariette Grange and Nicola Pipe r who, in addition to contributing
chapters of their own to the collection, also acted as reviewers for some ofthe pieces included. 
The greatest debt of gratitude is, of course, owed to the authors of the 12
chapters which together make up this collection. It has been a pleasure to
work with them and I am grateful for the initial alacrity with which theyTanya Basok David Keane
Wolfgang Benedek Jan Klabbers
Laurie Berg Magdalena Kmak
Marco Borraccetti Sonia Morano-FoadiLinda Bosniak Ronaldo Munck
Vahan Bournazian Lori Nessel
Elvira Dominguez-Redondo Jan NiessenSuzanne Egan Pia Oberoi
Rolando Garcia Miron Nicola Piper
Felipe Gómez Isa Bernard Ryan
Mariette Grangevi accepted the invitation to contribute  and their patience during the book’s
long gestation. I would also like to thank the individuals who produced
work in draft form on the implementation of the ICRMW in Azerbaijan,Bosnia and Herzegovina, Morocco, Uganda, the Philippines and
Uruguay. Time constraints meant that these draft chapters could not be
included in this volume. I hope that  this is a temporary setback and that
they will see the light of day,  sooner rather than later. 
Last but not least, Lizette Hermann at Pretoria University Law Press
shepherded the project through the en tire production process. She has been
a model of professionalism, good ch eer and equanimity in the face of
countless queries and endless emails.
I would like to dedicate this book to three individuals whose work in
connection with migrants’ rights an d human rights more generally has
been a source of inspiration, namely , Mariette Grange, Angela Melchiorre
and Siobhán Mullally: mo mhíle buíochas libh.
Alan Desmond
Leicester, November 2017vii CONTRIBUTORS
Cathleen Caron is the founder and executive director of Justice in Motion,
a Brooklyn-based nonprofit that protects migrants’ rights by ensuring
justice across borders. An attorney and summa cum laude graduate of the
American University Washington Co llege of Law, Cathleen has over
twenty years of human rights experience in the United States and abroad. 
Prior to launching Justice in Motion  (formerly Global Workers Justice
Alliance), Cathleen directed a needs assessment of human trafficking inEast Timor for the Alola Foundation. She worked in Florida as a staff
attorney with the Migrant Farmwork er Justice Project, successfully
litigating class action employment cases. She also consulted on labour
migration issues with Realizing Rights: The Ethical Globalization
Initiative, run by the former Presiden t of Ireland. Before law school,
Cathleen spent more than three ye ars in Guatemala assisting in human
rights litigation, researching inte rnal displacement, and directing an
indigenous rights programme for the United Nations.
Cathleen has been recognised with  her law school’s Outstanding Law
Graduate Award, the Peter Cicchino Award for Outstanding PublicAdvocacy, and the American Constitutional Society’s David Carliner
Public Interest Award. She has published articles in Human Rights Brief,
Clearinghouse Review Journal of Poverty Law and Policy and The Christian
Science Monitor. 
Ryszard Cholewinski is the Senior Migration Specialist in the
International Labour Organisation (ILO)’s Regional Office for Arab States
in Beirut. Previously, he was the Migr ation Policy Specialist in the Labour
Migration Branch in the Conditions of Work and Equality Department at
ILO Headquarters in Geneva. His respon sibilities include work on policy,
research, training and technical cooperation activities, in collaborationwith other units in ILO Headquarters, field offices and ILO’s tripartite
constituents, with a view to advanc ing ILO’s rights-based approach to
labour migration while recogn ising labour market needs.
Prior to joining the ILO in September 2010, Ryszard was a Senior
Migration Policy and Research Speciali st at the International Organisation
for Migration (IOM) in Geneva and Re ader in Law at the University of
Leicester in the United Kingdom.
He is a lawyer by training with 13 years of previous experience in an
academic setting. He has written wide ly on international labour migration,
the human rights of migrants, and various aspects of European law andpolicy relating to migration and as ylum. Most recently, he was the lead
author of Addressing governance challenges in a changing labour migration
landscape , the report for the general discussion on labour migration at the
106th Session of the International La bour Conference in June 2017. He
was also one of the principal authors of the Handbook for
Parliamentarians on Migration, human rights and governance  (October 2015),
a joint publication of the Inter-Parl iamentary Union (IPU), the ILO andviii the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR).
He holds a doctoral degree (LL.D.) from the University of Ottawa, a
Master of Laws degree (LL.M.) from the University of Saskatchewan, and
a Bachelor of Laws degree (LL.B.) from the University of Leicester.
Alan Desmond is a lecturer in law at the University of Leicester. Before
joining Leicester Law School in September 2016 he worked at third-level
institutions in Ireland, Italy and Po land. He has published on the topic of
migrants’ rights in the  European Journal of Migration and Law , Human Rights
Law Review  and the European Journal of International Law.  He has been a
Visiting Researcher at Harvard Law School and UCLA School of Law and
has delivered presentations on the Migrant Workers Convention in
Armenia, Ireland, Italy, Russia and the UK. Before entering legal
academia, Alan worked as a freelance print and broadcast journalist inPoland and wrote a number of awar d-winning Irish language books.
Athanasia Georgopoulou holds an LL.B. Degree in Law and an LL.M. in
Sociology of Law from the Faculty of Law of the National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens and a European Master's Degree in
Human Rights and Democratisation from the European Inter-UniversityCentre for Human Rights and Demo cratisation (EIUC), Venice. Since
2009 she has worked as a lawyer in several law firms in Athens and sinceAugust 2015 she has been a member of  the legal unit of the Greek Council
for Refugees, currently working mainly  on immigration detention and the
implementation of a UNHCR detent ion programme. She co-authored the
AIDA country report for Greece (2016) and is also member of the Groupof Lawyers for the rights of migrants and refugees, based in Athens.
Mariette Grange , Senior Researcher at the Gl obal Detention Project, is a
researcher and human rights practitioner. Mariette has held top
international human rights advoca cy positions. She has extensive
experience of international human ri ghts mechanisms and international
relations. Mariette co-established the Amnesty International office to theUnited Nations in Geneva and provided leadership to Human RightsWatch during the institution-building  years of the Human Rights Council.
Mariette has helped establish rights based programmes and operations onmigrant and refugee issues at the World Council of Churches and theInternational Catholic Migration Commission. She has coordinated
external relations at the International Council on Human Rights Policy;done research on UN treaty bodies’ jurisprudence and practice and
produced pilot training material on the human rights of migrants for the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Mariette advises andtrains civil society organisations and participates in academic projects and
inter-government al processes.
Mariette holds an MA in translat ion from the Institut Supérieur de
Traduction et Interprétation, Brussels. Her MA thesis focused on
anthropology and the caste system. She  has published extensively in her
area of expertise in English, French and Spanish and believes in multi-
disciplinary and innovative ap proaches to migration issues.ix Stefanie Grant  is a Visiting Senior Fello w at the London School of
Economics. She has written on a rang e of topics related to human rights
and migration, including the expert paper on human rights for the Global
Commission on International Migrat ion. Her recent work has been on
irregular cross border journeys, identification of those who die or go
missing, and the rights of their families.
Stefanie has headed Amnesty Inte rnational’s Research Department,
and Amnesty’s Office in Washington DC, acted for immigrants andrefugees as a solicitor in  London, and directed the research branch of the
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva. She isChair of the Institute on Statelessne ss and Inclusion, and a trustee of the
European Network on Statelessness.   
Her publications include: ‘The US  and the international human rights
treaty system: for export only?’ in P Alston & J Crawford (eds) The future
of UN human rights treaty monitoring  (2000); ‘Recording and identifying
European frontier deaths’ (2011) European Journal of Migration and Law ;
‘Identification and tracing of dead and missing migrants’ in the IOM’s
Fatal Journeys II (2016); and Human rights of migrants in the 21st century
(2017) which she co-edited with Elsp eth Guild and Kees Groenendijk. 
Kathleen Griesbach  is a PhD Candidate in Sociology and a Paul F.
Lazarsfeld Fellow at Columbia University. Her dissertation explores therole of unstable schedules in the experiences of contingent workers,
including migrant agricultural worker s and adjunct university instructors.
She has conducted research on the Texas-Mexico border and in New York
city. Kathleen holds a B.A. in English and Latin American Studies from
New York University and an M.A. in Latin American Studies from UCSan Diego, where she conducted and pu blished research with the Mexican
Migration Field Research Programme. For her M.A. thesis she conducted
ethnographic research on local-federa l immigration enforcement in North
Carolina and southern California, in cluding 32 qualitative interviews and
work with nonprofits in both regions, and published some findings in theacademic journal Norteamérica . Kathleen worked in Madrid, Spain as a
Fulbright English Teaching Assistant from 2011-2012. She has taught in
the Culture, Art, and Technology writing programme at UC San Diego
and in Columbia’s Sociology Depart ment. Prior to pursuing her PhD,
Kathleen worked as a paralegal on ci vil rights and employment cases for
Texas RioGrande Legal Aid. Her resear ch agenda is deeply informed by
the people she met and worked with in South Texas.  
Gretchen Kuhner  is the director of The Institute for Women in Migration
(IMUMI), a Mexcian NGO that advoca tes for women migrants and their
families within the region of Mexico , the US and Central America through
legal strategies, research, comm unication and policy reform.
Gabriela Díaz Prieto  coordinates IMUMI´s research. Both Gretchen and
Gabriela have written extensively on issues related to migrant women and
human rights in the Mexican context, including a chapter on Mexico´s role
in promoting and implementing the ICRMW in Migration and human rights ,
edited by Paul de Guchteneire, Antoine Pécoud and Ryszard Cholewinski,and published by Cambridge University Press in 2009; and a study onx Mexico’s commitment to the human rights of women migrant workers,
published in 2016 by UN Women and IMUMI, http://www.
unwomen.org/-/media/headquarters/ attachments/sections/library/pub
lications/2016/20-mexicos-commitment- to-the-human-rights-of-women-
migrant-workers-2016-en.pdf?la=en&vs=3357 
Beth Lyon  is a Clinical Professor of Law and founder of the Farmworker
Legal Assistance Clinic at Cornell Law School. Professor Lyon received
her B.A. from University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, her M.S. from
Georgetown University School of Foreign Service, and her J.D. from
Georgetown University Law Centre. She was the managing editor of theGeorgetown Journal of International Law and a Ford Foundation Student
Fellow with the Comisión Andina de Juristas. After law school, Professor
Lyon was a staff attorney for Human Rights First, a consultant at the
Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions, and a Practitioner in Residence
at Washington College of Law, Am erican University. She founded the
Farmworker Legal Aid Clinic and co -founded the Community Interpreter
Internship Programme at Villanova La w School. She serves on the Board
of Directors of the Society of Amer ican Law Teachers, Latina/o Critical
Legal Theory, and Justice in Motion. Professor Lyon served on the
Advisory Group of the American Bar Association Language Access
Standards Project. Her scholarship focuses on migrant and farmworker
rights and language access to justice. Her publications include two books,entitled Global issues in immigration law and We asked for workers. We got
people instead .
Antoine Pécoud  is professor of sociology at the University of Paris 13 and
a research associate at CERI/Sciences Po. He holds a PhD in socialanthropology from the University of Oxford. Between 2003 and 2012, he
worked as an international civil servant at UNESCO Headquarters in
Paris. He is the author of Depoliticising migration. Global Governance and
international migration narratives  (Palgrave, 2015), and the co-editor of
several books and journal special issues, including Migration without
borders. Essays on the free movement of people  (Berghahn, 2007), Migration and
human rights. The United Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights(Cambridge University Press, 2009), Migration and climate change
(Cambridge University Press, 2011), The politics of international migration
management  (Palgrave, 2010) and International organizations and the politics of
migration  (Routledge, 2015).  
Nicola Piper , a political sociologist who holds a PhD from Sheffield
University/UK, is Professor of Inte rnational Migration at the University
of Sydney/Australia and the Founding Di rector of the Sydney Asia Pacific
Migration Centre. Other appointments or roles held by her include
Professorial Research Fellow at the Freiburg Institute of Advanced
Studies, Freiburg University/Germany; external advisor on migrationresearch to the UN Research Instit ute for Social Development, Geneva,
and co-founder and Vice-President of the Global Migration Policy
Associates initiative. Her research fo cuses on international migration for
work, migrants’ labour and social rights, global and regional governance
of migration as well as gender and mi gration. Her publications include the
edited volumes New perspectives on gender and migration: livelihoods, rights, andxi entitlements (2008),  South–South migration: implic ations for social policy and
development  (with Katja Hujo, 2010) and the co-authored book Critical
perspectives on global governance: righ ts and regulation in governing regimes  (with
Jean Grugel, 2007).  She is co-founder and co-e ditor of the Routledge book
series Asian Migration. 
Roxana Sandoval  graduated magna cum laud e from Universidad Rafael
Landivar Law School in Guatemala in  2015, ranking 1st in her class. She
was awarded the Landivar Excellence Award as the best student of 2015
class. Roxana participated in several moot court competitions and she and
her teammate won the Guatemalan na tional moot court competitions of
International Human Rights. In 2013 she participated in the Inter-
American Human Rights Moot Court, where her team progressed to the
semifinals, obtaining the first plac e among more than one hundred teams
from all around the world. She has al so participated as coach and judge in
several human righ ts competitions.
Roxana has focused her practice in th e area of litigation, especially in
civil and commercial procedure la w. She has experience in civil,
mercantile and labour trials, as we ll as administrative proceedings in
several state institutions , and actions for infringement of fundamental
rights and freedoms.
She has a specialisation in Commercial and Tax Law from Universidad
del Istmo Law School in Guatemala and she is currently studying for anLL.M. in International Legal Studies at New York University (NYU),focusing on international law and international human rights.
Tessa Antonia Schrempf holds a Mag.iuris degree in Austrian,
International and European law as well as a Master’s Degree in HumanRights and Democratisation (E.MA) and a B.A. in InternationalDevelopment. She currently lives in the UK where she is cross-qualifying
into English and Welsh law, whilst  working for a boutique business
consultancy firm to develop their Corporate Social Responsibility
programme, focusing on combatti ng modern forms of slavery in
transnational supply chains. Tessa  has previously worked for an
international law firm, the European  Court of Human Rights, and the
OSCE during her studies; and has been a researcher at the International
Commission of Jurists and consulta nt for the Open Society Justice
Initiative (Open Society Foundations ) where her work focused primarily
on the rule of law, judicial independence and access to justice projects. Thel a t t e r  i s  r e f l e c t e d  a l s o  i n  h e r  w o r k  a s  c o - f o u n d e r  o f  t h e  N G O  C E H R I
(Centre for the Enforcement of Human Rights International) based in
Vienna, which seeks, inter alia, to op en avenues for access to justice for
victims of historic child abus e through strategic litigation.
Lisa Simeone  is a lecturer and doctoral candidate in anthropology at the
University of Chicago, where she is  completing her dissertation on the
sociolegal, economic and political dimensions of migration from
francophone Africa to the United States. She has more than twenty years
of experience as an educator, organiser and policy specialist in the fields of
civil rights and migration, having served as both a civil-society advocate
and an official with the Office for Civil Rights of the US Department ofxii Health and Human Services. As a co nsultant with the International
Labour Organisation (ILO) and a founding member of Global Migration
Policy Associates (GMPA), she has also participated in panels andconsultations on the global governance  of migration, with a focus on non-
discrimination and social justice issues.
Ursula Roldán Andrade  is currently director of the Institute of Research
and Projection on Global and Territorial Dynamics of the Rafael Landívar
University of Guatemala. 
She holds a PhD in geography from the University of Paris I of the
Sorbonne in France and two master s, one on ‘Social Management for
Sustainable Development’ from the Chipixab Institute and the
Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain and another on ‘Geography ofEmerging and Developing Countries’ fr om Universities I, IV and VII of
Paris.
She is a social work graduate of the San Carlos University, Guatemala
and has 20 years of experience in the development of projects,programmes, analysis, pu blic policy, research reports and publications
related to agrarian issues, rural develo pment, political participation and, in
the last two years,  on migration. 
Daniela Salazar  is a law professor at Universidad San Francisco de Quito
in Ecuador. She currently serves as Vice Dean and as Co-Director of thePublic Interest  Law Clinic.
Daniela is also a Lecturer for the Master's of Law Programmes of
Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar (Ecuador) and of the Human Rights
and Democratisation in Latin America and the Caribbean Master’sProgramme offered by the International Centre for Political Studies(CIEP) of the National Universi ty of San Martín (Argentina).
She received her law degree from Universidad San Francisco de Quito
and her master's degree (LL.M.) from Columbia University.
Daniela has worked as a human rights specialist for the Inter-American
Commission of Human Rights and ha s been a consultant for, among
others, OHCHR, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, theInternational Red Cross, Human Rights  Watch and the Centre for Studies
in Freedom of Expression.
She has published articles on constitutional law, criminalisation of
social protest, freedom of expression, and the rights of migrants andrefugees.
Daniela has been a Fulbright schola r, a Rómulo Gallegos scholar, and
an appointed member of the Academic Section of Legal Sciences of theEcuadorian House of Culture.
Denise Venturi  is a PhD candidate in International Law at Scuola
Sant’Anna (Italy) and KU Leuven (Belgi um). Her research investigates the
use of the vulnerability concept in the context of SOGI-based asylum
claims. Currently, she works as Eligibility Expert at UNHCR RRSE while
previously she worked as Legal of ficer at ECRE (European Council onxiii Refugees and Exiles) focusing on st rategic litigation. She has been a
Visiting Researcher at the Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology
and an Honorary Research Assistant at the University of Liverpool.Denise holds a Master's Degree in  Law and a Postgraduate Degree in
Asylum and Immigration Law from the University of Florence, as well asa European Master's Degree in Human Rights and Democratisation
(E.MA) from EIUC (Venice) and KU Leuven. Previously she worked as a
criminal defence and immigration lawy er in Italy. She has interned with
UNHCR Bureau for Europe and PICUM and has several years ofexperience as a volunteer with NGOs dealing with refugees’ and migrants’
rights.
Piyasiri Wickramasekara  is Vice-President of Global Migration Policy
Associates; he is an internationally recognised expert in development,
migration and employment issues. He obtained his PhD in Economics
from the University of Cambridge (UK). He joined the International
Labour Organisation in 1985 and was Senior Migration Specialist 2001 to2010. He was Senior Lecturer in Ec onomics, University of Sri Lanka,
1968-1984. He has directed research and technical assistance and providedadvisory services on employment, poverty alleviation, labour market
polices and international migratio n across Asia, We st and Southern
Africa, Central and Eastern Europe, and the Middle East. His expertisecovers: Asian labour migration, gove rnance of migration, migration and
development, circular migration, rights of migrant workers, irregular
migration, and migration statistics. He steered development of the
National Labour Migration Policy in Sri Lanka in 2007-08. He was co-
drafter of the ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration (2006) and co-
authored International labour migration: A rights-based approach  (ILO 2010).
Other publications include Circular migration: A triple win or a dead end?  and
Labour migration in South Asia: A review of issues, policies and practices .xiv FOREWORD
The urgent need to recognise migrants’ 
rights and dignity
Migrants in a precarious situation are voiceless in any host society, North
and South, be they undocumented or temporary migrant workers with
very restrictive vi sas or contracts.
They constantly exercise agency an d make life-altering decisions on a
regular basis – for some, simply taking the subway is a choice that can have
huge consequences on the course of their life and that of people who
depend on them for sustenance – but they have no access to the political
stage in any host society.
And they rarely protest, contest, or ganise, unionise. Sticking their neck
out to defend their rights may mean being detected as undocumented oridentified as a trouble maker by the employer, and the consequence ofeither may be detention and deportation.
Migrants and their family and community have most often invested
beyond their means in the migration project, in time, energy, money and
physical or mental health. And migr ants often undertake this migration
project guided by a sense of duty or simply by love for their family: they
must not fail them. 
Anything that threatens this central objective in their lives is considered
dangerous. Speaking up, protesting, fi ghting for their rights is dangerous.
“Moving on” is most often a preferred strategy.
***
Two structural factors contribute to the marginalisation of such migrants.
The first structural factor is politica l. The best political system we have
ever invented to govern ourselves – electoral democracy – is based on
electoral incentive.
Without a vote, migrants provide none and politicians will not take
them into account if this might trigge r a negative electoral reaction. This is
a structural limitation of electoral de mocracy as a political system: if one
does not vote, one’s human  rights go unprotected.
The second structural factor is economic. While globalisation has
enhanced the relocation of producti on to developing countries where
labour is cheap and workers’ protecti on standards are low, such relocation
is not possible for large sectors of the economy, such as agriculture,xv construction, hospitality, care gi ving, domestic work, fisheries or
extraction, as well as informal work. 
In consequence, temporary low- wage workers and undocumented
migrants form a pliable workforce for these sectors of the economy, which
would not be profitable in an open and regulated labour market in which
citizens would request much higher wages for the same tasks.Industrialised countries have theref ore created, on their own territory,
production conditions similar to thos e in developing countries, with a view
to subsidising these sectors through the reduction in labour costs. 
Labour migration is taking place in  a context of deregulation of work
and labour markets. Salient characteristics of changes in work includeprecarisation of employment, increased informalisation of work and
economic activity, as well as deteri orating work conditions. Competitive
pressures provide an incentive for seeking and hiring labour compelled to
accept lowered labour st andards, more precarious  statuses and ‘flexible’
employment conditions, in both Global North and Global South.
The absence of such migrants from public policy debates on migration
policies means those debates are not informed by the experience of thepersons these policies affect the most.
Much of public debates and policy activity is based on stereotypes,
threats and fantasies, as was the case when policies about women weremade by committees of men. Stereotypes and fantasies fuel the nationalistpopulist agenda and discourse, reinfo rcing negative public perceptions of
migrants and increasing the pressure i n  f a v o u r  o f  e v e r  m o r e  r e p r e s s i v e
policies, in a very vicious downward spiral.
***
Yet, migrants have rights. Actually, in international human rights law as
well as in many constitutional framewor ks around the world, they have all
the fundamental rights of any person, bar two: the right to vote and beelected, and the right to enter and stay in the country. This why humanrights are human rights and not only citizens’ rights.
However, obtaining that such rights be implemented by States,
institutions and other people rests on  having the power to force others to
recognise one’s rights. In history, marginalised groups have had to wrestle
their rights from the hands of self-r ighteous majorities, through pushing
politicians to alter their discourse and attitudes and to help defeat
stereotypes and fantasies. 
For political battles and legal battles to be launched and won,
individuals and groups need to be em powered to fight fo r their rights and
defend their dignity. One can note th at, for many of such groups (women,
indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities, to take only a few
examples), although battles have be en won, the war is not over and
substantial equality is still elusive. xvi Unfortunately, unless and until such  migrants gain some electoral
traction, politicians are not going to pay much attention. We shall have to
think, in some distant future probably, to provide voting rights to all long-
term residents and not only to nation als: this could indeed change the
tonality of many public debates on migration policies.
***
It was the ambition of the ICRMW to  encapsulate the international legal
regime applying to migrant workers and their families, and to providethem with a tool of empowerment that would help them gaining access to
the legal and political recognition necessary for them to lead a dignified
life, free of human rights an d labour rights violations.
Conceptually, the Convention did not invent much, as it drew most of
its inspiration from existing instrume nts applying to all, such as the UN
human rights instruments and the ILO la bour rights instruments. It was an
attempt at synthesising the rights regi me of migrant workers as it emerged
from the already existing human ri ghts and labour rights regimes.
It was certainly seeped in its time and some of its la nguage and concepts
appear dated today, as the human righ ts doctrine has considerably evolved
and matured in the past thirty years. For example, a question one may askalmost thirty years after its negotiation is: why limit this convention to
“migrant workers and members of their families” and not include all
migrants?
But States which host most migrant workers have forcefully rejected it.
In the words of a very pro-human-rights European ambassador to the UN
in Geneva, “it is a dead duck”. In pa rticular, although not only, host States
have objected to the fact that the Convention specifies that undocumented
migrants benefit from human rights guarantees. The statement that
migrants are rights-holders is absolutely true, even self-evident, in law, but,
in the toxic nationalist populist context which has developed over the pastforty years, it is a statement which is politically unutterable on most
political stages, if the politician is to  survive the next electoral challenge. 
***
Yet, despite its ridiculous ly slow ratification rate, this convention stands
tall as a testament to how migrants should be defined, i.e. as human beings
with rights and freedoms first and foremost. Their dignity requires – as
does that of anyone – that they be lifted from precariousness, that they be
empowered to defend their rights agai nst exploitation and discrimination,
that they be able to exercise options and make choices about their futureand that of their family. 
Constraining them to remain indefi nitely locked up in constructed
precarious statuses is an offense to human dignity that needs to be
addressed. This is espe cially so considering ho w inspirational so many
migrants’ stories are, due to their ag ency, courage and imagination, in sum
the sheer grit they often demonstrat e throughout their migration journey.
What they are ready to endure for the sake of their families and
communities is often extraordinary. In this sense, host States do not havexvii the moral high ground: migrants do. Far from being villains as portrayed
too often in the media, they are considered heroes in the family lore of
millions of households. 
A t  a  t i m e  w h e n  S t a t e s  h a v e  a t  l a s t  d e c i d e d  t h a t  t h e  U n i t e d  N a t i o n s
Organisation was an appropriate foru m for discussing migration policies
and are trying to negotiate for September 2018 a “G lobal Compact on
Migration”, it is a mind-boggling paradox that the only universalinstrument dedicated to migrants rema ins so forcefully resisted. Somehow,
this does not bode well for what an y Global Compact on Migration will
look like.
This collection by a group of brilliant scholars brings forward a welcome
analysis of the 1990 Convention, its qual ities, its flaws, its interpretation
and its future, as a key piece of our world’s human rights framework, aframework which remains, after all, the ultimate legitimation tool for allpublic policies, includ ing migration policies.
François Crépeau
Montreal, 24 October 20171Alan Desmond
Over 25 years have passed since the adoption, by the UN General
Assembly on 18 December 1990, of th e International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families1 (ICRMW, the Migrant Workers Convention, the Convention),
the seventh in the group of core in ternational human rights instruments
which has since expanded to ten in number.2 The ICRMW sets out the
basic minimum standards of human rights protection to which a
particularly vulnerable group of people, migrant workers and members oftheir families, are entitled. On the one hand, it represents a stunning
achievement: hard-won agreement amongst the member states of the
international community, under the au spices of the UN, on the minimum
protections to which inte rnational migrants, regardless of their status,
should be entitled. On the other hand, however, that achievement is
undermined by the reluctance of thos e same states to be bound by the
treaty. Indeed, the ICRMW is demonstrably the least successful of the core
instruments in terms of ratification: it took 13 years for the Convention to
attract the 20 ratifications necessary for it to enter into force in 2003 and it
currently has just 51 state parties.
1 UN International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families 1990, 2220 UNTS 3.
2 For a full list of the ten core international human rights instruments and their
monitoring bodies see http://www .ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/
CoreInstruments.aspx (accessed 15 June 2017) . There is some inconsistency within the
UN as to the exact number of core instruments. The website of the Office of the HighCommissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) contains references both to nine and ten
core international human rights instruments. This chapter refers to ten core
international instruments which are to be understood as the nine core human rightstreaties adopted by the UN General Asse mbly between 1965 and 2006 as well as the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and
Degrading Treatment (OP-CAT). The implementa tion by state parties of each of these
ten instruments is overseen by a monitoring  body composed of independent experts.
While a number of the treaties have been  supplemented by optional protocols, OP-
CAT is the only such protocol with a dedicated monitoring body. This is presumablywhy it is at times numbered amongst the core instruments, as distinct from the other
eight optional protocols whose implementa tion by state parties is overseen by the
monitoring body supervising the treaty to which the optional protocol relates.INTRODUCTION :
THE CONTINUING  RELEVANCE  OF THE
UN ICRMW2    Introduction
A brief comparison with the ratification rate of other core instruments
is telling. The International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance, following ratification by 20 states, enteredinto force in December 2010, less than four years after it  was opened for
signature by all states. It currently ha s 57 state parties. The Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabiliti es (CRPD) entered into force in May
2008, just over a year after it was op ened for signature, and currently has
174 state parties. The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), whose
adoption by the UN General Assembly preceded that of the ICRMW by13 months, entered into force in Sept ember 1990, less than a year after it
was opened for signature. With 196 state parties, it enjoys almost universal
ratification. 
Despite its anomalous ratification rate, however, the ICRMW is
arguably more relevant today than ever before. The number of
international migrants, persons living  in a country other than where they
were born, was estimated to be 244 mi llion or 3,3 per cent of the global
population in 2015. This represents an  appreciable increase on the 2,8 per
cent share of the global population made up by international migrants in
2000.
3 It means, to employ the language of the Preamble to the
Convention, that ‘the importance and extent of the migration
phenomenon’, which is often the cause of serious problems for migrant
workers and for the members of their families, affects more people todaythan at any point in the past. Th e time which has elapsed since the
adoption of the ICRMW in 1990 has done nothing to reduce the need for
a comprehensive convention establ ishing basic norms to protect
individuals who, outside of their state of origin, frequently find themselves
in a situation of vulnerability. Indeed, during a 2015 event to mark the 25th
anniversary of the Convention’s adoption4 the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights underscored the fundamental importance of the
ICRMW ‘as a robust and agreed inte rnational legal framework for the
rights of all migrant workers and their families in countries of origin, transitand destination’ which ‘was no w more relevant than ever’.5
The steady rise in the number of  international migrants has been
matched by an increase in the attent ion being paid to migration and the
human rights of migrants at the intern ational level. Migration features, for
example, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,6 the successor
3 See UN DESA ‘Population facts: Trends in  international migrat ion, 2015’ (Factsheet
No 2015/4 of the Population Di vision of the DESA of th e UN Secretariat) http://
www .un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/publications/
populationfacts/docs/Mi grationPopFacts20154.pdf (accessed 15 June 2017).
4 ‘Current challenges in protecting the human rights of migrant workers, irregular
migration flows in the Mediterranean,  migrant workers in the Gulf, and
undocumented children in the Americas’ http://www .ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/
Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=16398& LangID=E (accessed 15 June 2017).
5 Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, UN High Commis sioner for Human Rights (n 4 above).
6 Resolution 70/1: Transforming our w orld: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, GA (25 September 2015), UN Doc A/RES/70/1 (2015). Introduction     3
to the Millennium Development Goals which seeks to eradicate poverty by
facilitating sustainable developm ent. The 2030 Agenda acknowledges
migrants’ positive contribution to  inclusive growth and sustainable
development and notes that internatio nal migration is a multidimensional
reality ‘which requires coherent  and comprehensive responses’.7 Amongst
the Agenda’s 169 targets are securing  labour rights and safe working
environments for all workers, in cluding migrant workers, and the
facilitation of orderly, regular,  safe and responsible migration.8 The
ICRMW, of course, provides a framework in Part VI for state parties tocooperate to promote sound, equitable,  humane and lawful conditions for
international migration but is not mentioned in the 2030 Agenda.
An equally striking example of the attention being paid to migration at
the international level is the adoption by the UN General Assembly on19 September 2016 of the New York  Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants.
9 The Declaration set in train a process of intergovernmental
negotiations which is intended to cu lminate in 2018 in the adoption of a
Global Compact for safe, orderly an d regular migration and a separate
Global Compact on refugees. The Global Compact on migration is
intended to create a framework for comprehensive internationalcooperation on migrants and human mobility and to deal with all aspects
of international migration.10 While welcoming the priority afforded to
human rights in the New York Declaration,11 and notwithstanding its call
for ratification of the ICRMW,12 one is reminded of the celebrated
observation that those who fail to remember the past are condemned to
repeat it:13 it is difficult to understan d the New York Declaration’s
initiation of intergovernmental consultations for the elaboration of a
comprehensive compac t on international migration when an
internationally-agreed blueprint alre ady exists. The ICRMW provides a
framework in which to address most, if not all, of the elements envisaged
for inclusion in the Global Compac t such as greater international
cooperation on migration matters and reduction of irregular migration.14
Might the explanation for this apparent repetition lie at least partly in a
lack of awareness of the ICRMW and its contents?
Lack of awareness of the ICRMW ma y itself be both a symptom and
cause of its low and slow rate of ratification, a feature of the Convention
7 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Deve lopment (n 6 above) para 29.
8 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Developmen t (n 6 above) Targets 8.8 and 10.7.
9 Draft resolution referred to the high-l evel plenary meeting on addressing large
movements of refugees and migrants, GA (13 September 2016) UN Doc A/71/L.1
(2016) (New York Declaration).
10 New York Declaration (n 9 above) Annex II para 2.11 See E Guild & S Grant ‘Migration governance in the UN: What is the global compact
and what does it mean?’ (2017) 252 Queen Mary University of London, School of Law Legal
Studies Research Paper  4.
12 New York Declaration (n 9 above) para 48.
13 G Santayana The life of reason: Introduction and reason in common sense  (1906) 284.
14 See New York Declaration (n 9 above) Annex II para 8.4    Introduction
which is reflected in, an d perhaps largely the reason for, the relative
paucity of literature devoted to this  core human rights instrument. Less
than a year after its adoption the Convention was the subject of a specialissue of The International Migration Review (IMR).15 The winter 1991
volume of IMR included nearly 200 pa ges on the background, content and
future prospects of the new addition to the repertoire of internationalhuman rights instruments. It was no t until 2009, however, that a second
multi-author collection was dedicated to the topic of the ICRMW, namely,
Migration and human rights: The United Nations Convention on MigrantWorkers’ Rights .
16 The latter work documents the history and content of the
Convention and features regional and country studies on obstacles to and
prospects for ratification of the Convention. The 18 years dividing thesetwo landmark publications was not a co mpletely barren landscape in terms
of literature on the Convention. Ryszard Cholewinski’s Migrant workers in
international human rights law: Their pr otection in countries of employment in
1997 contained extensive analysis of  the Convention and a number of
important reports, articles and book  chapters sought to understand and
explain the comparatively low rate of ratification of the ICRMW.17 Since
2009 the literature produced on the to pic of the ICRMW has been limited
to journal articles, book chapters and reports:18 it remains the only one of
the ten core instruments not yet to have generated a dedicated monograph.
Similarly, there is little published work on the Committee on Migrant
Workers (CMW), the body of independent experts which oversees the
compliance of state parties with the ICRMW.19 
15 ‘UN International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families’ (1991) 25  The International Migr ation Review Special
Issue 685.
16 De Guchteneire et al (eds) Migration and human rights: The United Nations Convention on
Migrant Workers’ Rights (2009).
17 See, by way of illustration, L Bosniak ‘Human rights, state sovereignty and the
protection of undocumented migrants under the International Migrant Workers
Convention’ in Bogusz et al  (eds) Irregular migration and human rights: Theoretical,
European, and international perspectives  (2004) 311; E MacDonald & R Cholewinski The
Migrant Workers Convention in Europe: Obstacles to the ratification of the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families: EU/EEA Perspectives  (2007); S Vucetic ‘Democraci es and international human
rights: Why is there no place for migrant workers?’ (2007) 11 International Journal of
Human Rights  403.
18 See, again by way of illustration, K Touzenis & A Sironi Current challenges in the
implementation of the UN International Conventi on on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families  Directorate-General for External Policies
of the Union, Directorate B Policy Depa rtment Study (2013); B Ryan ‘In defence of
the Migrant Workers Convention: Standard setting for contemporary migration’ in
SS Juss (ed) The Ashgate research companion to migration law, theory and policy (2013);
LA Nessel ‘Human dignity or state sovereignty? The roadblocks to full realization ofthe UN Migrant Workers Convention ’ in V Chetail & C Bauloz (eds) Research handbook
on international law and migration (2014). There is also extended discussion of the
Convention in M Ruhs The price of rights: Regulating international labor migration  (2013).
19 The only two dedicated studies of the work of the CMW double are V Chetail ‘The
Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families’ in P Alston & F Mégret (eds) The United Nations and human rights:
A critical appraisal  (forthcoming 2018); and C Edel enbos ‘Committee on Migrant
Workers and implementation of the ICRMW’  in De Guchteneire et al (n 16 above)
100-121. Introduction     5
The gap in the literature on the ICRMW is thus of chasmic rather than
interstitial proportions and cannot be satisfactorily redressed by a single
publication. This collection therefor e only partially compensates for the
dearth of literature on the ICRMW. It aims to raise awareness of the
ICRMW, particularly ahead of the conclusion of the Global Compact on
migration and the implementation of the goals articulated in the
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030. It shines new light on the
Convention by illustrating its added value in the field of international
human rights law and by examining it s implementation in four state
parties: as noted by Ryan, one way of clarifying the value of this human
rights instrument is by focusing resear ch on the states which have ratified
it, rather than those who continue to abstain from ratification.20 Beyond
the value of the four country studies in  terms of the light they shed on the
implementation of the ICRMW, they each provide a richly informed and
expertly detailed panorama of the broader migration situation of thecountry in question. The volume brin gs together experts from academia
and practice, with the co ntributions of the latter informed by work on
policy and advocacy in NGOs, intern ational organisations and specialised
agencies.
T h e  1 2  c h a p t e r s  i n  t h e  v o l u m e  a r e  d i v i d e d  i n t o  f o u r  P a r t s .  P a r t  I
examines the extent to which the fate of the Convention is determined by
the political context, while illustrating the role that civil society can play in
influencing that context. Part II de scribes the important place of the
ICRMW in the international human righ ts law landscape. Part III contains
an investigation of the Convention’s implementation in four state parties.
Part IV provides an update on issu es surrounding the continuing failure to
ratify in two significant destination regions, namely, the US and the EU.
This introduction first provides a brief outline of the structure and contentof the ICRMW before going on to attempt a summary of each of the
v o l u m e ’ s  1 2  c h a p t e r s .  I t  t h e n  h i g h l i g h t s  s o m e  o f  t h e  m a i n  i s s u e s  a n d
themes which emerge from the contributions to the volume. It closes witha number of recommendations, gleane d from the 12 contributions, the
implementation of which would go a long way towards increasing
ratification of the Convention and compliance with its provisions as wellas, ultimately, improving the lives of  countless millions of migrants.
Structure and content of the Convention
Broadly speaking, the overall struct ure and underlying rationale of the
ICRMW is similar to that of the ot her core international human rights
treaties adopted since the late 1970s . Like the CRPD and the CRC, the
ICRMW takes the rights set out in the International Bill of Human Rights,
namely the Universal Declaration, the ICCPR and CESCR, and codifies
20 Ryan (n 18 above) 514.6    Introduction
them in relation to a particularly vu lnerable category of persons, in this
case migrant workers and members of their families.21 With 93 articles,
divided into nine Parts, the ICRMW is the longest of the ten coreinstruments. It is a comprehens ive document, covering the entire
migration process from pre-departure in the country of origin, through
travel in countries of transit, to entr y and residence in the destination state
and return to the country of origin.
The six articles in Part I set out the definitions of the terms used in the
Convention, providing a broad definition of a migrant worker as ‘a person
who is to be engaged, is engaged or  has been engaged in a remunerated
activity in a State of which he or sh e is not a national’. Part II, a single
article, contains the non-discrimina tion clause. Part III, consisting of
articles 8-35, is the longest and most controversial section of theConvention and is sometimes cited as an obstacle to ratification. It sets out
the rights to be enjoyed by all migran ts, regardless of their status. These
include civil and political rights found  in the ICCPR such as the right to
life; freedom from torture; freedom fr om slavery; freedom from arbitrary
arrest and detention; and freedom of ex pression. Part III also specifies the
enjoyment by all migrants of a number of economic and social rights foundin CESCR such as the rights to join trade unions; to medical care; and to
education for their children.
Part III also elaborates upon a numbe r of rights which are of particular
importance for migrant workers and me mbers of their families. States are
obliged to inform migrants of their right to the consular protection and
assistance of their states of origin when any right set out in the Convention
is impaired, and particularly in the ev ent of expulsion. Furthermore, article
22 of the Convention prohibits collect ive expulsion and provides that a
migrant may only be expelled on the basis of a decision taken by the
competent authority in accordance wi th law following an individualised
assessment of the case. Article 22 affo rds a particularly robust catalogue of
safeguards to migrants who are to  be deported, going beyond the
protection provided in instruments such as the ICCPR and regionalmeasures such as the EU Return Directive.
States are also obliged to ensure, in so far as practicable, that migrant
workers who are detained in a state of  transit or employment for violation
of provisions relating to migration shall be held separately from persons
who have been convicted or detained pending trial. The Convention
includes a prohibition on unlawful confiscation or destruction of a
migrant’s personal documents and recognises the right of migrants to
21 More detailed analysis of the provisions of the ICRMW can be found in, eg, chap four
of R Cholewinski Migrant workers in international huma n rights law: Their protection in
countries of employment  (1997); L Bosniak ‘Human rights , state sovereignty, and the
protection of undocumented migrants under the International Migrant Workers
Convention’ (1991) 25  International Migration Review  737; Touzenis & Sironi (n 18
above). Introduction     7
transfer their earnings and savings upon  the termination of their stay in the
state of employment.
The provisions set out in Part IV (articles 36-56) impose obligations on
state parties to the Convention only vis-à-vis lawfully resident migrants.
These include the right of migrants to form associations and trade unions
for the promotion and protection of their economic, social, cultural and
other interests;22 the right to move freely and choose residence in the state
of employment; and the right of migrant workers to family reunification,
though in this regard state parties ar e only obliged to ‘take measures that
they deem appropriate and that fall within their competence’.
Migrant-specific protections codified  in Part IV include the guidance
that states, when considering whether to expel a migrant worker or family
member, should take account ‘of human itarian considerations and of the
length of time that the person concerned has already resided in the State ofemployment’. Furthermore, lawfully present migrants are granted the right
to transfer their earnings and savings, with a corresponding obligation
upon states to take appropriate measures to facilitate such transfers.
Part V (articles 57-63) deals with the rights of migrant workers in
specific categories of employment, such as frontier workers, seasonal
workers and self-employed workers whil e Part VI (articles 64-71) sets out
the ways in which state parties should ‘co-operate with a view topromoting sound, equitable and human e conditions in connection with
international migration of workers and members of their families’. This
Part imposes obligations mainly, thou gh not exclusively, on destination
states. The requirements imposed by Part VI include exchange of
information between the competent authorities in state parties as well as
collaboration between states with a view to ‘preventing and eliminatingillegal or clandestine movements an d employment of migrant workers in
an irregular situation’. Underscoring  the Convention’s distinction between
regular and irregular migrants, Part VI  requires state parties to co-operate
in relation to the return home of the former ‘with a view to promoting
adequate economic conditions for th eir resettlement and to facilitating
their durable social and cultural reintegration in the State of origin’.
Part VII (articles 72-78) deals with  the establishment and operation of
the Committee on Migrant Workers, th e body responsible for overseeing
state parties’ compliance with the ICRMW through reviewing andcommenting on periodic reports fr om states. These reports contain
information on the measures undertaken to give effect to the provisions of
the Convention as well as any difficul ties affecting implementation of the
Convention and details on migration flows in the reporting state. The
Committee, composed of 14 independen t experts, held its first session in
22 On the topic of irregular migrants and the right to form associations and trade unions
in the state of employment, see the ch apter by Cholewinski in this volume.8    Introduction
March 2004. Part VII empowers the Committee to receive complaints
against state parties from individuals as well as from other state parties,
subject to the explicit acceptance of te n state parties of this power. So far,
however, just four countries have accepted the individual complaint
mechanism and just two have acce pted the inter-state complaint
procedure.
Part VIII (articles 79-84) contains ‘general provisions’ which require
state parties to provide an effective remedy to any individual whose rights
under the Convention are impaired an d to take the legislative and other
measures necessary to give effect to the Convention. States are reassured,however, that nothing in the Convention will interfere with their right to
establish the criteria governing admissi on of migrants. Part IX (articles 85-
93) sets out the ‘final provisions’ whic h include the right of states to make
reservations to specific obligation s when ratifying, with the obvious
prohibition firstly on lodging a reservation on the entirety of any of the
nine Parts of the Convention and, secondly, any other reservation which
would be incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention.
Chapters in the present volume
Part I
Antoine Pécoud in his chapter on the politics of the ICRMW notes that the
relative paucity of research into the Convention means that we can at best
only partially understand why states do not ratify. He argues that to better
comprehend the low rate of ratification we need to recognise theConvention’s political nature and its function as a symbol in the global
politics of migration. Underscoring the fact that ratification is not only a
legal or economic issue, Pécoud argues that it is also an inherently politicaldecision embedded in the power relations between the different actors
involved and in the worldviews th at inspire migration policymaking.
While not discounting technical argume nts which seek to account for non-
ratification by reference to the lega l obligations contained in the ICRMW
or the additional costs it would entail for destination states, Pécoud
suggests that such approaches tend  to miss the point: the ICRMW is
contested, perhaps above all else, for political reasons, both at the domestic
and at the international levels. 
One of the consequences of this under standing is to accept that there
can be little expectation of ratification by destination states failing the
extension to migrants of the right to vote in national elections or a
determined show of solidarity by national electorates with migrants. Whilethis may make for rather wistful mood music, Pécoud does strike a number
of hopeful chords. He suggests that the focus on the ratification rate of the
ICRMW underestimates its role in shap ing the way migration is discussed
by state and especially non-state acto rs and concludes with the suggestion Introduction     9
that the Convention could eventually come into its own as a symbol for
fairer and more balanced approaches to international migration and global
affairs.
In their chapter on the ICRMW and civil society, Simeone and Piper
also point up the centrality of the political context to the genesis and
current (mis)fortunes and use of th e Convention. At the same time,
however, they highlight the role that civil society can play in influencing
the political context. They note that it  was an absence of robust civil society
activity in the years immediately following the Convention’s adoption
which at least partially explains the languid pace at which ratifications
initially accumulated. Since the mid-1990s, however, there has been a
burgeoning of civil society organisati ons, as evidenced by the exponential
growth in the numbers of NGOs gran ted consultative status by ECOSOC,
enabling them to formally participate in UN activities.
Simeone and Piper credit this proliferation of transnational advocacy
networks for the current prevalence of human rights discourse in both
domestic and international politics, a related feature of which has been thedevelopment of a migrants’ rights movement committed to exposing the
structural vulnerability of non-citize ns. The authors point out that reaching
the required number of 20 ratifications necessary for the ICRMW’s entryinto force would likely not have been achieved by 2003 without civil
society, but acknowledge that advoca cy around the Convention remains
an uphill battle. None theless, the ongoing need for civil society
engagement with the ICRMW is beyond dispute. This is clear from the
authors’ observation, firstly, that  international advocacy provides a
platform for the exchange of idea s and produces new knowledge oriented
towards alternative hori zons and, secondly, that NGO monitoring is
crucial to ‘preserving the aspiration of human rights as a rationale for
inclusion against an international orde ring principle of differentiation and
exclusion’.
Part II
In her chapter on the ICRMW as a protective tool in the context of
immigration detention, a practice in volving detention of individuals on
account of their immigration status, Mariette Grange provides an
overview of the increasing use of such detention as a tool of migrationcontrol. Grange reviews ICRMW prov isions relevant to immigration
detention in light of similar provis ions in the ICCPR and CAT, thereby
showing the added value of the ICRMW. She notes, however, thatcountries with the largest detention estates have a very high record of
ratification of all core international human rights treaties except for the
ICRMW. It is therefore an examination of the work of the Human RightsCommittee (HRC), the body which mo nitors ICCPR, which most clearly
reveals the lower level of legal sa feguards afforded to immigration10    Introduction
detainees. The near-universal ratification rate of the ICCPR provides its
treaty body with the opportunity HRC to review many aspects of
immigration detention under differ ent legal systems and in country
situations with large-scale immigratio n detention, allowing it to ‘issue
recommendations on prac tices such as mandatory detention – a rarer
opportunity for the CMW – and the need to consider alternatives todetention’.
 The rate and geographic spread of ICRMW ratification has a number
of important consequences when it comes to implementation of the
Convention’s norms relevant to immi gration detention, a practice which
has grown exponentially since the Convention’s adoption in 1990. The
‘absence of old industrialised countries and democracies’ from the current
complement of state parties firstly means that the Convention’s detention-related provisions are not applied and developed in countries with the most
complex systems of immigration detent ion and, secondly, translates into
somewhat weaker expertise on this issue amongst the members of theCMW. Similarly, because most of the current state parties to the ICRMW
do not have a strong tradition of  accepting individual complaints
procedures, the individual complaints  mechanism provided for in article
77 remains unactivated, depriving th e Committee of the opportunity to
develop authoritative interpretations of the Convention’s provisions. This
latter point is of course applicable beyond the discrete field of immigrationdetention. 
Nonetheless, Grange concludes that as immigration detention
continues apace, and amid repeated calls for ratification from various
quarters, 
the ICRMW and its monitoring mechanism remain a central piece in the
international human rights toolkit for protection of the rights of migrant
workers and members of their fami lies in immigration detention.
In their chapter on the impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora,
Grant and Lyon investigate how, if at all, during 2013-2015 other UNbodies have supported the ICRMW by recommending its ratification and/
or by referring to it in their work. The authors find that UN human rights
mechanisms consistently call for ratification of the Convention. They also
find, perhaps not surprisingly, that in  government-driven fora such as the
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) an d in the non-UN Global Forum on
Migration and Development there is a clear cleavage in support for
ratification between states in the Global South and the Global North. 
While the treaty bodies overseei ng the other core human rights
instruments actively advocate the ra tification of the ICRMW, Grant and
Lyon find that they fail to seize opportunities to make substantive
reference to the Convention or the work of the CMW. They provide the
example of a 2014 recommendation from  the HRC to Chile to desist from Introduction     11
confiscating travel documents whic h could have referenced the same
recommendation issued to the same  country three years earlier by CMW.
While this is symptomatic of a more general failure amongst the treatybodies to refer to each other’s work, it is important to highlight that such
cross-referencing could e nhance coherence across th e work of the different
monitoring bodies and signal an endor sement of, in this case, the work of
the CMW. The authors conclude with th e suggestion that in this context
the Convention ‘is likely to benefit from the increasing trend towards cross
referencing of the core treaties, for example through the UPR and the useof joint general comments’.
In their chapter on the added value of the ICRMW, Georgopoulou et
al tackle the charge of superfluity levelled against the Convention on the
basis that the rights it protects are already enshrined at both internationaland national level. The authors demo nstrate the instrument’s added value
by drawing on three sets of rights contained in the Convention and
comparing them with similar rights provisions in other regional and
international human rights law instruments. They find that while
sometimes the Convention simply duplicates existing rights enshrined in
other instruments, there are also exam ples of it going beyond other rights
provisions, guaranteeing further protec tion for those whose situation it was
designed to address. They also note the value inherent in the specificity of
the CMW’s mandate which has allowed it  to respond to the particularities
of the lives of migrant workers and their families.
The authors find that the added value of the Convention lies at least in
part in the fact that it represents a coherent mechanism for the protection
of a broad category of migrants. It re presents a compilation of the existing
rights of migrant workers under intern ational human rights law, to which
it adds a number of additional guarantees as necessitated by the specific
vulnerability of such workers and their families. It therefore represents ‘themost holistic international human ri ghts catalogue applicable to anyone
leaving their country of origin to work in another country’.
In his chapter on the ILO, the ICRMW and the CMW, Cholewinski
underscores the complementarities betw een international labour standards
and human rights law in protecting migrant workers. While these are two
distinct branches of law, they are not mutually exclusive and overlap in the
specific consideration they have gi ven to migrant workers. Cholewinski
highlights the synergies between the ICRMW and the specific ILO
instruments for protection of migran t workers, namely the Migration for
Employment Convention (Revised ), 1949 (No 97) and the Migrant
Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No 143), and
their accompanying non- binding Recommendations.
Cholewinski underlines the importan ce of viewing these instruments
‘along a historical continuum and as  mutually reinforcing’ and suggests
that the fullest level of protection of  migrant workers can only be achieved12    Introduction
with ratification and effective im plementation of all three ‘as each
instrument contains unique provisions  which are not necessarily found in
the other two’. He also provides ev idence of the mutually reinforcing
nature of the work of the ILO supervisory system and the CMW and shows
how collaboration between the ILO and the CMW is important in
ensuring coherence in internatio nal law between international human
rights and labour standards.
Part III
The country studies in Part III high light a number of specific problems
hampering effective implementation  of the ICRMW which might with
advantage be taken up by the CMW du ring the state parties’ periodic
review. Some of the country studies,  particularly those on Mexico and
Ecuador, evidence the fluid nature of migration flows and support theobservation made by Pécoud in his ch apter that the distinction between
countries of origin, transit and destination holds less validity today than
ever before.
In her chapter on the implementation of the ICRMW in Ecuador,
Daniela Salazar describes the grow th experienced by Ecuador since 2000
in both immigration and emigration an d paints a picture of a state which
on paper is keenly alive to the migration phenomenon and thevulnerabilities of both emigra nts and immigrants. Ecuador’s 2008
Constitution enshrines the principles of universal citizenship and free
movement, with article 40 of the Constitution expressly providing that nohuman being shall be identified or co nsidered illegal in light of his or
immigration status.
Salazar argues, however, that de spite the discourse of universal
citizenship, migration initiatives and policies in Ecuador are informed by
the principles of selectivity, control,  security and sovereignty, rather than
human rights. She further notes that Ecuador’s migration-related plans and
agendas lack mechanisms to effectively monitor  progress and the
achievement of their objectives goes unevaluated. Furthermore, as noted
b e l o w ,  t h e  e m p h a s i s  i s  o n  t h e  e m i g r a n t  o v e r  o t h e r  t y p e s  o f  m i g r a n t s .
Indeed article 40 of the 2008 Constitution  establishes measures for the state
to undertake to support the rights of migrants living abroad regardless of
their status but is silent with regard to measures to be adopted to protectmigrants in Ecuador.
Ecuador ratified the ICRMW on 5 February 2002, just over a year
before its entry into force. Despite the length of time available to it to
comply with the Convention and its migration-friendly rhetoric, however,
Salazar finds that the Convention is not being sufficiently taken into
account in the formulation and implementation of laws and policies
concerning the rights of migrant workers. This is evidenced by the Introduction     13
observations of the CMW in 2007 and 2010 that a number of provisions in
national legislation were at variance with the Convention. Salazar also
notes that the ICRMW is rarely cited during formulation of legislation or
policies for migrants. Rarer still is judicial consideration of the Convention
when determining if the Ecuadorian au thorities have complied with their
duty to protect migrants’ rights. This points to a lack of awareness of the
ICRMW in Ecuador, something which is compounded by Ecuador’s
failure to give effect to the CM W’s recommendations concerning the
provision of training on the content of the Convention.
Caron et al in their chapter on Guatemala provide a detailed account
of that country’s migration situation as  well as the wider context in which
immigration and emigration is taking place: widespread violence, endemic
corruption, the rise of organised cr ime and drug trafficking have all
contributed to emigration from Guatemala. Given such challenging
circumstances, it can come as no surprise that compliance with the
ICRMW has been fraught with difficulty. 
Like Ecuador, Guatemala ratified the ICRMW shortly before the
Convention’s entry into force in 2003. The authors note, however, that the
Guatemalan government has yet to  establish strong mechanisms to
address abuses against its nationals working abroad and point out that thecountry’s legal framework is rife with pieces of legislation which violate
the ICRMW. One obstacle to compli ance with the Convention is the
absence of a comprehensive, mult idisciplinary and permanent public
policy involving all stakeholders. This is an issue which might, with
advantage, be raised by the CMW in its future dialogue with Guatemala.
The study of Guatemala illustrates how the ICRMW and its
requirement that state parties su bmit periodic reports provide an
opportunity for civil society to eng age in a close scrutiny of states’
immigration law framework. The author s suggest that it was Guatemala’s
non-compliance with the ICRMW whic h spurred civil society to develop
an alternative report to the govern ment one presented ahead of the 2010
review of Guatemala by the CMW so as  to hold it accountable for its
failure to meet its Convention obligati ons. This led to the emergence of the
Grupo Articulador coalition which includes the majority of organisations
working on migrant worker rights issues. The group continues to work for
a comprehensive immigr ation law and advance other public policy
proposals that protect migrant worker s. This makes it clear that the
Convention ‘serves as an important point of reference, catalyst and tool tohelp Guatemalan civil soci ety to press for change at both the national and
international levels’.
In their chapter on Mexico, which in 1991 became the first state to sign
the ICRMW, Díaz Prieto and Kuhner analyse the changes in legislationand policies made by Mexico to comp ly with the ICRMW with particular
reference to the specific situation of  women migrant workers. The authors14    Introduction
note the increasing feminisation of migration through and from Mexico to
the US and point to the fact that while Mexico does not have a high level
of immigration, the majority of Central American migrants in Mexico arewomen. The authors suggest that while implementation of CMW
recommendations would help  strengthen the protection of women migrant
workers’ rights in Mexico, the CMW sh ould in fact make a greater number
of recommendations specific to women migrants, the implementation of
which would help to eliminate the righ ts violations that they face. Díaz
Prieto and Kuhner take the view  that ‘specific and assertive
recommendations on enforcement of  ICRMW standards could give the
Mexican government the necessary dire ction to better achieve effective
implementation’. 
The authors strike an optimistic note by suggesting that new laws, and
reforms to existing laws, provide Mexico with an important regulatory
framework to promote and guarantee the rights of migrant workers as
recommended by the CMW and that in spite of some gaps the country haslegislation which, if properly implem ented, could effectively guarantee the
rights of migrant workers. They note progress in the form of the
government’s Special Programme on Migration  in 2014 which represents the
first ever national migration policy that includes objectives and specific
strategies that require inter-institutional cooper ation but lament the fact
that in practice policies have focused on detention rather thanregularisation of migrant flows and that planned national policies to
improve protection of migrant workers have in fact been neglected in
favour of enforcement activities. 
The study of Mexico illustrates a variety of problems undermining
effective implementation of the ICRMW which are likely to be present in
other state parties. There is a dearth  of public information on migrants’
access to rights and services whic h produces little hard evidence of de facto
compliance with the ICRMW. Enforc ement of laws and policies that
promote women migrants’ rights is vitiated by a weak rule of law,
corruption, impunity, xenophobia and the lack of a gender perspective.
Implementation is impeded by budgetar y constraints and a lack of clear
guidelines for state officials concerning  protection of migrants' rights. The
authors also emphasise that comp liance with the ICRMW cannot be
analysed in isolation from the econom ic and political interests of Mexico
within a region that comprises Nort hern and Central America, and its
complex position as a country of origin, transit and destination. 
Piyasiri Wickramasekara’s study of  Sri Lanka’s compliance with the
ICRMW illustrates the extent to which the ICRMW is effectively ignored
in the formulation and development of immigration law and policy by thestate party in question. Despite the country’s relatively early endorsement
of the Convention – Sri Lanka became the seventh state party to the
ICRMW when it acceded in 1996 – the reader is left with the impressionthat when immigration law is develo ped in a manner consonant with the Introduction     15
ICRMW it is by happy coincidence rather than by design. This raises
questions over the level of awareness of the ICRMW amongst the relevant
civil servants and other stakeholders or , just as disquietingly, may be taken
as an indication of the seriousness with which some  state parties treat the
Convention and the spirit in whic h they approach the obligations it
imposes on them.
One explanation for Sri Lanka’s fa ilure to effectively adhere to
ICRMW obligations and CMW recommendations is the state’s consistent
focus on foreign employment of Sri Lankans. This, according to
Wickramasekara, has ruled out any attention being paid in national
migration policies to the status and protection of foreign migrant workers
inside Sri Lanka. This does not mean , however, that Sri Lanka is a black
hole when it comes to migrants’ ri ghts. Indeed, Wickramasekara points
out that Sri Lanka has been a pioneer in  Asia in spelling out a rights-based
comprehensive National Labour Migr ation Policy based on the 2006 ILO
Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration. Given the focus on foreignemployment, however, it is little surpri se that such activity revolves around
Sri Lankan emigrants. The author dr aws attention to Sri Lanka’s progress
in regard to dissemination of info rmation on migration in safe and
dignified conditions. The Sri Lankan Bureau of Foreign Employment has
carried out safe migration sensitisat ion programmes in collaboration with
the ILO and a number of NGOs us ing its Safe Labour Migration
Information Guide. Such initiatives can provide a useful blueprint for
activities aimed at migrant workers in Sri Lanka and securing their
protection in line with the ICRMW.
Part IV
Beth Lyon in her chapter on the US and the ICRMW describes that
country’s unusually contradictory relationship with the Migrant Workers
Convention. Although it abstained from voting on the UN GeneralAssembly’s proposal in 1979 to cr eate a Working Group to draft a
convention to protect migrant worker s and their families, the US went on
to make hundreds of inte rventions over the ten ye ars of negotiations that
were to follow. On more than one occasion, the United States was
instrumental in breaking impasses by proposing compromise language and
participating in informal consultations. The country’s failure to show any
real interest in the I CRMW since its adoption in 1990 is part of a wider
behavioural pattern whereby the US ‘participates actively in human rightstreaty development but does not readil y join human rights treaties as a
party subject to international monitoring’.
From a legal point of view, however, there is relatively little conflict
between US law and the substantive protections of the Convention. Most
of the passages that were once objectionable have since become part of US
law. Any remaining conflicts ‘would likely be buffered upon ratification16    Introduction
owing to the United States’ typically aggressive practice of restrictions on
ratification’. It is therefore not so much legal matters which have proved so
inimical to the Convention’s reception in the US, Lyon suggests, butconcerns related to the country’s lo w wage labour migration regulation. 
Lyon laments the opportunities missed by non-ratification. She argues
that signature and ratification of th e ICRMW would help to re-frame the
debate on migrant labour and refo cus attention on non-enforcement
solutions to irregular migration, ushering the US along a path toward a
rational global approach to low wage labour migration. Ratification of the
Convention would involve the country in a much-needed self-examinationprocess but would not threaten longstanding policies. 
In his chapter on the uneasy relationship between the EU and the
Migrant Workers Convention, Desmond highlights the incongruity of the
Convention’s ratification record amongst EU member states in the contextof the other core international hum an rights instruments while also
illustrating how non-ratification is  simultaneously consistent with EU
member states’ approach to multilateral instruments focused on theprotection of migrants’ rights. The author details the conflicting attitudes
towards the Convention evinced by di fferent EU institutions and argues
that the failure of the Commission and the Council of the European Unionto support the ICRMW, along with member states’ non-ratification, opens
the EU and its member states to accusations of hypocrisy in light of their
recommendations to non-EU countries to ratify some of the other core
human rights instruments.
The author suggests that changes in the EU legal landscape,
particularly since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in 2009, have
produced an EU legal order more conducive to the protection of migrants’rights and therefore offer a legally prop itious context for ratification of the
ICRMW. Increasing calls for EU member states to ratify, particularly
during the UPR process, may provide the necessary pressure to encouragethe Commission and Council to change tack vis-à-vis the Convention and/
or to secure the support of handful of influential member states, both of
which would be necessary to adva nce the issue of ratification. 
Common issues and themes
The ICRMW and fragmentation and coherence in international 
migration law 
At the close of the last millennium the Working Group of
intergovernmental experts on the human  rights of migrants, convened by
the Commission on Human Rights, no ted that international human rights
law as it concerned migrants wa s ‘dispersive and fragmentary’,23 while Introduction     17
more recently Chetail ha s cautioned that the prol iferation of non-binding
standards and consultative processes am ongst a multiplicity of actors with
different agendas may aggravate the fragmentation of internationalmigration law norms.24 Echoing such fears of inconsistency and
incoherence, Grant and Lyon in their co ntribution to this volume note the
increase since 1990 of the inclusion of migrants’ rights in the work of all
the treaty bodies, a positive development which nonetheless has also led to
over-lapping jurisdictions and the risk of diverging interpretations.
A number of chapters in this collect ion, however, provide evidence of
efforts and opportunities to ensure  coherence and consistency in the
development and application of inte rnational law concerning migrants’
rights. In his chapter on the ILO, the ICRMW and the CMW, Cholewinski
attests to the CMW’s efforts to ensure more consistent approaches tointerpretation of key rights and thei r application to all migrant workers,
including those in irregular status. One of the ways the CMW does this is
to read the rights set out in the ICRMW in light of the other coreinternational human rights treaties and relevant ILO international labour
standards. An example of this is th e CMW’s approach to article 26 of the
ICRMW which confers the right to form trade unions only on migrantworkers in a regular situation. The Committee has observed, however, that
such a right applies to migrant workers in an irregular situation by virtue
of article 2 of the ILO Freedom of Association and Protection of the Rightsto Organise Convention, 1948 (No 87) and article 22(1) of the ICCPR.
Article 26 may therefore create broader obligations for state parties to both
the ICRMW and these instruments.
25 
In a similar vein, Georgopoulou et al note that while article 28 of the
ICRMW restricts migrants’ right to me dical care to urgent cases, the
Committee has interpreted this provision in light of article 12 of CESCR
and article 24 of the CRC to ascribe broader obligations to state parties,encompassing primary health care, im munisation against major infectious
diseases and emergency obstetric care for migrant women, amongst
others.26 In Grange’s chapter on immigr ation detention mention is made
of recent CMW recommendations whic h follow other international and
regional human rights mechanisms by pu shing for alternatives to detention
while, in their study on Mexico’s  compliance with the ICRMW, Díaz
Prieto and Kuhner show how th e CEDAW Committee’s General
Recommendation 26 on women migran t workers can usefully guide the
23 See ‘Working Group of Intergovernmental Experts on the Human Rights of Migrants’
CHR (9 March 1999), UN Doc E/CN.4/1999/80 (1999) para 103.
24 V Chetail ‘The transnational movement of persons under general international law –
Mapping the customary law foundations of international migration law’ in V Chetail
& C Bauloz (eds) Research handbook on inte rnational law and migration  (2014) 9.
25 General Comment 2 on the rights of migrant workers in an irregular situation and
members of their families, CMW (28 August 2013), UN Doc CMW/C/CG/2 (2013)
17-18, para 65.
26 General Comment 2 (n 25 above) para 72.18    Introduction
CMW’s interpretation of the ICRMW to strengthen women migrant
workers’ protection.
This trend towards interpreting the ICRMW in light of other human
rights instruments chimes with th e CMW’s statement in its General
Comment 2 that states’ obliga tions under the Convention 
must be read with respect to the core human rights treaties  and other relevant
international instruments to which it is a party. Although separate and
freestanding, these treaties are complementary and mutually reinforcing.27 
Such an approach will go some way to  ensuring greater coherence in the
development and application of inte rnational law on migrants’ rights. 
Firewalls
Although irregular migrants are formally entitled to a range of human
rights under the ICRMW and other human rights instruments, as a
practical matter they are often preven ted from exercising their rights and
entitlements by the fear that the necessary contact with the authorities will
set in train a process leading to their deportation. One solution to thisproblem is that of the firewall. The idea that there should be a firewall
between immigration law enforcem ent and human rights protection
implies that the agents of immigrat ion law enforcement should be barred
from obtaining information concerning  the immigration status of persons
accessing public or social services and that such service providers should
be similarly barred from sharing information about their clients’
immigration status. This is an idea which has been the focus of increasing
academic attention28 and is touched upon in the chapters by
Georgopoulou et al and Cholewinski. 
Both chapters discuss the CMW’s General Comment 2 on the rights of
migrant workers in an irregular situat ion and members of their families. In
their examination of the right of irregular migrants under article 28 of the
ICRMW to access health care Georgopoul ou et al note that the Committee
expressly discourages states from requesting the medical records of
migrant workers in an irregular situation and from ‘conducting
immigration enforcement operations on or near facilities providing
medical care’.29 
In the context of employment rights, Cholewinski notes the
Committee’s emphasis on the need to maintain a firewall between the
27 General Comment 2 (n 25 above) para 7.
28 See for example, JH Carens The ethics of immigration  (2013) 132-135; F Crépeau &
B Hastie ‘The case for ‘firewall’ protections for irregular migrants: Safeguarding
fundamental rights’ (2015) 17 European Journal of Migration and Law 157.
29 General Comment 2 (n 25 above) para 74. Introduction     19
activities of social and labour market institutions, such as labour inspection
services, and immigration enforcem ent authorities. This approach
corresponds with that taken by the Council of Europe’s EuropeanCommission against Racism and Intole rance in 2016 in its General Policy
Recommendation on safe guarding irregularly present migrants from
discrimination. Similarly, a decade ea rlier, the ILO Comm ittee of Experts
in its General Survey on labour inspection pointed out that the main
objective of the labour inspection system is to protect the rights and
interests of all workers, and to im prove their working conditions, rather
than the enforcement of immigration law.
The independence of the members of the CMW 
In accordance with article 72 of the ICRMW, the Convention’sapplication in state part ies is reviewed by a dedicated treaty monitoring
body, the CMW, consisting of 14 experts ‘of high moral standing,
impartiality and recogn ized competence in the field covered by the
Convention’. Each state party to the ICRMW may nominate one personfrom amongst its own nationals to membership of the Committee, with the
14 members being elected by secret ballot. Furthermore, the members of
the CMW are to be  elected  and to serve in their personal capacity. A
number of chapters, howeve r, draw attention to the potential for a lack of
impartiality and independence on the part of some members of the
Committee.
Grange argues that many of the individuals nominated and elected to
membership of the CMW hold positions closely linked to their countries’
executive which runs counter to the need for the Committee’s decisions to
be made on the basis of independent expertise. Grange’s argument findssupport in a report discussed by Grant and Lyon which found that, as of
2012, nine of the 14 members (64 per cent) of the CMW had an executive
branch affiliation, making it the trea ty body with the highest percentage of
such members.
A concrete example of such potential conflict of interest is provided by
Salazar in her case st udy on Ecuador. She notes that the Ecuadorian
member of the Committee ‘acted as the highest national authority on
migration matters within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the same time
as she acted as a member of the Comm ittee’ and poses the question as to
whether the Committee is in a position  to objectively and fairly evaluate
Ecuador’s compliance with the Convention when one of its members is
responsible for Ecuador’s policies and actions with regards to migrantworkers. At the very minimum, Salazar suggests, the Committee in such a20    Introduction
situation runs the risk of not being seen to be independent in the exercise
of its functions.30 
Grant and Lyon suggest that the preponderance of government-
affiliated individuals amongst the Committee’s members may be explainedby the fact that it is largely states in the Global South which have ratified
the ICRMW. Given that treaty body  members are unpaid, membership is
more financially feasible for those in government service who can attend
meetings in the course of their employment. 
The outlier status of the ICRMW amongst the core international 
human rights instruments 
A number of the chapters in this volume make clear the anomalous nature
and experience of the ICRMW by comparison with the other core
international human rights instruments.  The relatively scant literature on
the ICRMW and CMW, the disproportionately high percentage of CMW
members with executive branch affili ations and the anomalous ratification
record of the ICRMW when viewed in the context of the full range of tencore instruments have already been touched upon. In relation to the latter
point, Desmond in his chapter highlights the Convention’s deleterious
distinction of being the only one of the core treaties not yet signed orratified by any of the 28 member states of the EU.
The peculiarity characterising the trajectory of the Convention is,
however, a feature which precedes its adoption in 1990 and the CMW’s
establishment in 2004. Simeone and Pi per note that civil society has a
strong tradition of mobilising suppo rt for international instruments and
was involved in drafting the Univ ersal Declaration, the 1951 Refugee
Convention and many of the core  human rights instruments. The
development of the Convention, howe ver, was by and large a state-led
effort, initially involving only a few faith-based organisations.
In a similar vein, Pécoud argues that  a key feature of the history of the
ICRMW is the leading role played by non-Western states, to the extentthat it is sometimes known as a ‘G-77 treaty’. The active part played
throughout the drafting process by the governments of Mexico and
Morocco is unusual, Pécoud suggests , as international and diplomatic
debates over human rights tend to be mostly pushed forward by Western
developed countries. Pécoud sees migrants’ rights as one of the only fieldsof human rights that enjoys greater su pport from the ‘South’ than from the
30 It should be noted, however, that the CMW’s provisional rules of procedure provide
that no member of the Committee shall part icipate in the examination of state party
reports or the discussion and adoption of concluding observations if they involve the
state party in respect of which she or he wa s elected to the Committee. See Provisional
Rules of Procedure, Rule 32, CMW (7 May 2004), HRI/GEN/3/Rev.1/add.1 (2004).  Introduction     21
‘North’, an issue to which we return in the section on self-interest as a
motivation for ratification. 
Self-interest as a motivation for ratification 
Pécoud and Grange in their respective chapters suggest that many of the
current state parties to the ICRMW were at least partially motivated to
ratify by the scope it offered for protection of their own citizens who
emigrate. In this respect Grange points to Part VI of the Convention on the
Promotion of Humane and Lawful Cond itions for International Migration
which contains a number of provisions relating to protection of a state
party’s own nationals, whether abroad , about to emigrate or returning.
This, coupled with the fact that th e ICRMW imposes obligations mainly –
though by no means exclusively – on destination states, goes some way to
explaining why ratification is more prevalent amongst countries which are,
or at the time of ratification were, primarily states of destination.
Two of the country studies provide support for the contention that
some states ratified the ICRMW with a view to securing protection for
their emigrant citizens, resulting in a somewhat skewed understanding and
implementation of the Convention. Wickramasekara reports that Sri
Lanka’s accession to the ICRMW was done in the hope that the moral and
legal force of the Convention would he lp to bring international attention
to the abuse and exploitation of Sr i Lankan migrant workers which could
then be addressed through the institutional capacity of international
human rights agencies, UN agencies and civil society. This concern withSri Lankans employed abroad ha s continued and, according to
Wickramasekara, ‘has ru led out any attention in national migration
policies to the status of foreign migrant workers inside Sri Lanka and theirprotection, a major thrust of the ICRMW’.
Similarly, in her study of Ecua dor Salazar highlights how that
country’s concern in implementing the ICRMW has been directed to its
emigrant citizens, with state action plans and activities focusing on the
protection of Ecuadorian citizens abroad and those returning, while
neglecting migrant workers in Ec uador. Even when it comes to
Ecuadorian emigrants, ho wever, the state’s endeavours seem to focus
more on lofty proclamations of the universality of migrant status rather
than on concrete efforts at ensuring, for example, that its citizens abroad
are informed of the rights granted to them as migrant workers by the
ICRMW.
Recommendations 
• Since becoming a related UN agency in September 2016 and
rebranding itself ‘the UN Migrat ion Agency’, IOM should follow the22    Introduction
proposal of former UN Special Rapporteur François Crépeau that it
become an institutional champion for the ICRMW , promoting
compliance with Convention standa rds and ratification by non-state
parties.
• More pressure should be put on state parties to promote the ICRMW
and raise awareness of it amongst the lawyers, policymakers and stateand local officials who play a role in the protection of migrants’ rights
and the implementation of immigr ation law and policy. One way of
doing this would be to provide ICRMW-specific training to therelevant individuals. The pressure must come from the CMW and civil
society.
• The treaty bodies overseeing the other nine core instruments should
refer to the ICRMW and the work of the CMW when specialised
migration issues arise that are addressed by the Convention and the
CMW’s Concluding Observations. This  could result in an increase in
the number of ratifications if states  see that the obligations entailed by
the ICRMW inhere in treaties by which they are already bound.
• Civil society should be meaningf ully consulted by state parties when
immigration law and policy is be ing formulated. Recommendations
from the CMW in this direction would help to advance this goal. 
• The CMW should continue cooperation with its fellow treaty bodies
and other key stakeholders in the form of joint general comments and
days of general discussion. This would establish the Committee as a
key forum for the discussion of issues concerning migrants. It wouldalso promote awareness of the Committee and the Convention as well
as having the effect of advancing pr otection of migrants’ rights through
ensuring the ethos of the ICRMW informs as wide a range ofinitiatives concerning migrants as possible.PART I: OBSTACLES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES24Antoine Pécoud
1 Introduction
The United Nations International Conv ention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW),
which was adopted over 25 years ago by the UN General Assembly,1
remains one of the most neglected treaties in international human rights
law. It is presented, by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as one of the ‘core international human rights treaties’,
which include better-known conven tions like, for example, the 1966
Covenants,2 the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child and the 1979
Convention on the Elimination of A ll Forms of Discrimination against
Women.3 Yet, compared to these treaties, the ICRMW is under-ratified:
so far, only 51 states have ratified  i t  a n d ,  m o s t  n o t a b l y ,  n o  i m p o r t a n t
Western destination co untry has done so.4 It is arguable, therefore, that the
ICRMW has so far found it very difficult to achieve what it was meant todo, namely increase the protection of migrant workers’ rights by
establishing widely-accept ed standards in this subfield of human rights
law. 
This chapter argues that this si tuation can be interpreted as both
puzzling and logical. It is puzzling,  because Western liberal democracies
traditionally support human rights , and because the ICRMW does not,
contrary to widespread misperceptions, call for a new set of rights that
1 United Nations General As sembly Resolution 45/158.
2 International Covenant on Civil and Po litical Rights (ICCPR) and International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR).
3 See OHCHR ‘Human rights bodies’ http ://www .ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/Pages/
HumanRightsBodies.aspx (accessed 25 October 2017).
4 It should be noted that ‘important Western immigration countries’ is arguably an
unclear category. For example, both Turkey and Argentina ratified the ICRMW , andcould be defined as such. The fact remains, however, that the Convention has not been
ratified by any EU country, or by Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the United States
or Japan. 1CHAPTERTHE POLITICS  OF THE
UN M IGRANT
WORKERS  CONVENTION The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     25
would otherwise not exist in domestic  law or in other international human
rights instruments. There are therefore no legal obstacles that could justify
the reluctance to ratify and implemen t the Convention, at least in the well-
established Etat de droit  that are home to a large share of the world’s
migrant population. By contrast, from a cost-benefit perspective, it can also
be understood as logical, because the rights of migrants are difficult toreconcile with market logics in dest ination countries, and because there are
structural economic forces that ma ke it almost impossible to reach
multilateral agreements on migrant workers’ rights. In particular, the
socio-economic imbalances between origin and destination states make
reciprocal arrangements almost impossible. 
I will also argue, however, that  this seemingly binary opposition
should be challenged, and that the low ratification record should be
understood as a fundamentally political ma tter. It is above all for political
reasons, rather than for legal or so cio-economic reasons, that the ICRMW
suffers from such a low ratification re cord. This is for instance evident in
the way the UN and other intergovernmental organisations address
migration issues, as well as in the case  of ‘in-between’ states, which are not
clearly positioned on the origin/destination state divide: some of themratified, while others whic h could have done so ultimately did not. In other
words, while there are fundamental stru ctural forces (of a legal or socio-
economic nature) that explain why states may accept or reject theICRMW, there are also more contingent political factors which play a role
in shaping the current fortunes of the Convention. Importantly, this also
means that future perspectives remain, to some extent, open and that anincrease in the popularity of the ICRMW amongst states cannot be
excluded.
2 History and content of the ICRMW
The rights of migrant workers were firs t addressed at the international level
by the ILO. This organisation was cr eated in 1919, at the time of the
Versailles treaty and the establishment of the League of Nations, and its
original Constitution already mentione d the ‘protection of  the interests of
workers when employed in countries  other than their own’. The ILO is
characterised by its so-called tripartism, as it engages not only with
governments, but also with unions and employers. The interest in
migration was thus motivated by th e objective of increasing labour
standards, and by the ambition to lessen the downward pressure thatresults from competition between national and foreign workers; protecting
migrant workers’ rights was a strate gy to protect all workers’ rights.5
5 R Böhning ‘The ILO and the new UN Conven tion on Migrant Workers: The past and
future’ (1991) 25 International Migration Review 698. 26    Chapter 1
Throughout the 20th century, the IL O adopted conventions pertaining to
labour migration, but with mixed success in terms of ratification.6
The objectives pursued by the ICRMW are very much in line with
ILO’s efforts and the UN Convention on  this matter logically builds upon
earlier treaties adopted by this spec ialised agency. This was not a smooth
process, however, as the ILO believed  that the issue should remain solely
within its realm and was reportedly reluctant to cooperate with the UN.7
While incorporating a labour protec tion mandate, the ICRMW was also
born out of a distinct human rights approach. As noted above, it is indeed
one of the core international human righ ts law instruments, and reflects the
need to more explicitly articulate the relation between the inclusive
universality of human rights and the ex clusive nature of state sovereignty;
while human rights are to protect ‘everybody’ (whether citizens or
migrants), it progressively became clear that non-na tionals were not
systematically perceived as part of this category.8 
This explains why the ICRMW speaks of migrant workers . Today, this
term is less frequent: while the ILO still speaks of migrants as workers,9
many other actors and observers speak of migrant rights or of the human
rights of migrants ,10 sometimes with an emphasis on certain categories of
migrants (irregular migrants, trafficked migrants, migrant women, and soon). This is not just a matter of words, as this semantic change has political
implications. The emphasis on migrant workers  frames migration issues
within an internationally-constructed  perspective on labour protection;
migrant workers’ rights are then understood as a labour issue of
importance to all, as the rights of  national workers cannot be dissociated
from the rights of their foreign fellow workers. This challenges the nationaldivide between citizens and foreigne rs. By contrast, by omitting the word
worker , the notion of migrant rights  may be understood as placing more
weight on the foreignness of migrants and on the almost ontologicaldifference between them and citizens. Migrants are then portrayed as non-
6 See in particular Conven tion 97 in 1949 (Convention concerning Migration for
Employment (Revised)) and Convention 143 in 1975 (Convention concerning
Migrations in Abusive Conditions and the Promotion of Equality of Opportunity and
Treatment of Migrant Workers). For more on the role played by the ILO and its
standards in the protection of migrant workers’ rights, see the chapter by Cholewinski
in this volume.
7 G Battistella ‘Migration and human rights: The uneasy but essential relationship’ in
De Guchteneire et al (eds) Migration and human rights: The United Nations Convention on
Migrant Workers’ Rights  (2009). The special role of the IL O in the protecti on of migrant
workers’ rights was recognised in the I CRMW , which foresees that this agency be
consulted by the UN on these matters (see art 74). For further detail on the
relationship between the ILO and the ICRM W , see the chapter by Cholewinski in this
volume.
8 S Grant ‘The recognition of migrants’ rights within the UN human rights system: The
first sixty years’ in M Dembour & T Kelly (eds) Are human rights for migrants?  (2011). 
9 International Labour Organization ILO multilateral framework on labour migration: Non-
binding principles and guidelines for a ri ghts-based approach to labour migration  (2006). 
10 Amnesty International Living in the shadows: A primer on the human rights of migrants
(2006). The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     27
nationals or outsiders, who should benefit from universal human rights,
but whose interests may nevertheless diverge from those of nationals. 
At the same time, the emphasis on human  rights (and not solely labour
rights) is crucial in terms of the protection of migrants who are not activeon the labour market, or whose presence is only partly related to their
working capacity. The ICRMW refers to this category of people as
‘members of the families’ of migrant workers, but one can think of other
‘non-working’ categories of migrants, whose significance has increased in
scholarly and policy debates since the Convention was adopted (this is the
case of forced or trafficked migrants, for example). Nevertheless, and asdiscussed below, much of the current  academic and policy discussions on
the ICRMW focus precisely on the trade-off between the rights of nationals
and non-nationals, with the former  being opposed to the latter. This
‘national’ take on the topic milita tes against support for the ICRMW. As
this chapter will argue, ratification of the Convention is less likely if
citizens perceive this as the mere gran ting of rights to outsiders; this may
easily generate ho stile reactions along an ‘us and them’ divide. If, by
contrast, the ICRMW is framed in an international labour perspective, and
as an issue that benefits all workers by lessening the competition betweenthem, ratification may appear as benefi cial not only for foreigners, but also
for citizens. Yet, this second intern ationalist perspective is, arguably,
decreasingly popular, which does not favour the ICRMW.
This feature of the ICRMW, at the crossroads between labour
protection and human rights, is important to understand the current
situation. Broadly speaking, these di fferent frameworks indeed mobilise
different actors: labour protection is  an issue mainly for unions, whereas
human rights are predominantly supp orted by civil society organisations
and NGOs.
11 Grange and d’Auchamp report that, whereas human rights
NGOs traditionally play a key role in the drafting of human rightsconventions, they were largely abse nt in the case of the ICRMW: the
human rights of migrants were not a priority at the time, as the focus was
on civil and political rights (rather than on social and economic rights);even the rights of refugees were pe rceived as a humanitarian (and not a
human rights) topic.
12 This resulted in a lack of civil society support for the
Convention at the time of its negotiation.13 As they further note, this also
lead to the strong presence of fa ith-based organisations, which were
amongst the few to be interested in migration and remain, up until today,
11 There is a lively debate on the issue of  labour rights as human rights which also
involves political activism in terms of strategies and the type of organisation involved.
There are in fact increasing examples of  trade unions engaging in human rights
discourse and human rights NGOs engaging with labour standards/labour rights. SeeN Piper (2015) ‘Democratising migration f rom the bottom up: The rise of the global
migrant rights movement’  (2015) 12 Globalizations 788.
12 M Grange & M d’Auchamp ‘Role of civil society in campaigning for and using the
ICRMW’  in De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
13 Since then, civil society activism has gr own enormously. See the chapter by Simeone &
Piper in this volume.28    Chapter 1
at the forefront of the campaign for the ICRMW and for migrants’ rights
in general. 
Another key feature of the history of the ICRMW is the leading role of
non-Western states, to the extent that it is sometimes known as a ‘G-77treaty’.14 At the diplomatic level, the governments of Mexico and
Morocco were very active, througho ut the drafting process. This is
unusual, as international and diplomat ic debates over human rights tend
to be mostly pushed forward by Western developed countries. Indeed,
migrants’ rights is probably one of the only fields of human rights that
enjoy greater support from the ‘South’ than from the ‘North’. One of thereasons for this is that some key origin countries saw the ICRMW as a
useful standard to protect their citizens abroad.15 This nevertheless raises
the question of the universality of human rights, as it appears that thoserights that are not backed by the North tend to be contested and not viewed
as truly ‘universal’. This being said , initial proposals by sending countries
were strongly resisted, which gave a central role to a number of Western
states in searching for more consensu al formulations in the elaboration of
the ICRMW.16 
Content-wise, the ICRMW provides a more precise and specific
interpretation of the way human rights should be applied to migrantworkers. This is line with other simi lar treaties, which also target other
potentially vulnerable groups (women, children and, more recently,
persons with disabilities, for example). While it codifies some new rightsspecific to the condition of migran ts (such as the right to transfer
remittances or to have access to information on the migration process), it
mostly relies upon already-existing  rights, which were formulated in
earlier international human rights in struments, but whose application to
migrant workers had not been detailed  in a specific wa y. Of particular
relevance here is the ICRMW’s ex plicit inclusion of undocumented
migrants within its scope of appl ication. This is one of the most
controversial issues. Logically, undoc umented migrants are human beings
and, as such, are protected by international human rights law; the ICRMWputs this on paper, in a way that earlier treaties did not.
17 This remains
problematic, however, as destination states are required to guarantee the
rights of people they may not have wa nted to admit in the first place, and
14 N LaViolette ‘The principal international human rights instruments to which Canada
has not yet adhered’ (2006) 24 Windsor Yearbook of Access to Justice 267. 
15 On Mexico, for example, see G Díaz & G Kuhner ‘Mexico’s role in promoting an
implementing the ICRMW’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above); on the Philippines,
see N Piper, ‘Obstacles to, and opportunities for, ratification of the ICRMW in Asia’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above). 
16 These were in particular the so-called MESCA countries: Finland, Greece, Italy,
Norway, Portugal, Spain and Sweden. 
17 L Bosniak ‘Human rights, state sovereignty and the protection of undocumented
migrants under the International Migrant Work ers Convention’ in B Bogusz et al (eds)
Irregular migration and human rights: Theoretical, European, and international perspectives
(2004).  The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     29
whom they may want to remove, if necessary through coercive measures
like detention or expulsion. States te nd to find it difficult to respect
migrants’ rights when trying to remove undocumented migrants and, inpractice, these measures regularly lead to human rights violations.18 
After adoption by the UN Genera l Assembly on 18 December 1990,
the Convention was open to ratifica tion by states. Twenty ratifications
were necessary in order for the ICRM W to enter into force, with this
threshold not being reached until 2003.  By early 2017 it had been ratified
by just 51 states. This low ratification  record was not entirely expected.
Immediately after adoption, it was believed within the UN that theICRMW would enter into  force in 1991 or 1992; even less optimistic
observers believed that the MESCA-co untries would ratify; other countries
– Canada, Venezuela and Argentina – were also expected to do so.19 
Overall, there has not been much research on the ICRMW. This
means that any understanding as to why st ates do not ratify it is at best only
partial. Nevertheless, debates amongst researchers, policymakers and civil
society actors tend to be polarised around two diverging interpretations of
this situation, which in turn correspond to two different views of what
should be done. In a first interpre tation, the ICRMW’s low ratification
record is viewed as a puzzling mistak e that can and should be corrected. It
results from an array of factors, of different nature, which somehow
prevent the full recognition of the usefulness of the ICRMW and of the
legitimacy of migrants’ rights. By contrast, the second interpretation
considers that states’ refusal to ratify is logical given the structural
economic and political forces that sh ape immigration policy. On this view,
the ICRMW is a deeply flawed treaty, unable to increase or guaranteemigrants’ access to their rights. In what follows, I examine in greater
details these two interpretations.
3 The ‘puzzling’ legal/te chnical interpretation 
It has often been observed that the IC RMW is overall close to existing legal
standards, especially in Western demo cracies. If states were to become
interested in ratifying, they would fi nd this relatively easy, because their
own legislation already contains mo st of the rights foreseen by the
ICRMW. This is documented by seve ral case studies, which assess the
compatibility of the ICRMW with the le gal provisions that exist in other
(already ratified) internat ional treaties, as well as in domestic law. One of
the most detailed analyses in this  respect concerns Belgium which found
18 See for example S Vohra ‘Detention of ir regular migrants and asylum seekers’ in
Cholewinski et al  (eds) International migration law: Developing paradigms and key
challenges  (2007).
19 For an early perspective on the ICRMW by observers closely associated with its
elaboration, see S Hune & J Niessen ‘The first UN Convention on Migrant Workers’
(1991) 9 Netherlands Quarterly of Human Rights  130.30    Chapter 1
that ‘Belgian national law is (in pr actice) highly compatible with the
provisions of the Convention’.20 Oger21 and Touzenis22 reach more or less
the same conclusions for France and Ital y. This conclusion is in line with
the commitment to human rights that  characterise Western countries, and
with their good ratification record of  other international human rights law
treaties. Why, then, would Western advanced democracies prove sounwilling to ratify the ICRMW? How can we understand the low
ratification record of the ICRMW in this context? According to the
‘puzzling’ interpretation, the answer  lies in the misperceptions that
surround the Convention, in the technica l difficulties it raises, and in the
fact that states have only recently come to recognise that migration is an
issue for multilateral cooperation that  requires international standards. 
It is widely reported that the actual content of the ICRMW is the object
of many misunderstandings. Gove rnments would for instance often
wrongly believe that ratification of the ICRMW would force them to
change their legislation. According to MacDonald and Cholewinski,23 this
is the case in Europe, where states cl aim that they have legal objections to
the ICRMW; but the same authors show that this argument does not hold
up under closer examinat ion as ratification would not bring major changes
to their immigration policies. In Asia, Piper writes that the ICRMW is
viewed as ‘an instrument for liberal immigration policy’, and that it would
therefore challenge states’ sovere ign right to control and regulate
migration.24 F r o m  a n  a d v o c a c y  p e r s p e c t i v e ,  t h e  k e y  i s s u e  t h e n  l i e s  i n
correcting these mistaken beliefs. These misunderstandings can also be
linked to the complexity of the IC RMW: arguably a long and detailed
treaty, it addresses a wide range of issues, which encompass not only
labour protection, but also health po licy and the educational system for
example. This raises technical obstacles, as ratification would require ahigh level of coordination amongst a broad range of stat e (and even non-
state) actors. As Cholewinski noted twenty years ago, ‘technical questions
alone … may prevent many states fr om speedily accepting [the ICRMW’s]
provisions’.25 This complexity comes along with a high level of ignorance
surrounding the ICRMW. Even amongst unions, NGOs and other
migration-related actors and institut ions, few people know it and even
20 D Vanheule et al ‘The significance of  the UN Migrant Work ers’ Convention of
18 December 1990 in the event of ra tification by Belgium’ (2005) 6 European Journal of
Migration and Law  4 320.
21 H Oger ‘The French political refusal on Europe’s behalf’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 7
above).
22 K Touzenis ‘Migration and human rights in Italy: Prospects for the ICRMW’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
23 E MacDonald & R Cholewinski ‘The ICRMW and the European Union’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
24 N Piper ‘Obstacles to, and opportunities for, ratification of the ICRMW in Asia’ in
De Guchteneire et al  (n 7 above) 176.
25 R Cholewinski Migrant workers in international human rights law: Their protection in
countries of employment  (1997) 201. The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     31
fewer are capable of mastering its complexity and assessing the issues
raised by a potential ratification. 
Time would constitute an important factor in this respect. In many
countries, migration is (or is perceived as) a relatively new phenomenon,to the extent that governments still find it difficult to apprehend all its
implications and to evaluate th e consequences of ratifying a UN
convention in this field. For example, despite important migration flows,many Asian states still view themselv es as non-migration countries, and
hardly see the need for designing a comprehensive immigration policy.
26
To some extent, this also applies to certain European countries, like
Germany,27 Poland or Norway for example.28 This may be changing,
however: more and more states are confronted with migration-related
problems and are thus incited to recognise the key role played byimmigration, and the need to think abou t a political strategy in this field ‒
a process in which the ICRMW may prove useful. 
There are a few indications that this may already be taking place, at
least to a small extent. Even if not ratified, the ICRMW can indeed play a
potentially useful role, either in insp iring policy reforms or in catalysing
forces amongst migration-related actors. In the UK, for example, Ryan
reported in 2009 that th e Convention enjoyed the support of a range of
non-state actors (unions, civil society) , which use it as a standard in their
input to policymaking processes; as a result, the ICRMW indirectly
influenced political debates and policy reforms.29 Other authors call for
this process to start: in the United States, Lyon argues that while
ratification itself is unlikely, at least opening a debate on the ICRMW
could help push forward political debates on migration.30 This points to
the often-neglected catalysing function  of the Convention. Given its wide-
ranging scope and international nature , it has the potential to federate
different actors in different count ries, and serve as a rallying point.31
Debates on the ICRMW tend to focus on its ratification record, and to
conclude that, if few states have ratified it, then it has failed to make a
difference; while this is correct in many respects, it nevertheless
underestimates its role in shaping th e way migration is discussed by state
and (especially) non-state actors. In a world in which migration is
26 Piper ‘Obstacles to, and opportunities for, ratification of the ICRMW in Asia’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
27 F Hillman & A Klekowski von Koppenfels ‘Migration and human rights in Germany’
in De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
28 MacDonald & Cholewinski ‘The ICRMW and the European Union’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
29 B Ryan ‘Policy on the ICRMW in the United Kingdom’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 7
above).
30 B Lyon ‘The unsigned United Nations Migrant Workers Convention : An overlooked
opportunity to change the brown collar migration paradigm’ (2010) 42  New York
University Journal of Inte rnational Law and Politics  2. See also the chapter by Lyon in this
volume. 
31 Grange & d’Auchamp ‘Role of civil society in campaigning for and using the
ICRMW’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).32    Chapter 1
increasingly debated, and by an increasi ng range of actors , this function of
the ICRMW may be expected to be come more and more relevant. 
Taran elaborates this further by arguing that migration has long
constituted a black hole in global governance.32 The mobility of labour is
directly linked to economic globalisation, but lacks an international
political framework that would make sure it takes place in a way that is
both economically beneficial and respectful of states’ commitments tohuman rights and moral values. Over th e past decades, states have tried to
establish so-called global governance mechanisms to address transnational
issues, like trade or climate change. Migration has not been a priority here
even if, again, this may be changi ng: interest in ‘global migration
governance’ has increased sinc e approximately 2000, with many
international and mult ilateral initiatives.33 The former UN Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of migr ants, François Crépeau, thus calls
for a human rights-based ‘regim e’ for international migration:
Migration is a complex phenomenon whic h affects most, if not all, States in
the world and is closely linked to othe r global issues, such as development,
health, environment and trade. States have created international frameworksfor such other global issues, recognizing the advantages of regulation at the
international level, but despite the exis tence of legal frameworks on migration
issues, a comprehensive framework for mi gration governance is still lacking.
Certain aspects of migration are more frequently discussed at the bilateral and
multilateral levels, such as the connections between migration and
development. However, given that migration is in essence a fundamentallyhuman phenomenon, the Special Rapporteur notes the need for an
international migration governance regime strongly focused on human
rights.
34 
The possible emergence of such an ‘international migration governance
regime’ could be favourable to the ICRMW, as cooperation requires
shared norms and standards – precisely what the Convention has to offer. 
In sum, according to this first interpretation of the ICRMW’s low
ratification record, the core problems  lie in the unpreparedness of states,
which are unaware of its provisions and unable to implement it properly
because of their lack of experience of migration. This would be bound to
change, however, and the compatibilit y of the Convention with existing
laws could eventually make it quite easy  to ratify it – thereby correcting the
odd difference between the ICRMW and other human rights conventions. 
32 P Taran ‘The need for a rights-based approach to migration in the age of globalization’
in De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
33 One can for example mention the organisation of high-level international conferences
on migration, like the UN  High-Level Dialog ue (in 2006, 2013 and probably 2019) or
the Global Forum on Migration and Development (that takes place every year since
2007), see A Pécoud Depoliticising migration: Global governance and international migration
narratives  (2015). 
34 Human rights of mi grants: Note by the Secretary General, GA (7 August 2013), UN
Doc A/68/283 (2013) 3-4. The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     33
4 The ‘logical’ cost-b enefit interpretation
If one looks at the ICRMW from another angle, namely from a cost-benefit
perspective, its low ratification record lo oks very different: it is no longer a
strange mistake that can be corrected by the passage of time or awareness-
raising efforts, but rather the cons equence of fundamen tal imbalances in
migration dynamics, which are deeply unsupportive of migrants’ access to
human rights and, unfortunately, unlik ely to change in the near future.
The central assumption behind this  cost-benefit perspective is that
rights have a cost, and that states ar e unlikely to commit to migrants’ rights
if this does not yield benefits. The pr oblem is that, in the current migration
situation, ratification would enta il costs and bring little benefit to
destination countries. This is mainly due to the asymmetry between them
and origin states: migrants move predominantly from relatively poor torelatively richer regions (whether at the regional or global level), which
means that the ICRMW has unequal implications for the two sides of the
migration equation. Even if it forese es obligations for the origin countries
(like providing pre-migration inform ation), it is mostly destination
countries that have to implement its provisions. This leads to a lack of
reciprocity: if both origin and destinat ion states were to ratify, this would
be beneficial for the former (whose citizens living abroad would enjoy
more rights), but much less for the latter (which do not have many
emigrants in need of protection abroad). If all states were both origin anddestination countries, they would be  equally concerned and ratification
could support a mutual guarantee that would be of interest to all; but the
nature of migration flows make s this an unlikely scenario. 
This is a well-known problem when it comes to any kind of
cooperation over migration issues, especially when compared to other
fields of international cooperation like trade; as Hatton writes:
Migration is much more of a one-way street than is trade. While, in a
multilateral context, trade balances have to add up roughly to zero, net
migration balances do not. If rich an d poor countries were gathered around
the negotiating table, it is difficult to  see how improved terms of access to the
labour markets of the poor(er) countries could be of equal value to similar
conditions of access grante d by rich(er) countries in  return. Indeed, even the
poorer countries may have little incent ive to come to the bargaining table.
Those in poor countries who have th e greatest incentive to support such
negotiations are precisely those who wish to leave.35 
35 TJ Hatton ‘Should we have a WTO for international migration?’ (2007) 22 Economic
Policy  339 364.34    Chapter 1
There is empirical evidence that su pports this analysis. South Africa,
for example, sees no reason to ratify a Convention that would benefit
migrants from its poorer neighbours.36 Piper also notes that, in Asia, this
leads to a competition between origin states: poor countries are reluctant
to ratify because this would signal  a rights-consciousness that would
jeopardise their relationships with ri ch destination countries (particularly
the Gulf States).37 In other words, the two sides of the migration process
are not on an equal footing and, given the socio-economic and political
imbalances between them, destinatio n countries can afford to impose
conditions on origin regions, which have very little bargaining power to
impose respect for the ICRMW’s provisions.
Another implication of this imbala nce is that, from a supply and
demand perspective, destination co untries have access to an almost
unlimited pool of potential migrants  from poorer regions. They have
therefore no incentive to offer rights, as migrants are likely to come
anyway regardless of the level of prot ection they are afforded. This makes
for an unfavourable context, which will change only in the case of a
shortage of migrants. Indeed, this is  what happens with skilled migrants,
who are much less numerous and hence much more sought-after.Destination states are therefore obliged to grant them rights if they want to
attract them. Another difference betw een low-skilled and skilled migrants
is the unequal economic benefits they are expected to bring to thedestination country: low-skilled migran ts are typically thought to generate
low profits, which makes an investment  in granting them rights illogical;
by contrast, skilled workers are beli eved to boost the economy, which
justifies a generous right policy. 
This lead Ruhs to argue that migrants’ rights cannot be apprehended
as a matter of universal legal standard s; they should rather be understood
as an economic variable in immigration policy.
38 States would then decide
how many rights to grant the foreigners they welcome, depending upon
their overall strategy. For example, a country can decide to welcome many
migrants, but is then unlikely to grant them extended rights (as this wouldbe too costly). Opening the doors to skilled (and thus economically
profitable) migrants could, on the co ntrary, be accompanied by a generous
rights policy. In this political econ omy logic, the Convention is bound to
fail: it foresees a horizontal  distribution of rights to all migrants, whatever
their skill level or numbers, whereas ac cess to rights would on the contrary
depend upon market mechanisms – le ading to vertical hierarchy between
migrants and between the range of rights they enjoy. As Vucetic writes, the
36 J Crush et al ‘Migrants’ rights after apartheid: South African responses to the
ICRMW’  in De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
37 N Piper ‘Obstacles to, and opportunities for, ratification of the ICRMW in Asia’
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
38 M Ruhs The price of rights: Regulating international labor migration  (2013).  The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     35
ICRMW is unpopular because it ‘stipu lates too many rights for too many
people’.39 
This argument is both scientific an d normative. Ruhs claims that this
trade-off between numbers and rights is  empirically verifiable; for instance,
European states are generous in terms of rights and therefore opt for tight
immigration policy, whereas the opposite holds true for the Gulf States.
Measuring such variables as ‘rights’  and ‘openness’ is not easy, however
and, inevitably, such empirical findings can be contested, as changes in
variables will lead to different outcomes.40 Politically, the normative
implication of this trade-off is that states should design temporary labourmigration programmes, which would enable more migration, but with
fewer rights than what a treaty like the ICRMW foresees. This would be in
the interest of all, including of migrants, because more of them could thenhave access to employme nt opportunities abroad.
41 
This discussion amounts, in many respects, to the standard opposition
between pragmatists (or realists) and idealists. While generous, those who
support the ICRMW would actually harm migrants’ interests by asking forhigh standards, which states are bo und to resist. Real-world efforts in
favour of migrants should then give up the Convention and limit migrants’
rights to a core set of fundamental ri ghts. The problem, of course, is that
pragmatists’ arguments tend to boil down to a vibrant plea for the status
quo. Indeed, this political economy framework is useful to understand why
migrants fail to enjoy rights. It is  much less useful as a normative and
programmatic agenda, because the very idea behind the ICRMW (and
behind the entire human rights philosophy) is precisely to go beyond the
distribution of rights on the so le basis of wealth and power. 
5 The politics of the ICRMW
Both the ‘puzzling’ legal/technical  and the ‘logical’ cost-benefit  interpretations
display weaknesses. The first one is a little optimistic: indeed, even states
with both a well-established Etat de droit  and with a long-standing
migration history are reluctant to ratify the Convention;42 while arguments
on the need for time and awareness-rais ing efforts were relevant at the time
39 S Vucetic ‘Democracies and international human rights: Why is there no place for
migrant workers?’ (2007) 11 International Journal of Human Rights  4.
40 M Cummins & F Rodriguez ‘Is there a numbers versus rights trade ‐off in immigration
policy? What the data Say’ (2010) 11 Journal of Human Development and Capabilities 2.
41 Such a recommendation fits into a broader and renewed interest in so-called
guestworker systems, which used to be ve ry popular in both the US and Western
Europe until the early 1970s. As Castles note s, however, it is not clear why such
programmes would prove more successful today than in the past. A key lesson from
r e c e n t  h i s t o r y  i s  i n d e e d  t h a t  s u c h  p r o g r a m m e s  i n e v i t a b l y  l e a d  s o m e  m i g r a n t s  t o
overstay, in which case the issue of their st atus and rights becomes quite complex, see
S Castles ‘Guestworkers in Euro pe: A resurrection?’ (2006) 40 International Migration
Review  4. 
42 This is the case for France and Canada for example.36    Chapter 1
when the ICRMW was drafted and adopted, they prove less convincing
today, as the deep resistance of states to this treaty becomes clearer. The
second interpretation is based on  the questionable assumption that
ratification of the ICRMW is costly be cause it would entail more rights for
migrants: this makes sense in some de stination states which lack a strong
human rights tradition (like in Asia or in  the Gulf); but it is less relevant in
Western countries, in which – as noted above – existing laws already grant
migrants the rights that are contai ned in the Convention. If the ICRMW
does not entail a rights-expansiveness, then the cost-benefit argument nolonger holds true and the whole political economy argument regarding
why states do not ratify collapses. Moreover, the cost-benefit interpretation
assumes that the ICRMW improves the rights of migrants only: assuggested in the first section of this chapter, this is not the only way to
frame the issue; one can posit that, by lessening the competition between
foreign and national workers, the Co nvention may be beneficial for a
majority of workers, whether migrant or not. 
This calls for recognising the politi cal nature of the ICRMW, and its
function as a symbol in the global politics of migration. Ratification is not
only a legal or an economic issue; it  is a political decision, based on a
rights-consciousness and embedded in the power relations between the
different actors involved, as well as in the worldviews that inspire
migration policymaking. Technical ar guments over the legal obligations
contained in the ICRMW or the additional costs it would entail for
destination states are certainly important, but tend to miss the point in this
respect. In legal terms, the Convention may well not constitute anadditional set of rights, particularly for those migrants who lawfully live in
Northern countries wi th well-established Etats de droit ; neither would it,
therefore, lead to a real increase in the costs of labour migration. But theselegal and political considerations do not exhaust the issue: indeed, the
ICRMW is also (and, perhaps, above all) contested for political reasons,
both at the domestic and at the international levels. 
Inside destination states, it consti tutes a symbol for the recognition of
migrants’ rights, which is bound to  encounter resistance given the
widespread anti-immigration feelings that exist almost everywhere. Non-
ratification of the ICRMW can also be interpreted as a purely political (or
electoral) problem. As foreigners, mi grants are not citizens and (usually)
do not vote; ratification would then ha ppen only if migrants’ interests are
understood as close to citizens’, or if electorates were to express a solidarity
with migrants and to call upon their governments to grant them rights; but
as long as this is not the case, there is no reason to expect destination statesto ratify. By contrast, in origin countries , ratification is a strategy to protect
citizens, especially those who live abroad, but also those who are left
behind or who may emigrate at some point in the future. It follows that, asthe ratification record of the ICRMW indicates, only origin states are likely
to ratify.  The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     37
But the politics of the ICRMW also works at the international level: by
definition, migration is a phenomenon that concerns more than one
country; even if destination states see it as an issue closely associated withtheir sovereignty, and address migratio n mostly in a unilateral way, it is
difficult not to address this issue at th e international level. But it is equally
difficult for states not to disagree over this issue, and the ICRMW thus
constitutes a battleground betwee n the North and the South, between
origin and destination countries. As no ted above, it was strongly backed by
origin countries. Many Western and European countries, by contrast, were
reluctant to engage in normative st andards regarding migrants’ rights.43 At
the time, in the seventies, less-develop ed countries were hoping to push for
a new economic order, especially a fter the 1973 oil crisis, and migrants’
rights were understood as an issue that origin countries could try to impose
upon destination states. It follows that, from the start, the ICRMW was the
object of North-South disagreements. This divide is still visible: the factthat state parties are almost exclus ively from the South shows that, more
than forty years after the idea of an international convention on migrants’
rights was first proposed, the issue remains highly contested. 
This is, for example, exemplifie d by the question of irregular
migration. Initial drafts of the Convention were rejected because they were
seen as almost encouraging irregular migration, in a way that would
benefit origin countries ’ economies exclusively.44 The final draft is more
consensual, but nevertheless grants rights to irregular migrants in a way
that is much more explicit than in other human rights instruments. While
the Convention establishes a distinction between regular and irregularmigrants, with more rights for the former than the latter, it does not permit
reservations that would exclude irregu lar migrants from the scope of the
Convention (see article 88). From a labour protection or human rights
perspective, this makes a lot of sense. But from the perspective of
destination states, this can be inte rpreted as challenging their right to
control and regulate migrants’ movement s, and as an indication that the
ICRMW is predominantly based on  origin countries’ interests.45 Even if,
legally speaking, the ICRMW does not contain many new rights, its spirit
would be biased in favour of one side of the migration process, leading toan automatic rejection by the other side.
This section further addresses the international politics of the ICRMW
by looking at two issues: the work of the UN on migration and therecommendations by intergovernmenta l organisations; and the situation
43 G Battistella ‘Migration and human rights: The uneasy but essential relationship’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
44 R Böhning ‘The ILO and the new UN Conven tion on Migrant Workers: The past and
future’ (1991) 25 International Migration Review 4.
45 P van Krieken ‘Migrants’ rights and the law of the sea: Further efforts to ensure
universal participation’ (2007) 45 International Migration  1.38    Chapter 1
of ‘in-between’ countries that cut across the North-Sout h divide and shed
a particular light on the ICRMW. 
5.1 The ambivalent role of the UN system 
The attitude of the UN system towards the ICRMW is a clear indication
of its political nature. On the one ha nd, the UN system has been crucial to
make its adoption possible. Even if the Convention lacked the support of
influential states from the beginning of the drafting process, it is very
difficult for such a process to actually stop. Somehow, once it has started,
it goes on. For governments, and especially for those in developed
countries that find themselves in a minority in a setting like the UNGeneral Assembly, it is not easy to  justify why the drafting of a human
rights treaty should be interrupted. As Battistella recalls, Western
governments rather opted for letting the process run its course, while at thesame time making quite clear that  they would not feel bound by the
Convention after adoption.
46 This attitude makes it possible for such a
treaty to be adopted (even if not subs equently ratified). After adoption, the
UN system helps the ICRMW to continue to exist, by routinely producing
reports or statements that keep the to pic alive in international discussions. 
On the other hand, the UN has arguably failed to fully support the
ICRMW. UN agencies, including the ILO,  have historically done little to
promote their respective conventions on migrant workers. The text of the
ICRMW was reportedly not available publicly until 1996, six years after it
was adopted.47 Several observers also noted the unpreparedness of the UN
after 1990 and its inability to back the ICRMW in the early years following
its adoption.48 Part of the problem lies in internal disagreements: as noted
above, the ILO was initially in charge  of migrant workers issues; it then
proved reluctant to let the UN take over, and to put its expertise and
resources at the disposal of the ICRMW. But the UN also faced more
fundamental difficulties: the leading ro l e  p l a y e d  b y  o r i g i n  s t a t e s  i n  t h e
drafting process limited the support from powerful (and wealthy)
governments, resulting in a lack of political support and financial
resources. 
This is quite visible in the evolution of intergovernmental debates over
migration: over the past two decade s, the dominant approach among the
UN and other intergovernmental organ isations (like the IOM) has become
46 G Battistella ‘Migration and human rights: The uneasy but essential relationship’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
47 P Taran ‘The need for a rights-based approach to migration in the age of globalization’
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above) 164.
48 See for example Taran (n 7 above) 164 65; Grange & d’Auchamp, ‘Role of civil society
in campaigning for and using the ICRMW’  in De Guchteneire et al  (n 7 above) 76-77;
JB Grugel & N Piper ‘Do rights promote development?’ Global Social Policy  (2009) 9
79. The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     39
more and more centred on the economic benefits of migration, as well as
on the crime and security implications  of unauthorised migration. This has
resulted in an emphasis on the so -called ‘migration and development’
nexus, as well as on phenomena like human trafficking. The ICRMW is
hardly mentioned in thes e discussions, and sometimes even viewed with
explicit scepticism, as it  would be at odds with this ‘managerial’ logic.49
Moreover, many of today’s internationa l initiatives on migration (like the
Global Forum on Migration and Develo pment) are state-owned, reflecting
governments’ reluctance to give the UN too prominent a role therein. This
also goes along with an emphasis on non-binding soft law instruments to
regulate migration, rather than on  hard international law treaties.50
Finally, states have displayed a clear preference for bilateral or regional
approaches to migration governance, ra ther than for genuinely multilateral
initiatives.51 
The picture is therefore ambivalent: without the ILO or the UN, there
would be no internationa l standards pertaining to  migrant workers; but
even amongst those organisations th at are tasked with promoting and
monitoring these legal instruments, th ere are deep political disagreements
on how to apprehend migration, and on the emphasis that should be puton human rights. This lack of political support is a major obstacle to
increased acceptance of the ICRMW and cannot be addressed without a
better recognition of the political dimension of the Convention. Overall,
UN and other international organisati ons tend to downplay the political
sensitivity of migration-related issues by, for example, arguing that it can
be addressed in a way that is beneficial for all, or that helping migrants ismerely a humanitarian issue disco nnected from economic and labour
market forces. This has of  course to do with the intergovernmental setting
in which they work, which makes it diffi cult to address openly political and
sensitive topics. But this also ma kes it impossible to recognise that
migration policy is marked by core po litical (or even moral) issues that
cannot be left unaddressed.
52
This points to the need for renewed political coalitions around the
Convention. While advocates of migrants’ rights (origin states, unions or
NGOs) traditionally have limited bar gaining power, they may nevertheless
find it possible to promote the ICRMW, particularly by relying on the
legitimacy of human rights in Western democratic culture and in
49 G Goodwin-Gill ‘Migrant rights and managed migration’ in V Chetail (ed)
Mondialisation, migration et droits de l’homme: Le droit international en question/Globalisation, migration and human ri ghts: International law under review  (2007). 
50 S Grant ‘GCIM Report: Defining an “ethical compass” for international migration
policy’ (2006) 44 International Migration  1; A Pécoud ‘The UN Convention on Migrant
Workers’ Rights and internationa l migration management’ (2009) 23 Global Society:
Journal of Interdisciplinary International Relations 3.
51 ‘Human rights of migrants: Note by the Secretary General’ UN General Assembly
(7 August 2013) UN Doc A/68/283 (2013).
52 A Pécoud Depoliticising migration: Global governance and international migration narratives
(2015). 40    Chapter 1
supranational or international institut ions (like the European Union, see
below). As this discussion makes clear,  there are few real obstacles to the
ICRMW and, in developed countries, refusal to ratify a human rightstreaty is potentially difficult to justify.  As long as the issue is not raised, or
raised with little insistence, it is possi ble to ignore it. This  has been the case,
as the Convention has long suffered from very low levels of awareness andvisibility. This is changing however, and while the very topic of migrants’
rights will remain politically contes ted and sensitive, there might be room
for envisaging a brighter  future for the ICRMW.
53 
On a different note, this political approach to the ICRMW points to
the fact that rights rarely exist in an  abstract and absolute manner; they are
always the object of bargains over the extent to which they are to be
implemented, and therefore subject to  ongoing political negotiations. It
follows that, as Alba writes, ‘much of the discussion of migrant abuse
concerns rights not being enforced, ra ther than their absence on paper’.54
Measuring rights is therefore difficult, as the real issue lies less in their
formal existence than in their translat ion into practice, especially when it
comes to undocumented migrants. In this respect, the Convention may not
change the content of the rights available to migrants (at least not inWestern developed countries); but it ca n have an impact on the context in
which different actors (government, migrants, employers, unions, civil
society) interact and negotiate over th e way rights are made available. This
makes clear that migrants’ access to rights is a political issue, which
depends upon the power relations between the actors that play a role
therein. 
5.2 In-between states
Another observation that can be made  concerns the grey zone in which
certain states find (or have found) themselves with respect to ratifying the
ICRMW. While the Convention has been the object of disagreementsbetween the North and the South, the composition of these two blocks is
sometimes unclear and has changed over time. It follows that some states
are not clearly on one side only and are characterised by an in-betweennature that makes their relationship to the ICRMW more complex. This is
not to say that the divide between origin and destination countries, or
between developed and less-developed states, has disappeared; there are
still very real diverging interests am ongst countries when it comes to the
global politics of migration. Rather, it is to suggest that those states that
53 A Desmond ‘The triangle that could square the circle? The UN International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, the EU and the Universal Periodic Review’ (2015) 17 European Journal
of Migration and Law 39; N Piper & S Rother ‘Let's argue about migration: Advancing a
right(s) discourse via communica tive opportunities’ (2012) 33 Third World Quarterly  9.
54 F Alba ‘Martin Ruhs’ The price of rights : Flexible accommodation vs all-encompassing
norms?’ (2015) 3 Migration Studies  2. The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     41
find themselves in this grey zone can shed light on situations of non-
ratification that are complex and no t attributable to a single factor. 
One can first mention states that, while traditionally on the origin side
of the migration process, have grad ually become destination countries.
The best example is probably Mexico, which was one of the chief
advocates of the ICRMW from the very  beginning and ratified it in 1999.
As Díaz and Kuhner recall, this was pa rt of a strategy to protect Mexican
migrants in the United States. But Me xico is now also a destination and a
transit country. This raises major challenges, but, as these authors further
note, ‘Mexico is in a position to sh ow the international community that a
state which both receives and sends migrants can ratify and comply with
the Convention’.55 More or less similar observations could be made in
relation to other non-Western count ries, like Morocco or Argentina.
What is perhaps less well-known is that several European countries
used to be in a relatively similar si tuation. Southern European countries,
in particular, were predominantly st ates of origin when the ICRMW was
first conceived; when it was eventual ly adopted, they had moved to the
destination side. Portugal and Italy, for example, had ratified both ILO
Conventions by the early eighties. But in the nineties, their concerns were
no longer centred on the protection of  their emigrants; they had started to
experience immigration, which ch anged their attitude towards the
Convention.56 It is even reported that they used their own experience to
warn other countries that considered ra tifying, especially in North Africa,
arguing that sooner or later they would have to apply the ICRMW to their
own immigrants – and that they shou ld be cautious when committing to
such standards.57 According to several ob servers, Italy considered
ratification quite seriously and did not see major obstacles to do so; the
main problem rather seemed to have re sided in its political instability, with
frequent changes of gove rnments and the difficulty of ensuring consistency
in policy orientations.58 
In Portugal, the situation appeared to have been quite different, as the
country is reported to ha ve been discouraged from ratifying in the context
of its accession to the EU (which to ok place in 1986). This is extremely
difficult to document: in principle, there is no conflict between EU
membership and ratification of an international human rights treaty, and
EU discussions on this matter are highly  unlikely to be formal or public. It
remains, however, that several obse rvers have noted th e unsupportive role
played by the EU: from the authors’ personal experience, it appears that
most of the people interested in the ICRMW have heard rumours
55 G Díaz & G Kuhner ‘Mexico’s role in promoting an implementing the ICRMW’  in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 abovve) 241.
56 K Touzenis ‘Migration and human rights in Italy: Prospects for the ICRMW’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above).
57 Graziano Battistella, interview, June 2015. 
58 Mariette Grange, interview, March 2015. 42    Chapter 1
according to which the EU would instru ct new member states, or potential
candidates for EU membership, not to ratify. Given the absence of in-
depth research on this sensitive topic, it is difficult to assess the extent towhich this assessment is correct. What is  clear is that EU states function as
a kind of benchmark: countries in the EU periphery attempt to change their
policies and legislation according to European and EU standards, and are
actively encouraged to do so through EU support or by intergovernmental
bodies (like the ICMPD).59 As a result, states which have recently joined
the EU, or that aim at doing so, will not consider the ICRMW as a priority,
and will prefer to emulate what other EU states do. Whether this means
that some of these states genuinely wanted to ratify, but were kept from
doing so because of EU pressure, ca nnot be said with any certainty. 
What is certain, however, is that the process of European integration
did not contribute to broader ac ceptance of the ICRMW. Migration
became an issue for Europe at more or less the same time as the ICRMW
was finalised and adopted. The 1985 Sche ngen treaty, in particular, paved
the way for a borderless zone in th e EU, while the 1999 Amsterdam treaty
formally established migration as a matter of competence for the EU.
While this did not create an EU i mmigration policy (which, to a large
extent, does still not exist), it neve rtheless made clear that the growing
interdependencies between European states were inevitably going to
impact migration dynamics; as MacD onald and Cholewinski observe, this
made for a convenient ‘EU alibi’, as member states could justify the non-
ratification of the ICRMW by pointing to the need of an European strategy
on that matter.60 
6 Conclusion
The ICRMW has, from the start, been the object of heated debate. Of the
ten core international human rights instruments, it is clearly the most
controversial and contested. While it would be erroneous to consider that
other human rights treaties are fully consensual,61 the unease with the
ICRMW reflects a broader unease with migration at large, and with the
role migrants should play in destin ation societies. It also reflects a
59 European influence can even be felt far away from its neighbourhood: Piper
documents that Japan and the Republic of Korea, for example, tend to look at the
attitude of European countries before developing their own strategy in terms of human
rights and of the ratification of international standards. Piper ‘Obstacles to, andopportunities for, ratification of the ICRMW in Asia’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 7
above) 177. 
60 MacDonald & Cholewinski ‘The ICRMW and the European Union’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above). See also the chapter by Desmond in this volume. 
61 Taran recalls that acceptance of the ICRMW was made further difficult because it was
adopted at a time when human rights at large became more openly contested,particularly during the 1993 Vienna World Conference on Huma n Rights. Taran ‘The
need for a rights-based approach to migration in the age of globalization’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 7 above) 157-60. The politics of the UN Migrant Workers Convention     43
somewhat ‘sedentary’ assumption, according to which people should
‘normally’ remain in their own state,62 as well as the often implicit
assumption that nationals are somehow more deserving than foreignersand should have priority access to human rights. These controversies over
migrants’ rights have, as argued in this chapter, done much harm to the
ICRMW – to the extent that it remains, up until today, a much under-ratified and under-used legal instrument.
But the controversial nature of the ICRMW could also be viewed as a
good thing. It indeed makes clear that migration, and the rights that should
be granted to migrant workers, are political matters. One can argue atlength about the legal and economic  implications of ratifying the
Convention; but as this chapter has tried to show, the core disagreement is
of a political nature. Human rights are sometimes characterised by a kindof depoliticisation process, whereby everybody seems to generally agree as
to their relevance (while not necessarily translating them into practice).
This is not the case with the ICRMW, which represents one of the very fewinternational codifications of human rights to be openly contested by even
the most human rights-friendly countri es. This has often remained implicit
and unnoticed, as the low visibility of the Convention has meant thatgovernments in destination states  could avoid clearly positioning
themselves. 
But as this changes, the rights of migrant workers may become the new
frontier for human rights, and for soci al and political progress at large. In
a world in which many countries in  the global South face persistent
economic disadvantage and socio-politica l instability, migration is likely to
remain a global trend, with a lasting impact on destination societies. Theexisting political responses to pe oples’ mobility, such as the neat
distinction between ‘economic’ migr ants and ‘political’ refugees, will
prove increasingly inadequate, and mo re and more obviously so. This is
not new, of course. But this ‘age of migration’
63 will make the key
questions raised by the ICRMW ever more acute: issues such as the rights
of non-nationals; their role in the labour market; the recognition of theirpresence and needs; the responsibility  of states and employers; and the
need for international cooperation, will be more and more difficult to
ignore. Importantly, and as early- twentieth century efforts by the ILO
already demonstrated, these do not only concern foreigners or migrants,
but all workers and members of both origin and destination societies. To avery large extent, the appropriate political framework to address these
questions remains to be invented. There is no guarantee that it will emerge
soon, nor is it certain that the Convention will play a role therein. But byenvisaging a world in which migran t workers have full access to human
62 O Bakewell ‘Keeping them in their plac e: The ambivalent relationship between
development and migration in Africa’ (2008) 29 Third World Quarterly  7.
63 S Castles et al The age of migration: International population movements in the modern world
(2013).44    Chapter 1
rights, the ICRMW at least raises the right questions, and could eventually
come into its own as a symbol for fa irer and more balanced approaches to
international migration and global affairs.45Lisa Simeone and Nicola Piper
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
[I]t turned out that the moment human beings lacked their own government
and had to fall back on their minimum ri ghts, no authority was left to protect
them and no institution was willin g to guarantee them ... [What was]
supposedly inalienable, proved to be unenforceable.
Hannah Arendt, 19511
Judging by headlines in the popular press,  we are living in ‘times of crisis’.
Economic, political and environmenta l shocks are driving international
migration on a scale not seen since the end of World War II, galvanising
many of the same debates. This is no accident; institutional arrangements
defining the landscape of  migration policy today are largely the product of
political and ideological struggles surrounding post-war reconstruction.
The sociopolitical context in which th ese institutions operate has changed
dramatically with the deepening of a globally networked economy. Yet
throughout this period, controvers ies about racism and xenophobia,
humanitarian obligation, and national sovereignty have had a tendency to
reproduce similar dilemmas. For example, as Hannah Arendt famouslyobserved, many of those who slip thro ugh the cracks between nation-states
become legally invisible at the local level, however integral they may
become to the communities in which they live and work.
Herself ‘stateless’ at the end of World War II, Arendt lived the bitter
irony of an emergent world order in  which human rights were a function
of national citizenship. Even as the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (Universal Declaration) was being drafted, she expressedskepticism with regard to an international legal regime that guaranteed
rights as a natural abstraction, arguing that such a conceptualisation
1 H Arendt ‘The decline of the nation-state and the end of the rights of man’ in The
origins of totalitarianism  (2004) 372.2CHAPTERMAKING  RIGHTS  IN
TIMES  OF CRISIS :
CIVIL SOCIETY  AND  THE
MIGRANT  WORKERS
CONVENTION46    Chapter 2
obscures the active, historical proce ss through which we create rights in
public life. According to Arendt, refugees are ‘the most symptomatic group
in contemporary politics’2 because they make evident a contradiction that
lies at the heart of the liberal nation -state itself, a universal rule of law
authorised by ‘a people’ with a pa rticular and necessarily exclusive
membership. 
The paradox involved in the loss of hu man rights is that such loss coincides
with the instant when a person becomes a human being in general – without a
profession, without a citizenship, wi thout an opinion, without a deed by
which to identify and specify himself [sic] –  and different in general,
representing nothing but his [sic]  own absolutely unique individuality which,
deprived of expression within and ac tion upon a common world, loses all
significance.3 
She considered the post-war refugee cr isis not as the aberrant consequence
of war, but a feature of national sove reignty itself, one that would continue
to manifest itself through discrimina tion and criminalisation of migrants. 
Today, migrants in many countries have effectively traded their
citizenship rights at home for a job elsewhere. This may be because those
rights have lost their meaning under in tolerable conditions of war, poverty,
environmental crisis, political repressi on, or discrimination. Others leave
home to reunite with family, or to  find a better job, education, or
investment capital. Whatever the comb ination of factors that impels that
drastic and often dangerous step, mo st international migrants will find
work, wherever they land.4 As such, migrants are likely to be integral
participants in multiple life-worlds, contributing through their labour,
social networks and remittances to  welfare and economic development
both at home and abroad.5 This situation often receives tacit approval as
long as it enhances local competitiveness and preserves the viability of
other, better-paid jobs. On the other ha nd, fears of economic insecurity and
terrorism have also fuel ed xenophobia in many countries, contributing to
a volatile policy environment indiffer ent to both the contributions and the
needs of non-citizens.
2 Arendt (n 1 above) 353.
3 Arendt (n 1 above) 383.4 As of 2013, about 232 million people re side outside their country of birth.  According
to the ILO, most of these persons, or about 90 per cent – a population roughly the size
of Brazil’s – are working or being supported by someone who is. ILO International
labour migration: A rights-based approach  (2010) 15-19. About 7 per cent of this total, or
15.7 million persons, are classified as refugees. UN Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, Population Division Trends in international migrant stock: The 2013 revision
United Nations database, POP/DB/MIG /Stock/Rev 2013. See www .unmigration.
org. (accessed 25 October 2017).
5 Key sources on the formation of transnat ional communities include: L Basch et al
Nations unbound: Transnational projects, postcolonial predicaments and deterritorialized
nation-states  (1994); A Ong Flexible citizenship: The cultural logics of transnationality (1999);
and J Urry Mobilities (2007).  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     47
These developments manifest the ways in which globalisation both
challenges and consolidates nation al sovereignty. Sociologists have
brought attention to the ways in which differential pathways in the
international circulation of money,  goods, services, and people have
contributed to a gradual mutation of state-centred border regimes.
Increasingly, international mobilities traverse a global web of borderedspaces, with variable sites of enforcement governed by often contradictory
norms and practices at multiple scales of jurisdiction.6 Within this
increasingly fragmented institutional terrain, rearrangements of economic
interest and legal author ity streamline no rmative processes in ways that
enhance efficiency at the expense of transparency.7 The encompassment of
migration policy within security disc ourse reflects this trend, which is
giving rise to autonomous systems la rgely beyond the reach of traditional
democratic processes. On the other ha nd, these dynamics are also creating
a transnational public sphere of civi l society organisations, committed to
preserving a space for participatory politics wherever critical decisions are
being made. 
If Arendt is right that the exclus ion of the non-citizen has been a
condition of possibility for national so vereignty, then attention to changes
in the conceptualisation of that crit ical figure – as migrant or refugee,
desirable worker or unwelcome invade r – may illuminate transformations
in the institution of citizenship.8 I n  t h i s  c h a p t e r ,  w e  p u r s u e  s u c h  a n
analysis with respect to the errati c trajectory of the 1990 International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families (ICRMW).  Like the 1951 Convention Related
to the Status of Refugees, the ICRM W asserts an obligation by sovereign
states to recognise a non-citizen’s right to have rights. The earlier
convention applies to an unrecognised foreigner’s rights at entry and while
under the protection of a state granting asylum; the latter applies to all non-
6 Sociologist Saskia Sassen calls this diffusion of border regulation ‘transversal
borderings’. See S Sassen ‘Bordering capabilities versus borders: Implications for
national borders’ (2009) 30 Michigan Journal of International Law  567.  
7 It may appear as though institutional fragmentation would undermine rather than
enhance efficiency. As a number of observer s have pointed out, however, tendentious
interpretations of the ‘rule of law’ and a ‘thinning out’ of bureaucratic processes canfacilitate discretionary decision-making in ways that serve short-term managerial
objectives. See C Dauvergne ‘Sovereignty, migration and the rule of law in global
times’ (2004) 67 The Modern Law Review 588-615 . For more on the transformations of
authority and scale within contemporary legal systems, see F von Benda-Beckmann et
al (eds) Rules of law and laws of ruling  (2008); P Schiff Berman ‘The globalization of
jurisdiction’ 2002 151 iUniversity of Pennsylvania Law Review  311; and JDR Craid & S
Michael Lynk Globalization and the future of labour law  (2006).  
8 An extensive legal scholarship on the denationalisation of citizenship has emerged in
recent years. See L Bosniak ‘Citiz enship denationalized’ (2000) 7 Indiana Journal of
Global Legal Studies  447; A Shachar The birthright lottery: Citizenship and global economy
(2009); and W Boyd ‘Ways of seeing in environmental law’ (2010) 37 Ecology Law
Quarterly  843. In the social scienc es literature, see S Sassen (n 6 above); EF Isin Being
political: Genealogies of citizenship  (2002); S Bibler Coutin Nations of emigrants: Shifting
boundaries of citizenship in El Salvador and the United States (2007); and T Nail The figure of
the Migrant  (2015).48    Chapter 2
citizens already residing in anothe r country. Strictly speaking, their
contents are complementary, mutually reinforcing, and consistent with a
growing body of international law that recognises ‘the inherent dignity and
the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family’.9
However, as nation-states struggle to assert boundaries in the midst of
ongoing crises, real and perceived, re sistance to both Conventions brings
into stark relief the practical li mitations of this formulation. 
In the pages that follow, we consider current anxieties over refugee
admissions and the role of migrant workers within the historical context of
these landmark treaties. Separated by forty years of dramatic change, they
represent different moments in the unfolding of the legal and political
tensions at the heart of Arendt’s paradox, as colonial independence
movements, the end of the Cold War, and changes in the organisation ofcapitalism generated new migrations and inflected political sensitivities
regarding how to address them. Notwit hstanding significant shifts in the
human rights landscape, however, negotiations surrounding the drafting
and promotion of the ICRMW have taken place on a preexisting field of
legal qualifications that sabotage its reception by many states, even as
certain features of the global enviro nment have intensified its urgency and
mobilised an international movement for migrants’ rights. Today, the legal
distinction between refugee and migrant represents a fault line of political,
institutional and ethical tensions th at underlies the international law
governing the treatment of non-citize ns. Yet human rights, what historian
Kenneth Cmiel called ‘that noble, yet sl ippery phrase’, are made not given;
they circulate like a global currency representing changing aspirations of
justice, expressing the local histories of universal claims.10 Thus, we argue
that the heated debates over categorical definitions are less a matter of legal
interpretation than of co ntradiction embedded with in the law itself, which
is never devoid of politics . Furthermore, in turning to the lessons of history
to make sense of our current conundru m, we find that the ICRMW serves
as a particularly revealing case st udy for considering how rights have
become a compelling motivation for collective action.
2 Why must they move? The paradox of the 
deserving migrant
Whether it is considered the cause or the consequence of crisis,
international migration tends to provoke state action in a political climateof uncertainty. In recent years, the US government has been taken to task
for detaining undocumented minors and their guardians, while Mexico
9 Preamble, Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
10 K Cmiel ‘The recent histor y of human ri ghts’ (2004) 109 American Historical Review  126
134.   Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     49
cracks down against Central Americans along its own southern border;11
the Dominican Republic implemented a court ruling denying birthright
citizenship to children of Haitian descent;12 and researchers investigating
the abuse of migrant workers have been intimidated, harassed, and
expelled from Thailand, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates.13 The
Australian High Court has upheld the offshore detention of asylum seekers
on the pacific island of Nauru,14 while the Florida state legislature debated
a bill that would allow the governor to use military force to block refugees
from entering or resettling in the state.15 Even in Europe, where the
principle of non-refoulement has been most thoroughly incorporated into
national and regional statutes,16 politicians espousing an agenda of nativist
populism have gained gr ound throughout Europe,17 as a growing
reluctance to grant asylum to ‘third-country nationals’18 erupts into open
hostility. 
Confronted with the most significant cross-border displacement of
people since Arendt’s time, many Europeans express skepticism withrespect to the viability of the Refugee Convention.19 The individuals
seeking asylum are not only fleeing th e war in Syria, they point out, but
also the warlords of Somalia, the flooding in Bangladesh, devastation inIraq and Afghanistan, and numerou s other circumstances of varying
severity. In fact, the vast majority of these asylum seekers do not qualify as
11 See Jenny L Flores et al v Jeh Johnson et al 2015 CD Cal CV 85-4544 DMG (AGRx); and
‘Mexico’s migration crackdown escalates dangers for Central Americans’ The
Guardian  13 October 2015.
12 See JM Katz ‘In exile’ New York Times Magazine  13 January 2016; Case of Expelled
Dominicans and Haitians v Dominican Republic  IACHR (28 Aug 2014) Ser C 282(1)
Official Summary; and K Culliton-González ‘ Born in the Americas: Birthright citizenship
and human rights’  (2012)  25 Harvard Human Rights Journa l 127. 
13 See ‘Human rights in Thailand: Andy Hall’s legal battle to defend migrant workers’
The Guardian  22 January 2016; ‘UK human rights researchers held in Qatar Freed’ The
Guardian  9 September 2014; ‘NYU professor is  barred by United Arab Emirates’ New
York Times  16 March 2016.
14 ‘High court finds offshore detention lawful’ The Sydney Morning Herald  3 February
2016.
15 ‘Florida bills would give state power to block refugees’ Naples Daily News  22 January
2016.
16 ‘ Non-refoulement ’ is the legal term of art for the prohibition of expulsion or return: ‘No
Contracting State shall expel or return  (“refouler”) a refugee in any manner
whatsoever to the frontiers of territories wh ere his life or freedom would be threatened
on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group orpolitical opinion.’ Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees art 33(1). See
European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights and Council of Europe Handbook on
European law relating to asylum, border and immigration  (2014).
17 See ‘The March of Europe’s Little Trumps’ The Economist  12 December 2015;
RM Dancygier Immigration and conflict in Europe  (2010).
18 See T Hatton ‘The rise and fall of asylum: What happened and why?’ (2009) 119 The
Economic Journal  183. In Europe, the term ‘third-coun try national’ refers to individuals
who are nationals of a country that is not a member state of the European Union. 
19 UNHCR Global trends report  (2015); Amnesty International ‘EU-Turkey Summit: EU
and Turkish leaders deal death blow to th e right to seek asyl um’ 8 March 2016 https:/
/www .amnesty.org/en/latest /news/2016/03/eu-turkey-summ it-reaction/ (accessed
1 June 2016).50    Chapter 2
‘Convention refugees’, although their moral claim for protection cannot be
denied. To quote Alexander Betts: 
[A]lthough states’ obligations to thos e fleeing persecution are based on a
relatively high degree of legal precision, those relating to states’ obligations topeople fleeing deprivations ar e based on legal imprecision.20 
The diversity of this ‘mixed migration’ brings to the fore the logical
inconsistencies of a refugee protec tion regime founded on ambiguous
criteria, exposing the parallel classi fications of ‘labour migrant’ and
‘refugee’ as disparate categories that  are neither mutually exclusive nor
internally coherent.
Of course, the Refugee Convention  was never intended to offer a
comprehensive solution to the poli cy challenges of international
migration. One of the earliest legally -binding treaties to follow the 1948
Universal Declaration, it requires only that states provide temporary
protection to a relatively narrow cate gory of persons who have already left
their country, and can demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution,
should they return, for reasons of ra ce, religion, nationality, political
opinion, or membership of a particular social group.21 As the specialised
agency concerned with rights at  work, the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) was tasked with representing the interests of migrants
within global labour markets. The Migration for Employment Convention
(Revised), 1949 (No 97) and the Migrant Workers Convention, 1975 (No
143) both set minimum standards for equality of treatment, and provide
guidelines for preventing the abuse of  migrant workers. By bringing these
labour rights into the human rights framework, the architects of the 1990
ICRMW hoped to lend them a higher de gree of visibility, sectoral scope
and international prestige.22 Yet states have been reluctant to support any
of these instruments,23 and today the ICRMW is  rarely raised – by
advocates, journalists, or even human rights officials – as a point of
20 A Betts Survival migration: Failed governan ce and the crisis of displacement  (2013) 2.
21 The 1951 Convention was drafted explicitly to address the post-war refugee crisis in
Europe; the 1967 Protocol eliminated its te mporal restriction beyond 1 January 1951,
and extended its universal coverage for the majority of its signatories. See P Weis The
Refugee Convention, 1951: The Travaux Préparatoires analyzed with a Commentary by Dr PaulWeis (1990).
22 As with UN treaties, ILO conventions allow states some flexibility in tailoring their
commitments to their unique legal and administrative systems, and degree ofdevelopment. However, while certain conv entions may permit partial ratification,
states cannot make reservations to their commitments. This has discouraged
ratification of ILO conventions in some cases. Some states also object to ILO’stripartite structure, which allows unions to play a key role in the organisation’s
governance. See G Battistella ‘Migration an d human rights: The uneasy but essential
relationship’ in De Guchteneire et al (eds) Migration and human rights: The United
Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (2009).
23 49 of 187 ILO member states have ratifi ed Convention 97, and 23 have ratified
Convention 143. To date, 51 states are pa rty to the ICRMW: Albania, Argentina,
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belize, Bo livia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, East Timor, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Guinea, Honduras, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan,  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     51
reference.24 Though the ICRMW arguably creates no new rights beyond
those already codified in existing treaties, it has by far the lowest
ratification rate of any of the core international human rights instruments,
and has gained the support of only Argentina amongst major countries of
immigration.25 The Refugee Convention, on the other hand, is one of the
most widely ratified treaties in the United Nations system.
This disparity in the legal author ity of the two Conventions suggests
that the symbolic recognition of rights  does not always coincide with the
instrumental rationalities that are ke y to the application of international
norms. Some rights have a price th at states are not willing to pay,26
whatever their formal necessity according to the Universal Declaration.
Over the past century, standards for equality of treatment have developed
in dialectical tension with economic and political imperatives, giving rise
to a legal infrastructure at the international level that is increasingly
sensitive to patterns of exclusion ba sed on race and ethnicity, gender, age
and disability.27 Because national govern ments remain the primary
guarantors of rights, however, st ruggles for recognition are generally
realised within the boundaries of the nation-state, where efforts to protect
the rights of non-citizens have ofte n had difficulty gaining the support of
government or civil society actors co ncerned with protecting the interests
of domestic constituencies.28 Thus, although international migration
policies are driven by interests at every level, they have historicallyrepresented a blind spot with regard to the formal guarantees of liberal
democracy.29 
23 Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Ma uritania, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Syria,
Tajikistan, Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay and Venezuela.
24 For example, two key human rights inde xes barely mention the ICRMW , despite
extensive discussion of the other core co nventions. See HJ Steiner et al (eds)
International human rights in co ntext: Law, politics, morals (2008) where it appears twice in
1492 pages: in a list of Human Rights Trea ties on 918 and in a table on 920; and
L Henkin et al (eds) Human rights  (2009), where it is comp letely absent, despite an
extensive section entitled ‘Refugees an d extraterritorial application’ 276-314.
25 It should be noted, however, that Burkina Faso, Ghana, Libya, Mexico, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nigeria, Senegal and Turkey have become important states of transit and, insome cases, destination in recent years.
26 See M Ruhs The price of rights: Regulating international migration  (2013).
27 For competing histories of the emergence of the contemporary human rights regime,
see L Hunt Inventing human rights: A history (2008); and S Moyn The last utopia (2012). 
28 See L Malkki ‘Citizens of humanity: Internationalism and the imagined community of
nations’ (1994) 3 Diaspora  41; J Crush ‘The dark side of democracy: Migration,
xenophobia and human rights  in South Africa’ (2001) 38 International Migration  103;
JA Bustamante ‘Immigrants’  vulnerability as subjects  of human rights’ (2002) 36
International Migration Review  333. N Piper ‘Rights of foreign workers and the politics
of migration in South-East and East Asia’  (2004) 42 International Migra tion 71; and
D Cole ‘The idea of human ity: Human rights and im migrants’ rights’ (2006) 37
Columbia Human Rights Law Review  627.  
29 For three very different developments of this idea, see JH Carens The ethics of
immigration  (2013); L Bosniak The citizen and the alien: Dilemmas of contemporary
membership (2006); and B Honig Democracy and the foreigner  (2001).52    Chapter 2
This particular vulnerability of migrant workers to invisibility and
exploitation has been evident to scholars and reformers for over a
century.30 The heyday of industrial capitalism wrought its own
globalisation effects across the glob e, as technological innovations,
colonial expansion, and social uphe aval generated unprecedented flows of
people, goods, and capital throughout the world. In 1889, pioneermigration scholar EG Rave nstein observed that: 
Bad or oppressive laws, heavy taxation , an unattractive climate, uncongenial
social surroundings, and even compulsion (slave trade, transportation), allhave produced and are still producing curr ents of migration, but none of these
currents can compare in volume with  that which arises from the desire
inherent in most men [sic ] to ‘better’ themselves  in material respects.31 
Between 1860 and 1914, as many as 80 million rural Europeans moved to
cities within Europe, and 52 million  moved to the Americas, Asia or
Oceania.32 Also significant in terms of sheer numbers during this period
were an estimated 3.1 million Chinese and 1.3 million Indians, migrating
to the Americas, Southeast Asia, and the Caribbean.33 There were
significant variations amongst the ‘push’ and ‘pull’ factors motivatingthese patterns of mobility, which often involved seasonal or temporary
work, as well as the expansion or redirection of pre-existing labour
markets. 
Though the demand for workers an d growing economic integration
encouraged relatively open immigratio n regimes, techniques to identify
and manage population movements were a preoccupation of emerging
state bureaucracies throughout the 19t h century. Parallel with the brutal
importation of African sl aves to the new world were regulated indenture
and guestworker programmes , particularly for Asians recruited into the
colonies. Particular hist ories gave rise to a variety of sociopolitical
configurations across the global landscape. For example, despite
continuous hostility to wards foreign workers in France, weak labour
politics contributed to a tradition of relatively open immigration policiesand a fluctuating economic dependence on migrants;
34 while in Germany,
the demand for surplus labour was met through regulations privileging
certain ethnic groups.35 Even the ‘assisted lai ssez faire’ invitations of
settler societies such as the United States, South Africa and Australia were
30 See KJ Bade Migration in European history (2003); A McKeown ‘Global migration,
1846-1940’ (2004) 15 Journal of World History  155; and A Zolberg A nation by design:
Immigration policy in the fashioning of America  (2006).
31 EG Ravenstein ‘The laws  of migration’ (1889) 52 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
286.
32 See C Strikwerda ‘Tides of migration, currents of history: The state, economy, and the
transatlantic movement of la bor in the Nineteenth and Tw entieth Centuries’ (1999) 44
International Review of Social History  367.
33 R Sanjek ‘Rethinking migratio n, ancient to future’ (2003) 3 Global Networks  315.
34 G Noiriel The French melting pot: Immigration,  citizenship and national identity (1996).
35 Restrictions against Jewish and Polish migrants were frequently subverted by farmers
and industrialists intent on reducing labour costs. See Bade (n 30 above).  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     53
accompanied by racial exclusions  and expectations of national
assimilation, reflecting public in vestment in social reproduction.36 
During the interwar period, the swelling of nationalism amidst
interstate tensions initiated the ado ption of identity documents, census
technologies and an intensification of policing in most countries. This
institutionalisation of state power implied the ethno-national branding of
foreign-born populations through legal quotas, deportations andwidespread stigma both in law and practice. Though the Treaty of
Versailles created an intergovernmental infrastructure of peacekeeping and
human rights institutions, the climat e was not amenable to international
coordination, and the League of Nation s was hogtied from the start. In the
Preamble to the ILO’s 1919 Constituti on, ‘protection of the interests of
workers when employed in countries other than their own’ and‘recognition of the principle of equal remuneration for work of equal value’
featured amongst the new organisation’s key imperatives.
37 However, the
ILO could not convince governments to  address migration, and efforts by
the International Federation of Trade Unions were no more successful. As
argued by John Torpey, states seized a monopoly over ‘the legitimate
means of movement’ in response to a growing international imperative to
sort their own citizens – and exclude outsiders – in order to more
effectively extract and mobilise reso urces within a congealing system of
states.38 As depicted vividly by Arendt, this process of consolidation
culminated in the displacement of  somewhere between 50 and 60 million
refugees by the World War II, amountin g to about 10 per cent of Europe’s
total population, as well as the murder of 11 million Jews, Gypsies, Slavs,homosexuals, people with disabi lities and political dissidents.39
Prior to the 1951 Convention, re fugee policies were generally
conceived in relation to labour mobility. According to Katy Long: 
While the focus on migration was to so m e  e x t e n t  d i c t a t e d  b y  t h e  l a c k  o f
prospects for return or local integratio n, it also reflected a broader cultural
understanding that placed economic poverty at the centre of a European planfor ‘emigration as development.’40 
This ‘broader cultural understanding’ survived into the early years of the
post-war period in the form of the Keynesian welfare state, which
accompanied the expectation of full em ployment as a necessary feature of
global prosperity. Seminal to this inclusive concept of rights was
36 See GL Neuman ‘The lost century of  American immigration law’ (1993) 93 Columbia
Law Review  1833; and M Ngai Impossible subjects: Illegal aliens and the making of modern
America  (2004). 
37 ILO Constitution, Preamble.
38 J Torpey The invention of the passport: Surveillance, citizenship, and the state (2000).
39 See Bade (n 30 above) 204; M Mazower Dark continent: Europe’s twentieth century
(2000).
40 K Long ‘When refugees stopped being migrants: Movement, labour and humanitarian
protection’ (2013) 1 Migration Studies  11.54    Chapter 2
TH Marshall’s 1949 essay, ‘Citizenship  and social class’, which considers
social citizenship to be the crowning stage in the historical development of
the modern state. Marshall identifies  a first ‘civic’ phase with the 18th
century revolutions establishing the in dividual right to property, personal
liberty, and access to justice. The seco nd stage enshrined ‘political rights’
through the expansion of the franchise to working men, former slaves and
women over the course of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Marshall
anticipated that the ‘social rights’ of the late 20th century would offer not
only opportunities for economic improvement, but also a universalentitlement ‘to a share in the full social  heritage and to live the life of a
civilized being according to the stan dards prevailing in the society’.41 
This sensibility is evident in the 1948 Universal Declaration, which
acknowledges the incapacity of a ri ghts-bearing individual to exercise
autonomy under circumstance s of economic deprivation.42 However, as
the United States and the Soviet Union locked horns over the ideological
grounds of the post-war world order, skirmishes over the form, content,and institutional stewardship of inte rnational norms gradually entrenched
a conceptual opposition between civil and economic rights as a matter of
political common sense.43 In the shadow of the Ho locaust, the egalitarian
provocation of the Eastern bloc demanded a counter-vision of altruism
that remained faithful to the liberal ideals of social contract and possessive
individualism.44 Thus, the 1951 Convention is an artifact of highly
partisan disputes over refugee resett lement, particularly with regard to
Russians resisting repatriation.45 Its narrow scope was designed to
recognise a particular kind of individu al claim against a particular kind of
state. 
Even with such limited applicabilit y, however, the architects of the
refugee protection regime had difficulty convincing states to support the
principle of non-refoulement, which cut to the defining principle of modern
sovereignty: the power to control access to national territory. Such
reluctance reflected ambiva lence, even at that early stage, towards social
citizenship as a principle of international human rights. In the polarisingclimate of the Cold War, a model of civil society grounded on the
contractual exchange of individual ri ghts and obligations stood in uneasy
41 TH Marshall Citizenship and social class and other essays  (1950) 78.
42 ‘Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being
of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and
necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment,
sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstancesbeyond his control.’ Art 25(1) Univer sal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.
43 See Long (n 40 above); R Karatani ‘How history separated refugee and migrant
regimes: In search of their institutional origins’ (2005) 17 International Journal of Refugee
Law 517. 
44 CB Macpherson The political theory of possessive individualism: From Hobbes to Locke
(2011).
45 For a detailed account of the circumstances giving rise to the contemporary refugee
protection regime , See G Loescher Beyond charity: International cooperation and the global
refugee crisis (1993) .  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     55
tension with solidarity-based notions of collective good. Capitalist
democracies distanced themselves fr om communism by adopting a notion
of the ‘good society’ that approached  social welfare as an enhancement of
mutual self-interest. This valorisati on of political freedom over economic
security represented a disavowal of the socialist tradition of social reform,
according to which the deprivations of  the few jeopardise the well-being of
the whole. The humanitarian obliga tions of refugee protection were
thereby construed as a burd en to be assumed as a form of charity, rather
than an essential commitment to international stability. 
The contingencies of the past are easily interpreted as the inevitable
foundations of a familiar present.46 This is why it is important to point out
that, even as certain conceptual opposi tions were congealing into the post-
war infrastructure, alternative scenario s were also circulating within the
international community. The ILO, in particular, approached the
internationalist aspiration of peac e and human development as a problem
of distribution.47 In 1946, the first of a series of conferences was convened
to position the agency as a supranat ional authority for the identification,
transportation and settlement of migrants and refugees.48 Following two
years of laborious consultations, this plan, involving a host of UN andspecialised agencies, was the centrepiece of an international conference in
Naples, Italy. The conference, however, wa s a disaster, its vision of
international oversight incompatible with an emergent world order thatwas oriented by national interest. 
It soon became evident that leaders in the United States and Western
Europe had another model in mind. Two weeks later, the US Congress
appropriated ten million dollars to encourage emigration from Europe,provided that ‘none of the funds made available pursuant to the proviso
should be allocated to any internat ional organization which was in its
membership any Communist-dominated or Communist-controlledcountry’.
49 In Brussels at the end of that year, a Provisional
Intergovernmental Committee for the Movement of Migrants from
Europe (PICMME) was agreed upon by representatives of 28 non-Communist governments, with a much more limited mandate: one year of
intergovernmental operations and transportation services on a cost-
reimbursable basis. According to Reiko Karatani, the most important
46 For a classic meditation on modernity as a retrospective reading of the past, see
R Koselleck Futures past: On the semant ics of historical time (1979).
47 During the 114th Session of the ILO Go verning Body, in Ma rch 1951, the Director-
General remarked that ‘ [a]ction to promote a more judicious distribution of the world
population w as in m y vie w an effecti v e means of fighting the causes of w ar ... ’ See
Karatani (n 43 above) 523.
48 These deliberations produce d the Migration for Employment Convention 97 of 1949
and Recommendation 86, and led to conversations with the UN Secretariat
culminating in the endorsement by the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) of ablueprint for the international coordination of migration flows. Karatani (n 43 above)
524-25. 
49 Karatani (n 43 above)  536.56    Chapter 2
difference between the operational frameworks of these two proposals was
the autonomy provided for national immigration regimes.50 This allowed
for the continuation of business-as-usu al with regard to the variability of
international migration flows,  accommodating the economic
interdependencies, restrictionist tend encies, and flexibilities of the past
within an international framework that privileged development over theprotection of rights. 
The formation of the UN and the institutionalisation of refugee
protection under an Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) mark a decisive turning poin t in the international recognition of
civil and political rights. However, the status of migrant workers within the
international system remained under determined, we argue, not because
their rights’ claims were in doubt,  but because their presence as non-
citizens was in large part driven by an economic rationality of supply and
demand which could not be reconcil ed with the logic of individual
entitlement. Quite the contrary, in fa ct; this period was equally marked by
vigorous debates regarding how states  might best achieve ‘the affluent
society’.51 As historian Mary Ann Glendon recounts, the Universal
Declaration left room for choice am ongst a range of means for realising
this goal:
At the national level, welfare principl es are sometimes framed as obligations
of society and the state rather than  entitlements of individuals. With
hindsight, it is perhaps regrettable th at the framers, in dealing with these
provisions, did not adopt the obligation model. To couch the social security
and welfare principles in terms of a common responsibility might have
resonated better than rights in most of the world’s cultures and would still
have left room for experiments with different mixes of private and public
approaches.52 
While some consensus was reached re garding aspirational standards of
human dignity, the more contentious question of economic justice was
deferred indefinitely towards a future of global peace and prosperity. Manyleading economists were confident th at this would come soon, provided
50 Karatani (n 43 above). 538.  ‘Experts summarised the PICMME as “a multilateral
institution outside of the United Nations, with an American Director, and a board
composed entirely of democratic nations friendly to the United States.”’ PICMME
would go through a number of name changes as its mandate expanded, becoming the
Intergovernmental Committee for Euro pean Migration (ICEM) in 1952, the
Intergovernmental Committee for Migratio n (ICM) in 1980, and the International
Organisation for Migr ation (IOM) in 1989.
51 See JK Galbraith The affluent society (1958) . For a balanced account of postwar debates
over ‘self-adjusting markets’ see E Helleiner Forgotten foundations  of Bretton Woods:
International development and the making of the postwar order (2014) . 
52 MA Glendon A world made new: Eleanor Roosevelt an d the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights  (2001) 189.  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     57
that states were free to manage th eir national economies with minimal
interference.53 According to convergence theory – and the sociology of
modernisation on which it was based – wealthier countries shared certain
features of sociopolitical organi sation: the mass production and
consumption of manufactured commod ities, the rapid proliferation of
media technologies, neocorporatism, and a social safety net. Variations inrelative socioeconomic stability were considered the effect of inevitable
business cycles that could be contai ned through built-in countercyclical
policies such as unemployment in surance and currency stabilisation.
Disparities between ‘first, second and third worlds’,54 on the other hand,
were explained in evolutionary terms as the effect of inadequate property
and contract law, volatile class re lations, and underdeveloped industrial
infrastructure, all features which coul d be remedied by political reform and
successive ‘stages of growth’.55 
Less widely recognised was the degree to which the terms of
participation in global markets were sk ewed in favour of countries with a
growing population that could afford to consume what it produced, a state
of affairs made possible by a political compromise with labour and the
externalisation of inflationary pressures.56 Nor was there widespread
awareness that the dramatic postwar expansion of the global economy was
fueled by a steady stream of migrants into the labour-hungry sectors of the
industrialised world. The rapid re construction of Europe under the
Marshall Plan demanded colonial su bjects and guestworkers from the
Mediterranean and Eastern Europe; in the United States, Mexican braceros
carried the agricultural sector; Canada and Australia took advantage ofEuropean refugees to fill labour shortages; while South African
industrialisation relied on migrants from throughout southern and central
Africa.57 The inequalities in income and opportunities driving this ample
labour supply were not mitigated by the independence of former colonies,
which in most cases continued to depend on trade relations with the former
metropole. Eventually, a counter-narrative emerged attributing the
53 WW Rostow The stages of economic grow th: A non-Communist manifesto  (1960); S Gindin
& L Panitch The making of global capitalism: The political economy of American empire
(2012).
54 P Worsley The three worlds: Cultur e and world development (1984).
55 B Jessop The capitalist state  (1982). 
56 R Gilpin Global political economy: Understand ing the international economic order  (2001)
365-66.
57 See R Hansen ‘Migration to Europe si nce 1945: Its history and its lessons’ in
S Spencer (ed) The politics of migration: Managing  opportunity, conflict and change (2003);
DG Gutiérrez ‘Migration, em ergent ethnicity, and the ‘third space’: The shifting
politics of nationalism in  Greater Mexico’ (1999) 86 Journal of American History  481;
P Ongley & D Pearson ‘Post-1945 internatio nal migration: New Zealand, Australia
and Canada compared’ (1995) 29 International Migration Review 765; and F Wilson
‘International migration in Southern Africa’ (1976) 10 International Migration Review
451.58    Chapter 2
modernisation standard of the ‘conve rgence club’ to the comparatively
lower cost of natural and human resources from the Global South.58 
For roughly three prosperous decades, the Western countries
produced enough wealth to accept limited numbers of asylum seekerswithout an overt guarantee of socio-economic benefit. In a sense, this
might be considered a strategic ex change, insofar as the political
advantages of asylum policies re inforced Cold War commitments.59 These
commitments were further codified in the segregation of ‘social, economic,
and cultural rights’ from ‘civil and political rights’ into separate
Covenants,60 both drafted in 1954 and adopted in 1966, with extensive
reservations in which states position ed themselves along the geopolitical
divide. In 1967, a Protocol was adop ted to expand the spatiotemporal
reach of the Refugee Convention, if not its criteria for elig ibility, permitting
states to conduct foreign policy thro ugh targeted admissions. At the same
time, governments continued to improve the legibility of social processes
in order to facilitate both governance and control.61 Cold War sensitivities
motivated the adoption of stringent border controls in late colonial and
post-colonial territories such as So uth Asia, Malaysia and Hong Kong.62
In occupied Japan, a domestic labour surplus and entrenched
discrimination, under perceived threat  from the Korean War, led to the
deportation and indefinite detention of more than two million long-term
residents of Korean descent.63 
Thus, both refugee movements an d labour migrations during les trentes
glorieuses64 were shaped by the increasing  militarisation of relations
between ‘the West and the rest’ und er the pressure of disappointing
58 G Arrighi et al ‘Industrial convergence, globalization, and the persistence of the North-
South Divide’ (2003) 38 Studies in Comparative International Development  3.
59 Receiving countries could use population flows ‘to discredit both the government or
country of origin and to bolster the image of countries granting them asylum.’ In other
situations, Cold Warriors could 'take advantage of refugee movements by arming andtraining some of the people concerned an d using them to destabilize the government
within their homeland’. J Mertus ‘The state and the post-Cold War refugee regime:
Models, new questions’ (1998) 10 International Journal of Refugee Law  321, citing
UNHCR The world’s refugees: In search of solutions (1995) 30 37.
60 See A Kirkup & T Evans ‘The myth of Western opposition to economic, social, and
cultural rights? A reply to Whelan and Donnelly’ (2009) 31 Human Rights Quarterly
221.
61 J Scott Seeing like a state: How ce rtain schemes to improve the human condition have failed
(1998).
62 T Mahmud ‘Colonial cartographies, postcolonial borders, and enduring failures of
international law: The unen ding wars along the Afgani stan-Pakistan frontier’ (2011)
36 Brooklyn Journal of International Law  1; A Kuar ‘Labor crossings in Southeast Asia:
Linking historical and contemp orary labor migration’ (2009) 11 New Zealand Journal of
Asian Studies  276; and A Mckeown Melancholy order: Asian migr ation and the globalization
of borders  (2008).
63 T Morris-Suzuki ‘The wilder shores of power: Migration, border controls and
democracy in postwar Japan’ (2006) 86 Thesis Eleven  6.
64 The term coined by French demographer Jean Fourastié to describe the years between
1945 and 1975, during which the ci tizens of the world’s indu strial centers enjoyed high
productivity, average wages, rates of consumption, and state-subsidised social benefits.
See J Fourastié Les trentes glorieuses, ou la révolution invisible de 1946 à 1975  (1979).  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     59
development outcomes. In 1965, the replacement of na tionality-based
entry quotas in the United States shifted the demographic mix decisively
towards migrants from Latin Americ a and Asia, where industrialisation
and ‘proxy wars’ were disrup ting local ways of life.65 After generations of
depending on undocumented workers to buffer labour market fluctuations,
a mechanism was in place to grant legal recognition to those who couldmeet certain criteria. In 1969, the ne wly-formed Organisation of African
Unity (OAU) adopted a refugee conventi on tailored to the post-colonial
struggles roiling the region, expanding the definition of ‘well-founded fearof persecution’ to include persons displaced by ‘external aggression,
occupation, foreign domination or events seriously disturbing public
order’.
66 Throughout the world, debates over the paradox of the deserving
migrant were marked by political, class, and racial considerations,
whatever the rationale for admission. 
These cross-cutting grounds of differ ence generated friction within and
between countries, giving rise to a mu ltitude of political movements across
the ideological spectrum. While most of  this activity took place locally, it
galvanised existing internationa l networks to make emergency
interventions and become involved in policy discussions at theinternational level. Less powerful stat es also adopted advocacy strategies
within the UN, building coalitions within the General Assembly to push
for more favourable aid programm es, terms of trade and foreign
investment. The oil emba rgo of 1973 represented an  opportunity for the
Group of 77 – comprised of developing and newly independent post-
colonial states, many with significant oil reserves – to make headway inthese efforts. In 1974, the UN Gene ral Assembly adopted the Charter of
the Economic Rights and Duties of  All States, recognising structural
inequalities in international markets – just as thirty years of industrial
expansion came to an end, triggering new restrictions on labour migration.
3 Global governance or migration management? 
Why conventions matter 
Rights are made in times of crisis, insofar as they are posited as a remedy
for violence or exclusion. Understood in this way, rights are a creative
response to a failure of law, when a critical mass of stakeholders finds that
65 See OA Westad The global Cold War: Third world inte rventions and the making of our times
(2007).
66 Adopted by the Organisation of African Un ity in 1969, the Convention Governing the
Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa applies to ‘every person who, owing toexternal aggression, occupation, foreign domination or events seriously disturbing
public order in either part or the whole of his country of origin or nationality, is
compelled to leave his place of habitual residence in order to seek refuge in anotherplace outside his country of origin or nati onality’. The Conventi on acknowledged that
most refugee movement is populous, not individual, and provided for permanent
settlement, as well as burden-sharing amongst member states.60    Chapter 2
the existing normative fr amework is inadequate to the ethical challenge at
hand. The human rights system was as sembled during such a moment, and
has been adapting ever since in re sponse to transformations in the
organisation and dynamics of power amongst states, economic actors and
civil society. To point out the historic al particularity of international norms
is not to dismiss their significance or legitimacy, but to interrogate their
common-sense appearance as first principles expressing a categorical
imperative. Insofar as so cial norms operate as a set of received customs
and beliefs, they assert a certain a priori authority with respect to the
messiness of everyday life. Yet we argue that culture is better understood
as a dynamic process of symbolic and material production, through which
people collectively make meaningful  worlds and the institutions that
sustain them. As one such cultural ex pression, the law is constantly being
contested and reinterpreted as a mo ral project that is also deeply
political.67 
Thus, human rights work is as much practice as principle: formulated
through a ritual performance of comp romise, international norms can only
be realised through the participation of  a wide range of social actors. This
perspective shares common ground with scholars who emphasise thecultural embeddedness of states with in a ‘world society’, in which human
rights principles are disseminated through communicati ons amongst local
institutions and through cross-border networks.68 Some proponents of this
approach emphasise the socialising effects of world public forums and
inter-governmental organisations, poin ting out that states participating in
international meetings are more open to ratification.69 Others working
within this paradigm contend that support for international treaties ripens
through less structured normative me chanisms, in response to a range of
political pressures.70 A key insight of this schola rship is the critical role of
non-governmental organi sations, activists and community leaders as
critical knowledge brokers: translating transnational ideals into local
strategies, articulating expectations, and pressuring states to ‘deliver’ on
human rights obligations.71
67 See J Hoover ‘Towards a politics for human rights: Ambiguous humanity and
democratizing rights’ (2013) 39 Philosophy and Social Criticism 935; and M Goodale
‘Ethical theory as so cial practice’ (2006) 108 American Anthropologist  25. 
68 See K Tsutsui & CM Wotipka ‘Global civil society and the international human rights
movement: Participation in human rights international nongovernmental
organizations’ (2004) 83 Social Forces  587; and E Hafner-Burton et al ‘International
human rights law and the politics of legitimacy: Repressive states and human rights
treaties’ (2008) 23 International Sociology  115.
69 See J Boli & GM Thomas (eds) Constructing world culture: International non-governmental
organizations since 1875  (1999). 
70 WM Cole ‘Sovereignty relinquished? Expl aining commitment to the international
human rights covenants, 1966-1999’ (2005) 70 American Sociological Review  472.
71 See S Engle Merry ‘Transnational human rights and local activism: Mapping the
middle’ (2006) 108 American Anth ropologist 38; and A Kuper (ed) Global responsibilities:
Who must deliver on human rights ? (2005); and A Riles The network inside out (2000).   Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     61
NGOs have long mobilised support for international instruments, both
through national representatives and as part of international networks.72
They were involved in drafting th e Universal Declaration, the 1951 Refuge
Convention, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, the Convention on  the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Convention against Torture andOther Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.  In each of these cases, advocacy at
the UN was to a significant extent the outgrowth of social movements atthe domestic level, where struggles over civil rights, gender equality and
political oppression were drawing concessions from some governments,
and brutal crackdowns from others. Th is was particularly the case in the
United States, Latin America and Af rica, where multiplier effects of
parallel struggles across the world were  mobilised, often to great effect,
through international collaboration, but the focus was on changing law
and practice at home.
73 
The anomalous position of the migran t worker as a subject of rights,
however, presented a unique set of challenges that marked the ICRMW
from the start. First, local and nation al organisations were more likely to
champion the rights of migrants as workers, women, children, persons of
colour, or even refugees, than attend to the special problems associated
with working as a migrant. While some activists were grappling withnationality and immigration-based di scrimination during the 1970s, they
were politically marginalised and had difficulty gaining the support of
unions and civil rights groups. Most migrants’ rights advocacy in the USand Europe took the form of community organising and legal
representation, and there was little funding for travel to meetings.
74 Thus,
the development of the Convention was by and large a state-led effort,initially involving only a few faith-based organisations.75 Second, the
conflicting interests being mediated by this Convention were not primarily
located within the confines of the nation-state, but were themselvesinternational, overlapping with sensit ive questions of foreign policy and
72 Trade unions, and religious and women’s organisations have maintained international
infrastructures since the 19th century, and have been central to labour, abolitionist,
suffrage, and public health movements, as well as the establishment of socialprotections within modern state bureaucracies. See M van der Linden ‘The promise
and challenges of global labor history’ (2013) 82 International Labor and Working-Class
History  57; LJ Rupp Worlds of women: The making of an international women's movement
(1997); A Hochschild King Leopold’s Ghost: A story of greed, terror, and heroism in Colonial
Africa (1998); and A Rice  et al  Liberating sojourn: Frederick Douglass and transatlantic
reform (1999).
73 See M Dudziak Cold War civil rights: Race and the image of American democracy  (2000);
A Escobar & SE Alvarez (eds) The making of social movement s in Latin America: Identity,
strategy, and democracy (1992); and JL & J Comaroff (eds) Civil society and the political
imagination in Africa (1999).
74 See M Garcia From the jaws of victory: The triumph and tragedy of Cesar Chavez and the
Farm Worker Movement (2014); and C Lloyd ‘Anti-racism, social movements and civil
society’ in F Anthias & C Lloyd (eds) Rethinking anti-racisms  (2002).
75 M Grange & M D’Auchamp ‘Role of civil society in campaigning for and using the
ICRMW’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 22 above) 71-74.62    Chapter 2
trade. Third, those conflicting inte rests straddled a North-South divide
fraught with socio-econom ic inequality and historical resentment, during
a period of world-changing ‘crises’ an d structural adjustments that would
significantly increase international mobility. 
 Recommendations for a comprehensiv e migrants’ rights treaty began
to circulate through the UN system  just as inflation was becoming
apparent in Europe and North Amer ica, and attitudes were souring
towards migrants.76 In December 1978, the General Assembly passed a
resolution initiating consultations wi th member states, and half of them
would eventually participate at so me stage in the drafting of the
Convention. Yet Arendt’s paradox would stymie the process for a
decade.77 The two countries to take the lead in mobilising this project,
Mexico and Morocco, were both prominent members of the Group of 77,with significant expatria te populations working in two powerful countries,
the United States and France. Their co ncerns with protecting the rights of
nationals living abroad were re sisted by Western countries facing
industrial decline, which in many cases meant dismantling commitments
to social citizenship for their own citizens. Beyond the condemnation of
discrimination on one hand, and ille gal entry on the other, these groups
were locked in an uncomfortable sy mbiosis, as resource-poor countries
became increasingly dependent on  remittances, and employers in
countries of destination exhibited a growing demand for cheap, flexible,
undocumented labour.78 Mediating this deadlock were Mediterranean
and Scandinavian countries,79 which confronted fewer migration
pressures during that period. 
The text that was adopted on 18 December 1990 marked a milestone
in establishing fundamental rights for all migrant workers, yet limited
family reunification, liberty of mo vement and participation in public
affairs only to lawful permanent residents.80 Many observers were
dissatisfied with this compromise. In a special issue of International
Migration Review published shortly afterward, migrants’ rights advocate
Linda Bosniak wrote that, despite fa irly rigorous anti-discrimination
standards, the lack of mandatory re gularisation for unauthorised workers
effectively undermines the employment rights that are otherwise
guaranteed, due to the fear of deportat ion. ‘In other words, under the terms
76 See R Böhning ‘The ILO and the new UN Convention on Migrant Workers: The past
and future’ (1991) 25 International Migration Review  698; Battistella in De Guchteneire
et al (n 22 above) 50-54.
77 A Pécoud & P de Guchteneire An investigation of the obstacles to the UN Convention on
Migrant Worker’s Rights  (2004) 5-7.
78 Battistella in De Guchteneire et al (n 22 above) 47.
79 ‘MESCA’ countries included Finland, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain and Sweden, later
joined by Norway.
80 For a comprehensive overview of the ICRMW , see R Cholewinski Migrant workers in
international human rights law: Their protection in countries of employment  (1997).  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     63
of the Convention, the undocumented continue to enjoy institutionally
sanctioned second- (or third-) class status.’81 In the same issue, refugee
advocate Peter van Krie ken lamented that the inclusion of irregular
migrants would doom the Conv ention to political failure.82 In yet another
contribution, activists Jan Niessen an d Patrick Taran emphasised that both
the strengths and weakness of any in ternational convention are realised
through ratification and implementation , activities that require the vigilant
participation of NGOs.83 All three of these predictions would bear out
during the ratification phase and beyond.
As anticipated by Niessen and Tara n, without robust civil society
involvement, ratifications in the earl y years following the adoption of the
ICRMW accumulated at a disappointing pace. No intergovernmental
agency made an effort to promote it, and it was initially even difficult to
obtain a copy of the text itself.84 By the mid-1990s, however, NGOs were
exploding in number and strength at every level, impelled by new
communications technologies and th e fissures created by the downsizing
state. Some were the beneficiaries of  ‘privatized’ publ ic services; others
were stepping up to shoulder the bu rden of widening gaps in care and
political representation. This surge in advocacy motivated ECOSOC tomake consultative status available to  national and regional NGOs in 1996,
and between 1980 and 2010, the number of organisations able to
participate formally in UN activities grew from 300 to 3000.85 Indeed, the
current prevalence of human rights discourse within both domestic and
international politics can be attributed to this proliferation of transnational
advocacy networks, what we have elsewhere called ‘globalization from thebottom up’.86 
The same dynamics that expanded opportunities for participation in
governance processes also accelerated and diversified international
migration and with it, a migrants’ ri ghts movement committed to exposing
the structural vulnerability of non-citizens.87 The emergence of Asia as a
leading site for the outsourcing of supp ly chains led to a particularly vital
advocacy presence, bringing attention to the abusive recruitment practices,
poor labour conditions, and sex trafficking that accompanied the
81 LS Bosniak ‘Human rights, state sovereignty and the protection of undocumented
migrants under the International Mi grant Workers Convention’ (1991) 25 International
Migration Review  737.  
82 P van Krieken ‘Migrants’ rights and the law of the sea: Further efforts to ensure
universal participation’ (2007) 45 International Migration Review  209.
83 J Niessen & PA Taran ‘Using the new Migr ant Workers’ Rights Convention’ (1991) 25
International Migration Review  859.
84 See P Taran ‘Human rights of migrants : Challenges of the new decade’ (2001) 38
International Migration  7. 
85 Grange & D’Auchamp in De Guch teneire et al (n 22 above) 72.
86 N Piper & J Grugel ‘Global migration governance, social movements and the
difficulties of promoting migrant rights’ in CU Schierup et al (eds) Migration,
precarisation and the democratic deficit in global governance (2014).
87 J Grugel & N Piper Critical perspectives on global governance: Rights and regulation in
governing regimes (2007).64    Chapter 2
celebrated growth of the ‘Asian tige rs’. The absence of any regional human
rights mechanism encouraged activi sts to focus their efforts at the
international level, where they joined forces with allies from other regions
in a global ratification campaign.88 NGOs translated the Convention into
various languages, produced materi als for targeted audiences, and
established a website. They formed working groups and played a visible
role in major global events, cultivating sophisticate d relationships with a
range of instit utional actors.89 These efforts led to the designation of a
Special Rapporteur on the human righ ts of migrants, established in 1999,
and the formation of a hybrid St eering Committee for ratification,
composed of both NGOs and intergovernmental organisations. The
Global Steering Committee published a campaigner’s handbook that was
circulated widely, and coordinated pa nel events on migration issues at
national and regional levels.90 It was largely due to these strategic efforts
that the Convention en tered into force in 2003, 13 years after its
adoption.91
Unlike other Conventions, however,  which have been widely accepted
at this stage, advocacy surroundin g the ICRMW remains an uphill battle.
For a few years, it appeared as thou gh the tide had turned, as both UN
agencies and major multi-issue human rights organisations began
committing resources to migrants’ rights work. International Migrants
Day became a rallying cry in count ries where coalitions were just
beginning to form,92 and national campaigns were launched throughout
Europe, building particular moment um in Spain, Belgium, Italy and
Ireland, countries of immigration that had sent workers abroad only a
88 N Piper ‘Democratising migration from the bottom up: The rise of the global migrant
rights movement’ (2015) 12 Globalizations  788.
89 Representatives of migrants’ rights organisations participated in the 1994 International
Conference for Population and Developm ent in Cairo; the 1995 World Summit on
Social Development in Copenhagen and Fourth World Conference on Women in
Beijing; and the World Conference Agai nst Racism, Racial  Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, he ld in Durban, Sout h Africa, in 2001. 
90 Only nine states had ratified the ICRMW in the first eight years after adoption. The
remaining 11 ratifications necessary for entry into force took place following thecreation of the Steering Comm ittee in 1998. G Gencianos ‘International civil society
cooperation on migrants’ rights: Perspe ctives from an NGO network’ (2004) 6
European Journal of Migration and Law  147.
91 In a study of the obstacles and opportunities for ratification of the ICRMW in the Asia
Pacific, the first commissioned by UNESCO in a series of regional studies, Piper
identified migrant associations as the actors most crucial to successful ratification. SeeN Piper ‘Obstacles to, and opportunities for, ratification of the ICRMW in Asia’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 22 above).
92 The UN General Assembly declared the day of the ICRMW’s adoption, December 18,
to be International Migrants’ Day on 18 December 2000. An additional factor in
assuring the rise in ratifications was the formation of the Global Migration Group,
comprised of the heads of international agencies involved in migration-relatedactivities (for a full list, see http://www .globalmigrationgroup.org (accessed
26 October 2017)). Set up in 2006 on the re commendation of th e GCIM, this Group
proactively engaged in the promotion of th e ICRMW , a novelty on the part of the UN
that had so far been rather reticent on spreading the news and relevance of this
Convention. Following entry into force, the number of ratifications doubled in only six
years. However, these were exclusively resource-poor origin states.  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     65
generation ago. Migration became a front-page issue around the world,
and an increasingly pressing concern amongst a broader swath of
governments and institutions, both pu blic and private. Two high-profile
consultations were announced by the UN: the Global Commission on
International Migration (GCIM), a fa ct-finding panel of experts that
convened between 2003 and 2005; an d the High-Level Dialogue on
Migration and Development in 2006, which would lead to the annual
Global Forum for Migration and Development (GFMD). 
This attention to the role of migration in the global economy was long
overdue, yet it accompanied a grad ual withdrawal from the goal of
ratification.93 The final GCIM report, for example, generally
recommended better implementation of human rights instruments but fell
short of championing the campaign. It also reported, erro neously, that ‘a
number of countries have stated that they are unwilling to ratify the 1990
Convention because it provides migrants (especially those who have
moved in an irregular manner) with righ ts that are not to be found in other
treaties, and because it generally  disallows differentiation between
migrants who have moved in a regular or irregular manner’. 94 Similarly,
in his report for the High-Level Dialogue, former UN Secretary-GeneralKofi Annan designated the ICRMW as a core human rights treaty without
calling on states to ratify it. 
The unpopularity of the Convention reflects the pattern, which has
characterised the UN system since its inception, of addressing rights and
economics as separate spheres of concern. Yet the success of NGOs in
promoting migrants’ rights as a cross-cutting concern also suggests
significant changes in processes of policy formation and governance. As
NGOs insinuate themselves within decision-making an d implementation
processes, they become increasingly necessary to the maintenance of the
system itself.95 Thus, the awakening of interest in international migration
over the last decade may also reflect this shift from state-centric
governance towards network models of mutual responsibility. This trend
can be discerned as early as 1998, in the ILO’s Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at  Work, which was widely criticised
for lacking reference to a minimum wage. At the World Economic Forum
in 1999, Secretary-General Kofi A nnan announced the Global Compact,
a wide-reaching effort to formalise vo luntary private sector participation
within the UN system. A Special Representative of the Secretary-General
93 See ‘International migration and develo pment’ UN General Assembly (18 May 2006)
UN Doc A/60/871 (2006).
94 GCIM Migration in an interconnected world: New directions for action  (2005) 57.
95 PJ Taylor ‘The state as container: Territor iality in the modern world-system’ (1994) 18
Progress in Human Geography  151; B Anderson Imagined communities (1983); Rogers
Brubaker Nationalism reframed: Nationhood and the national question in the new Europe
(1996). 66    Chapter 2
on Business and Human Rights was al so appointed in 2005 to monitor
progress.96 Along these lines, labour migration researchers have
increasingly focused on global supply chains, while international policiesare focused on the ‘management’ of  labour markets rather than the
protection of workers. These developments indicate both the political
influence of economic actors in the post-industrial West, and a desire forgreater traction in the Global South, where the informal sector is
predominant and governments are preoccupied with attracting
international investment.
Within this increasingly privatis ed policy environment, advocacy
activities, and the research describi ng them have also taken on the
characteristics of business transa ctions. Advocates are described by
scholars as ‘norm entrepreneurs’, who try to expand the human rightsagenda by strategically mobilising claims  within shifting fields of action.
97
Such claims may promote human rights standards for new social practices,
or identify new bearers to already existing rights.98 According to Martha
Finnemore and Kathryn Sikkink, this is a process that evolves through
stages. First, norms emerge, as norm entrepreneurs call attention to a new
or unnoticed human rights violation, and persuade states to promote it.
When a critical mass of states have been persuaded to adopt the norm, a
‘tipping point’ is reached, leading to a ‘norm cascade’,  as other states are
convinced or pressured into accepting it as well. In order for a norm to gett o  t h i s  s t a g e ,  i t  u s u a l l y  m u s t  b e come institutionalised in rules and
organisational practices, through wh ich socialisation and peer pressure
become the dominant mechanisms for ensuring compliance. The last stageis internalisation , which signifies that the norm  is no longer controversial
but has reached a taken-for-granted ch aracter, after which conformity can
be assumed.
99 According to this theory, rights  advocacy is most influential
in the first stage of norm emergence, by calling attention to a specific
problem through the strategic construc tion of cognitiv e frames. At the
present stage, the Convention has not yet reached its tipping point, withonly 51 ratifications and 38 signatur es. Only a critical mass of major
destination countries would trigger a norm cascade, yet none have yet
committed their support except for Argentina. 
Not surprisingly, research has found that new norms are more
persuasive if they ‘fit’ rather than  ‘clash’ with already existing ones.100 For
example, Keck and Sikkink have found that norms that are more likely to
96 International relations scholar John Ruggie served as the first Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on human rights and transnational corporations and other
business enterprises. See his final report, ‘Guiding principles on business and human
rights: Implementing the United Nations “protect, respect and remedy” Framework’Human Rights Council  (21 March 2011) UN Doc A/HRC/17/31 (2011).
97 S Tarrow Power in movement: Social movements and contentious politics  (1994). 
98 A Brysk Human rights and private wrongs: Co nstructing global civil society (2005) 3.
99 M Finnemore & K Sikkink ‘I nternational norm dynamics  and political change’ (1998)
52 International Organization  887.
100 A Björkdahl From idea to norm: Promoting conflict prevention  (2002).  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     67
have an impact are those that are either concerned with preventing
especially vulnerable groups from bodi ly harm, or those that promote legal
equality of opportunity.101 Others claim that norms resonating with core
ideologies are likely to be accepted.102 Tanya Basok builds on this
observation in her distinction between hegemonic  and counter-hegemonic
human rights.103 While the former are consistent with liberalism’s focus
on individual freedom, formal equali ty, and the integrity of the nation-
state, and thus enjoy wide recognition, the latter challenge these core
concepts and are hence subject to grea ter controversy and dispute. In her
opinion, migrants’ rights represent a counter-hegemonic discourse insofar
as they extend recognition to undocumented non-citizens, thereby
challenging the norm of sovereignty.  This may present difficulties for
advocacy groups, who for instrument al reasons may have to draw on
arguments that do not fit their intent ions in order to reassure states.104 
Some scholars are understandably pe ssimistic about the capacity for
advocacy organisations to count eract the normative pressures of
contemporary institutio ns. Sangeet Kamat argues that limitations to
intervention are built into the catego ry of ‘civil society’ itself, which
implies a privatised notion of public  interest through which democracy is
being redefined as the plural expressi on of diverse constituencies, rather
than a check on the unequal distribution of power.105 Kamat describes the
ways in which NGOs, forced by fu nders to adopt corporate modes of
operation and subcontracted to prov ide state services, are discouraged
from challenging transnational enterp rises and the structure of the global
economic system, while those that do so are effectively excluded frompolicy forums. She objects to the promotion of civil society participation
by international institutions, on the one hand, and a lack of attention to
their capacity to represent the public interest, on the other. 
As a result, business and industry associations are now equally a part of
‘NGO representation’ in in ternational policy forums, making it impossible for
progressive NGOs to buil d a common alliance agai nst corporate interests.106 
This dynamic of procedural absorption  has in fact been observable during
the annual meetings of the GFMD. This  ‘informal, non-binding, voluntary
and government-led process’ is limited to state and UN agency
101 Finnemore & Sikkink (n 99 above) 898.
102 A Brysk (n 98 above) 22. 
103 T Basok ‘Counter-hegemonic human rights discourses and migrant rights activism in
the US and Canada’ (2009) 50 International Journal of Comparative Sociology  179.
104 Basok (n 103 above) 185-188. This resonate s with the way that Amnesty International
introduces new issues on the human rights agenda, by initially associating it with
approved human rights themes, then developi ng it into an issue on its own – always
careful to keep its framing non-confrontational. See EB Rodio & HP Schmitz ‘Beyond
norms and interests: Understanding the evolution of transnational human rights
activism’ (2010) 14 The International Journal of Human Rights  442.
105 S Kamat ‘The privatization of public interest: Theorizing NGO discourse in a
neoliberal Era’ (2004) 11 Review of International Political Economy  170. 
106 Kamat (n 105 above) 165-66.68    Chapter 2
representatives. However, a parallel  ‘Civil Society Days’ forum invites
participants from all walks of ‘civ il society’ life: private business,
foundations, trade unions, diaspora as sociations, resear ch institutes or
think tanks, academia – and migrants’ rights activists. Yet some migrants’
rights activists, skeptical regarding the impact of this exercise, have
nevertheless taken advantage of the global  visibility of the event to organise
a series of alternative parallel conferences – People’s Global Action on
Migration, Development and Human Ri ghts – at which they have voiced
concerns regarding the emerging management and security-oriented
framework that appears to be emerging from the GFMD process. Central
to their critique has been the observat ion that, despite lip service, migrants’
rights have been subsumed by measures  to maximise the economic benefits
of migration. Furthermore, count er-terrorism and sophisticated
technologies of surveillance have mo tivated the international coordination
of policing in ways that permit the mobility of some populations whilerestricting it for others. Advocates are concerned that the goals of ‘orderly
migration’ articulated within the di scourse of ‘migration management’
entail an intensification of dete ntion, deportation, and the legal
segregation of temporary workers without full rights or possibilities for
integration within the countries demanding their labour.107 Pithily put by
Zygmunt Bauman: ‘traveling for profit is encouraged; traveling for survival
is condemned.’108
4 Trading rights for survival? Sharing risk in a 
fractal world
From a contemporary standpoint, many of Arendt’s fears have proven
quite prescient. She found most troubling the prospect of prosperous, post-
war societies stratified by citizenship status, in which laws would not apply
equally to everyone. She anticipated th at global pressures would ensure a
growing number of people that cannot claim membership in the political
community. By depriving them of the ‘r ight to have rights’, modern social
institutions risked undermining th eir own legitimacy, endangering the
foundations of modern  democracy itself.109 Over the past 30 years, the
socio-economic constellation of forc es that we call globalisation has
107 These trends are evident worldwide. See L Amoore ‘Biometric borders: Governing
mobilities in the war on terror’ (2006) 25 Political Geography  336; F Trauner & S Deimel
‘The impact of EU migratio n policies on African countr ies: The case of Mali’ (2013)
51 International Migration 20; and H Venters et al ‘Into the abyss: Mortality and
morbidity among detained immigrants’ (2009) 31 Human Rights Quarterly 474.
108 Z Bauman Society under siege  (2002) 84.
109 For a range of theoretical perspectives on the contemporary implications of Arendt’s
argument, see G Agamben Homo sacer (1995); S Benhabib The rights of others: Aliens,
residents and citizens  (2004); and A Shachar ‘Citizenship and the “right to have rights”’
(2014) 18 Citizenship Studies  114.  Civil society and the Migrant Workers Convention     69
shaped a world order of increasing interdependence and precariousness,
altering the landsc apes in which people live and work.110 Urban centres
from Toronto to Sao Paulo, Dublin  to Bangkok are teeming with men,
women, and children from other count ries, other worlds, and so are rural
fields and factories, suburban homes, hotels and hospitals. Insofar as they
carry the passport of their country of origin, most of today’s migrants may
not be stateless. However, current trends of global mobility imply a
comparable scenario, in which many non-citizens are unable to exercise
full political, social and cultural rights  within the countries where they live. 
NGO monitoring plays a critical role in preserving the aspiration of
human rights as a rationale for inclus ion against an international ordering
principle of differentiation and exclusion. The latter trend is less
conspiracy, we suggest, than an orch estrated attempt to deal with the
overwhelming complexity of a world riven by the crises and contradictions
of late capitalism. As the unim peded circulation of finance and
commodities becomes increasingly vita l to the functioning of the global
economy, so too does the regulation of human capital and the containment
of threat, as part of an integrated st rategy of risk-management that renders
mobility an increasingly privileged asset under circumstances of persistent
inequality.111 S o c i a l  m o v e m e n t  s c h o l a r s  d e s c r i b e  t h e  r o l e  o f  a c t i v i s t
networks in this ‘rescaling’ of public  and private spheres, amplifying the
effects of particular interventions by pooling resource s and facilitating
communications that can generate ne w solutions to existing problems.112
Such forms of collective action are a key mechanism for voicing counter-
hegemonic discourse, by providing op portunities to negotiate conflict
through the identification of common interests.113 International advocacy
not only provides a platform for the exchange of ideas; it also produces
new knowledge oriented towards alternative horizons. Indeed, it
demonstrates a form of citizenship that has broken free of the nation,
through the practice of a trans-territorial politics operating both within and
across forums of governance. 
If civil society today is awash in neoliberal pluralism, on the one hand,
which exchanges the critique of power for a celebration of diversity, and a
nationalistic populism, on the other, which retreats into xenophobic
nostalgia, perhaps some activists are building a third way, guided by a
vision of participatory democracy th at is as multiple, overlapping and
110 See S Castles et al The age of migration: International population movements in the modern
world (2013); S Sassen Territory, authority, and rights (2006); and D Held et al Global
transformations: Politics, economics, and culture  (1999). 
111 See N De Genova & N Peutz (eds) The deportation regime: Sovereignty, space, and the
freedom of movement (2010); and R Shamir ‘Without b orders? Notes on globalization as
a mobility regime’ (2005) 23 Sociological Theory  197. 
112 For a detailed review of the existing literature, see J Bendell & A Ellersiek ‘Noble
network: Advocacy for global justice and the “network effect”’ (2009).
113 M Diani ‘Introduction: Social movements, contentious actions, and social networks:
From metaphor to substance?’ in M Diani & D McAdam (eds) Social movements and
networks: Relational approaches to collective action  (2003) 1-18.70    Chapter 2
fractal as the world we live in. Ac cording to Linda Bosniak, Marshall’s
aspiration of social citizenship su rvives through such engagements, as
ethical projects adapted to the reco nfiguring powers of globalisation.
Bosniak’s argument is less a proposal than a statement of social fact: many
migrants are already living this reality. 
[A]s ties increase across national borders, people are increasingly taking on
commitments and identities that exceed  the bounds of the national society
and its members. Globalizat ion, in this account, reconstitutes us in the
deepest personal ways; it has importan t imaginative and emotional and moral
effects on all of us.114 
This implies that the strange mix of enthusiasm, hostility and disregard
inspired by the ICRMW reflects its unique capacity amongst UN treaties
to surface the defining challeng e to governance of our times.
114 Bosniak (n 8 above) 485.PART II: THE ICRMW IN 
INTERNATIONAL HUMAN 
RIGHTS LAW72Mariette Grange*
1 Introduction 
Four of the ten core international human rights treaties focus on specific
categories of human beings: wome n, children, migrant workers and
members of their families and persons with disabilities.1 Such ‘population-
specific’ treaties (along gender and age lines, migration status and
disability) embody the added value of consolidated sets of internationalnorms around persons empowered as ‘s ubjects’ with rights and not viewed
as ‘objects’ of protection. The principle of non-discrimination prominently
features in all four ‘pop ulation-specific’ treaties.2 As other such treaties, the
International Convention on the Protec tion of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW or the Convention)
incorporates a number of fundamental civil and political rights derivedfrom the Universal Declaration of Hu man Rights (Universal Declaration).
One of the rights, that cuts across many of these treaties, is the right to
1 Research methodology combines the author’s practical advocacy experience of
campaigning for ratification of the ICRMW and monitoring of the CMW; personalinteraction with CMW experts and Secretariat, intergovernmental officials, diplomats
and non-governmental advocates; a review of academic and other literature; and desk
research in the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and UniversalHuman Rights Index databases. The author would like to thank Eve Lester and
Izabella Majcher for their helpful comments on this chapter.
1 K Touzenis & A Sironi Current challenges in the implementation of The UN International
Convention On The Protection Of The Rights Of All Migrant Workers And Members Of Their
Families  European Parliament, Directorate-General for External Policies of the Union,
Directorate B, Policy Department, EXPO/B/DROI/2013/ (2013) 27 http://www .
europarl.europa.eu/thinkt ank/en/document.html?ref erence=EXPO-DROI_ET%282
013%29433715 (accessed 26 October 2017); and B Lyon ‘The unsigned United
Nations Migrant Worker Rights Convention: An overlooked opportunity to changethe “brown collar” migration paradigm’ (2010) 42 New York University Journal of
International Law and Politics 389 482. http://works.bepress.com/beth_lyon/25
(accessed 26 October 2017).
2S  M a r k s  &  A  C l a p h a m  International human rights lexicon  (2005) 24  112 414; M Grange
Strengthening protection of migrant workers and their families with international human rights
treaties – A do-it-yourself kit  (2006) 26.3CHAPTERTHE MIGRANT  WORKERS
CONVENTION : A LEGAL  TOOL
TO SAFEGUARD  MIGRANTS
AGAINST  ARBITRARY
DETENTION
*  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     73
liberty and security of person; a right compelling in itself and pivotal to
access to and enjoyment of many other human rights. 
Political memory seems almost wilfully  short or at least selective about
the fact that the movement of people, undertaken for a whole host ofreasons, is a natural human phenomen on through which different corners
of the earth have been populated for millennia. Demographers estimate,
for example, that at least 65 million  persons left Europe between 1820 and
1930 alone.3 Yet, over 25 years after the adoption of the ICRMW, rather
than the starting point being accepta nce of population movements as a
natural phenomenon, such movement s are increasingly scrutinised
through ‘risk analysis’ models that  trigger security responses, and
sometimes even military-style naval operations, that focus on containing
or putting a halt to migration flows rather than protecting the rights of
those who are caught up in them. Notwithstanding selective political
memory and contemporary preocc upations with ‘risk analyses’,
immigration detention does not occu r in a legal vacuum. International
human rights and refugee law provide a clear legal framework for policies,
practice and operations rolled out by sovereign states seeking to regulate
access to, entry and residence within their national territories or other areasunder their jurisdiction or effective control.
In recent decades the right to libert y and security of person has become
particularly pertinent for non-citizens, not least migrant workers and
members of their families.4 T h i s  i s  b e c a u s e  t h e  p r e v a l e n c e  o f  l a w s
authorising and regulating immigrat ion-related detention has increased
dramatically in many countries. Somewh at ironically, this has taken place
since the adoption of the ICRMW in 1990, which directly addresses
concerns about the treatment of non- citizens, including the prohibition on
arbitrary detention. Immigration detention has spread against the
backdrop of very low ratification of the ICRMW. Western countries wherethe largest detention estates have developed hold a very high record of
ratification of all core international human rights treaties except the
ICRMW. This exceptional context a ffects implementation of the norms
relevant to immigration detention in the Convention. It undergirds the
absence of jurisprudence emanating from the Committee on Migrant
Workers (CMW) as the individual complaints procedure has not come
into force.5 Most current state parties to the ICRMW do not have a strong
tradition of accepting such proced ures, failing which development of
authoritative interpretations of hum anrights treaties provisions is
hampered. 
3 WS & ES Woytinsky World population and production, trends and outlook  (1953);
P Ladame Le rôle des migrations dans le monde libre  (1958) 88.
4 M Grange & I Majcher ‘Immigration detention under international human rights law:
The legal framework and the litmus test of human rights treaty bodies monitoring’ inMJ Flynn & MB Flynn (eds) Challenging immigration detentio n: Academics, activists and
policy-makers (2017) 269-71.
5 ICRMW art 77.74    Chapter 3
Section two begins with an over view of immigration detention
including a definition and a brief survey of detention trends and expansion
since adoption of the ICRMW. The third section reviews ICRMW
provisions relevant to immigration detention in the light of similar
provisions in other core human ri ghts treaties, in particular the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the
Convention against Torture and ot her Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (CAT). This  section adopts a chronological and
incremental approach. A fourth section offers a brief analysis of how theCMW monitors implementation of provisions at country level set against
related monitoring by the Human Rights Committee (HRC). A fifth
section studies the impact of western non-ratifi cation of the Convention on
the scope and limitations of CMW moni toring and a sixth section outlines
some strengths and limitations of the CMW modus operandi and
monitoring.
2 Immigration detention: An expanding ‘non-
punishment’
Immigration-related detention has been  described as ‘the deprivation of
liberty of non-citizens because of their immigration status’.6 Such ‘status’
detention means that foreign men, wo men and children are detained ‘not
on account of what they have done, but on account of what they are’.7
Scholars have traced the emergence of centralised immigration laws, and
of immigration detention, back to the nineteenth and early twentieth
century. The perceived ‘imperative’ of immigration control is what gave
rise to the interest of states in the practice of immigration detention.8 
Immigration detention has evolved over time as an administrative
detention measure. The United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention (WGAD) has defined ad ministrative detention as the:
[A]rrest and detention of individuals by  State authorities outside the criminal
law context, for example for reasons of security, including te rrorism, as a form
of preventive detention, as well as to restrain irregular migrants.9 
Researchers and jurists further explai n that, unlike criminal incarceration,
immigration detention as an administ rative form of state response to
irregular migration ‘refers to deprivat ion of liberty ordered by the executive
6 M Flynn ‘An introduction to data construction on Immigration-related detention’
(2011) 1.
7 G Cornelisse ‘Immigration detention and the territoriality of universal rights’ in N de
Genova & N Peutz (eds) The deportation regime: Sovereignty, space, and the freedom of
movement  (2010) 102.
8D  W i l s h e r  Immigration detention: Law, history, politics (2012) 7.
9 Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention (18 January 2010), UN Doc A/HRC/13/30 (2010) para 77.  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     75
branch of government ‒ rather than the judiciary ‒ without charges or
trial’.10 Under European human rights law – and in many other regions of
the world ‒ detention is authorised as a pre-removal measure prior to
deportation and prior to readmission. In ternational law requires that it be
non-punitive  in nature and expects immigratio n detainees to be held in non-
penal settings. However, irregular migr ation is not a crime against persons,
property or national security and as  such should not be sanctioned with
fines and imprisonment.11 
In recent years, many discussions an d research projects  have addressed
the phenomenon of ‘crimi nalisation’ of migration. Arguably, this concept
is used in two distinct contexts . On the one hand, the concept of
criminalisation refers to the set of coercive measures that states deploy
towards undocumented migrants, incl uding immigration detention itself
or deportation.12 For instance, in 2008, the WGAD, reaffirmed its 1999
definition of: 
[D]eprivation of liberty of aliens, asyl um seekers or immigrants as ‘custody’
(rétention ) and deemed that this criminalisation  practice exceeded ‘the
legitimate interest of States to cont rol and regulate illegal immigration and
lead[s] to unnecessary detention.13 
In 2010, the WGAD wrote that ‘immi gration detention should gradually
be abolished’ as ‘migrants in an irre gular situation have not committed any
crime’.14 Criminalisation of irregular migration was denounced by the
CMW chair in a joint statement on International Migrants Day in 2013.15
On the other hand, the notion of criminalisation is also used to
describe the phenomenon of applying criminal law to breaches of
(administrative) immigration law. The most extreme example of this trend
10 C de Senarclens & I Majcher ‘Discipline and punish? Analysis of the purposes of
immigration detention in Europe’ (2014) 11 AmeriQuests 1; International Commission
of Jurists ICJ submission to the Workin g Group on Arbitrary Detention (2012) 10.
11 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the hu man rights of migrants, François Crépeau
United Nations, HRC (2 April 2012), UN Doc A/HRC/20/24 (2012), para 13 http://
www .ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Migration/SRMigrants/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx
(accessed 26 October 2017). 
12 European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights ‘Criminalisation of migrants in an
irregular situation and of person s engaging with them’ (2014) 4. 
13 Report of the Working Group on Arbitr ary Detention, HRC (10 January 2008), UN
Doc A/HRC/7/4, (2008), para 53 http: //www .ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Detention/
Pages/Annual.aspx.
14 Report of the Working Group on Arbi trary Detention (n 10 above) para 58.
15 ‘Annex III - Joint statemen t to mark International Mi grants Day’ 18 December 2013,
issued by François Crépeau,  Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants;
Abdelhamid El Jamri, Chair of the Committee and Felipe González, Rapporteur on
the Rights of Migrants of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in Reportof the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families,  Nineteenth session  (9-13 September 2013) and Twentieth
session (31-11 April 2014), CMW (23 May 2014), UN Doc A/69/48 (2014) 13.76    Chapter 3
is penalising irregular entry or stay with a prison sentence.16 It is beyond
the scope of this chapter to detail ICRMW provisions relevant to rights and
safeguards in criminal proceedings . Criminal law provisions in the
ICRMW largely replicate due process standards applicable to nationals
under the ICCPR. The analysis below focuses on the practice of
administrative detention.
It is likely that the drafters of the ICRMW did not foresee that more
than 25 years after its adoption immi gration detention as  a state response
to unauthorised migration flows woul d affect hundreds of thousands of
people around the world including women and children. Ironically, asdetailed below, industrialised count ries that have generally approached
ICRMW as a taboo have increasingly used immigration detention as a key
form of immigration control since th e early 1990s. For ex ample, Australia
has had a policy of mandatory immi gration detention since 1992; a policy
later externalised throug h the controversial ‘Pac ific Solution’ between
2001 and 2008, and then revived in November 2012 with resumed transfersof asylum-seekers who had arrived by boat to Nauru and to Manus Island
in Papua New Guinea.
17 Various forms of immigr ation detention akin to
mandatory detention have also been observed over time in Angola, Italy,Japan, Malta and Mexico. Policymakers in Canada and New Zealand
stepped up responses to unauthorised arrivals in ways that were clearly
inspired by Australian mandatory detention policies.18
Expansion of immigration detentio n in the United States and the
European Union (EU) dates back to the 1990s.19 Countries at the broader
periphery of industrialised regions in  Central and North America, Eastern
Europe and North Africa as well as emerging economies across South East
Asia have also developed or consol idated large immigration detention
estates. Migration ‘management’, he avily focused on security aspects,20
and border control externalisation po licies spearheaded and sponsored by
16 M Provera ‘The criminalisation of irregular migration in the European Union’ Centre
for European Policy Studies (2015) 2.
17 Parliament of Australia ‘Offshore processing: Lessons from the “pacific solution”’
(2014) http://www .aph.gov .au/About_Parl iament/Parliamentary_Departments/Par
liamentary_Library/FlagP ost/2014/April/Offshore_proc essing (accessed 26 June
2015); UNHCR ‘UNHCR monitoring visit to  Manus Island’ Papua New Guinea, 23-
25 October 2013.
18 Global Detention Project ‘Relevant co untry profiles’ http://www .globaldeten
tionproject.org/de/home.html (accessed 26 June 2015).
19 M Flynn ‘How and why immigration detent ion crossed the globe’ (2014); M Provera
The detention of asylum seekers in the European Union and Australia  (2013) 94; C Rodier
Xénophobie business: À quoi serv ent les contrôles migratoires? (2012) 52; M Bosworth &
S Turnbull ‘Immigration detention, punishment, and the criminalization of migration’
in S Pickering & J Ham The Routledge handbook on crime and international migration
(2014) 92.
20 Human Rights Council Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants, François Crépeau ‘Regional study: Management of the external borders of
the European Union and its impact on the human rights of migrants United Nations’HRC (24 April 2013), UN Doc A/HRC/23/46 (2013) para 37 http://www .ohchr.org/
EN/Issues/Migration/SRMigrants/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx (accessed 27 October
2017).  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     77
Western countries have ofte n triggered or intensified ripple effects towards
increased detention through their ‘neighbourhoods’ across land and
maritime borders.21 Australia’s externalisation of its detention policy has
been clearly spelt out:
Non-citizens without a valid visa, and those who do not comply with their
visa conditions and have their visa canc elled, may be subject to detention and
removal from Australia. … Australia does not provide permanent protection
to people who arrive illegally by boat . Anyone who attempts to travel to
Australia illegally by boat will be turned back or transferred to a regionalprocessing country. The Republic of Nauru and the Independent State of
Papua New Guinea are currently designated as regional processing
countries.  22
In the United States, support of Mexi co’s immigration control policies is
well documented. In a submission be fore an Inter-Am erican Commission
on Human Rights hearing on the ‘Human Rights Situation of Migrant andRefugee Children and Families in the United States’ human rights
organisations described ‘the prodigio us support for immigration control
measures including interdictions, chec kpoints, detention, and deportation’
deployed by multiple US agencies. They stated that:
The manner in which the US government has encouraged, supported and
stood-up forces in the region engage d in intercepting, interdiction and
deportation of persons without requis ite safeguards are well outside the
bounds of international law .23
In parallel to the increasing preval ence of detention policies across the
world there has also been an increase in the harshness of those policies.24
In June 2015, a leaked letter from the EU Home Affairs Commissioner to
EU interior ministers proposed temporary derogation from detention
standards pursuant to a time-bound ‘emergency clause’ in the EU Return
Directive as a way of strengthening its enforcement by frontline states of
the EU. As Steve Peers explained, the Commissioner’s suggestion to
temporarily derogate from the binding EU instrument on return by using‘an obscure clause allowing for except ions to the normal EU standards for
detention of irregular migrants’ would have potentially harmful
consequences. For example, under the proposal, unauthorised migrants
21 EU Neighbourhood Info Centre ‘The European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP)’ http:/
/www .enpi-info.eu/main.php?id=344& id_type=2 (accessed 25 June 2015).
22 Department of Immigration and Border Protection ‘Community’ http://www .
immi.gov .au/About/Pages/detention/about-immigration-detention.aspx https://www .border.gov .au/australian- border-force-abf/protecting/
community#Illegal%20maritime%20arrivals (accessed 25 July 2017).
23 Jesuit Conference of the United States & the Washington Office on Latin America ‘US
support and assistance for interdictions, interceptions, and border security measures in
Mexico, Honduras, and Guatemala undermine access to international protection’ in
Human rights situation of Migrant and refugee children and families in the United States
Materials Submitted in Support of Hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights  153rd Ordinary Period of Sessions (27 October 2014) 9 & 15.
24 MSS v Belgium and Greece ECHR (21 January 2011) Application no 30696/09.78    Chapter 3
could ‘not only be detained in ordi nary prisons, but mixed in with the
ordinary prison population of convicted criminals and those awaiting trial
for serious crimes’.25 The Commissioner’s letter reads:
This clause offers a possib ility for Member States not to apply three detention
related provisions of the Directive, namely: the obligation to provide for a
speedy initial judicial review of detent ion; the obligation to detain only in
specialised facilities and the obligati on to provide separate accommodation
guaranteeing adequate privacy to families.26
This would go against the standard s set by the European Committee for
the Prevention of Torture whereby: ‘A prison is by definition not a suitable
place in which to detain someone wh o is neither convicted nor suspected
of a criminal offence.’27 
Even though Western states which practice immigration detention are
not parties to the ICRMW, it is nevertheless important to emphasise their
immigration detention policies becaus e fifteen countries that are directly
affected by their externalisation of migration control and other detention-
related migration management and bo rder control activities are state
parties to the ICRMW. This represents one third of state parties to the
ICRMW and includes six of the 16 countries in the EU neighbourhoodframework: namely, Algeria, Azer baijan, Egypt, Libya, Morocco and
Syria as well as Turkey, an EU candidate country.28 It also includes three
state parties at Australia’s periphery in South East Asia: Indonesia, Timor-
Leste and Philippines; and Mexico, Be lize, Guatemala, El Salvador and
Honduras in the Americas.29
3 ICRMW detention provis ions: A chronological 
and incremental approach
When considering the significance  of the ICRMW in the context of
immigration detention, it is important to bear in mind that its provisions
build on the bedrock of the International Bill of Human Rights – the
Universal Declaration and the Inte rnational Covenant s on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and Civil and Political Rights and their optional
protocols – and forms an integral part of the international legal framework
for the protection of the rights of people on the move.
25 S Peers ‘Jailing migrant families together with convicted criminals: A desperate EU
policy to deter irregular migration’ (2015) http://www .statewatch.org/news/2015/
jun/eu-jailing-migrant-families.htm (accessed 26 June 2015).
26 D Avramopoulos Brussels, 1 June 2015 Ares (2015) 2397724 n 4.
27 European Committee for the Prevention  of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment CP T Standards (2011) para 28.
28 ENP (n 21 above). 
29 United Nations Treaty Collection ‘Status of Treaties’ https://treaties.un.org/pages/
ParticipationStatus.aspx  (accessed 25 June 2015).  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     79
In 1948 the Universal Declaration set out the general principles
‘[e]veryone has the right to life, libe rty and security of person’ and ‘[n]o
one shall be subjected to arbitr ary arrest, detention or exile’.30 In 1966 the
ICCPR dealt with the right to life in a separate provision and elaborated
upon the right to liberty and security of person.31 It introduced safeguards
against arbitrary arrest or detentio n and framed deprivation of liberty
within broader legal parameters:
Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be
subjected to arbitrary arrest or detent ion. No one shall be deprived of his
liberty except on such grounds and in accordance with such procedure as are
established by law .
Fourteen years after the ICCPR’s entry into force the General Assembly
adopted the ICRMW without a vote and sanctioned the Convention’s
extension of the ICCPR’s safeguar ds. The ICRMW extended provisions
relating to the right to liberty an d security for ‘migrant workers and
members of their families’ in a substantive article.32 
Migrant workers and members of their families shall not be subjected
individually or collectively to arbitrary arrest or detention; they shall not be
deprived of their liberty except on such grounds and in accordance with such
procedures as are established by law .33
The ICRMW echoes ICCPR safeguards on  the legality of detention and it
is the only core international human rights treaty to include protection
against collective arbitrary arrests or detention.34 
 In article 2, the ICRMW provides a very broad definition of migrant
workers: 
The term ‘migrant worker’ refers to a pe rson who is to be engaged, is engaged
or has been engaged in a remunerated activity in a State of which he or she isnot a national.
It is important to bear this definiti on in mind when studying detention
related to immigration status as it makes clear that the quality  of migrant
worker both pre-exists and outlasts the working experience. This wording
also includes the transit phase of em igration which over the past decade
has dramatically expanded  as a source for immigration detention at the
30 Universal Declaration arts 3 & 9.
31 ICCPR arts 6 & 9(1).
32 ICRMW art 16(1)-(9).
33 ICRMW art 16(4).34 Collective expulsion of aliens is prohibited under regional human rights treaties
including Protocol 4 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms art 4; American Convention on Human Rights art 22; AfricanCharter on Human and People’s Rights art 12 which reads: ‘The mass expulsion of
non-nationals shall be prohibited. Mass expulsion shall be that which is aimed at
national, racial, ethnic or religious groups.’80    Chapter 3
periphery of western industrialised states. It is also important to point out
in this context that while refugees and asylum-seekers feature amongst the
persons excluded from the scope of  the Convention, the distinction
between the treatment of asylum-seekers and of migrant workers in an
irregular situation is, in practice, often opaque.
 This chronology and other elements detailed below reflect not only
the international evolution of legal th inking on deprivation of liberty over
four decades from 1948 to 1990, but also shed light on the specificity of the
protection needs of migrants highlighted in the ICRMW Preamble. In this
context it must also be noted that ICRMW provisions related toimmigration detention and rights in  detention are included in ICRMW
Part III which covers the human rights of both documented and
undocumented migrant workers and members of their families.35 While
during the ICRMW drafting process a handful of countries viewed the
extension of protection to undocumente d migrants as problematic, a larger
group supported it.36 
3.1 Procedural standards
The ICRMW, like other core internatio nal human rights treaties, does not
provide a detailed description of what  constitutes arbitrary detention. It
does, however, deal at length with  safeguards against such detention.
3.1.1 Right to information: Free assistance of an interpreter
The ICRMW clarifies conditions to be met so that migrants who are
arrested can understand what is happening to them. It emphasises the needfor states to ensure that informatio n is provided in a language migrants
understand on the reasons for arrest, on any charges against them and
during related court proceedings on the lawfulness of detention and in
criminal proceedings.37 In contrast, ICCPR provis ions on language apply
to criminal proceedings only.38 In the context of criminal charges, the
ICRMW also guarantees the right to ‘hav e free assistance of an interpreter
if they cannot understand or speak the language in court’ to migrant
35 ICRMW arts 16, 17 & 18.
36 The United States, Germany, Netherlands, Australia, France and India objected and a
larger group including receiving and sending countries argued for it both ‘as a matter
of universal values and as an issue of instrumental expediency’ as it would discourageexploitation of undocumented migrants; L Bosniak ‘Human rights, state sovereignty
and the protection of undocumented migrants under the International Migrant
Workers Convention’ International Migration Review Special Issue: UN International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families  (1991) 749; L Bicocchi ‘Rights of a ll migrant workers (Part III of the
Convention) Travaux Préparatoires’ 5.
37 ICRMW arts 16(5) & 18(3)(a); B Opeskin et al Foundations of intern ational migration law
(2012) 161.
38 ICCPR arts 14(3) & 14(3)(f).  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     81
workers and members of their families.39 According to the travaux
réparatoires for the ICRMW, an early US proposal, supported by Australia
suggested adding ‘free of charge, if necessary’. 
This proposal was strongly opposed by the representatives of Netherlands,
Germany, Sweden, Senegal and Yugoslavia. They stated that ‘The question
was also which authority would decide  whether free interpretation was
necessary, and the opinion was expressed that it would be difficult to assess
who needed free interpretation and wh o did not.’ The text adopted in the
second reading ignored the USA propos al and assured the right to the free
assistance of an interpreter for migrants  that cannot understand or speak the
language used in court.40
3.1.2 Challenging the lawfulness of detention: Right to compensation
When migrant workers or members of their families are ‘deprived of their
liberty by arrest or detention’ – that is  in administrative or penal processes
– the ICRMW, like the ICCPR, requires that provision be made for
challenging the lawfulness of detention before a court that may order their
release if the detention is not lawful.41 Here again, in acknowledgment of
migrants’ vulnerability, the ICRMW incl udes recourse to a free interpreter
if necessary.
ICRMW provisions for an enforceabl e right to compensation in case
of unlawful arrest or detention ar e similar to those of the ICCPR.42 This
compensation provision was oppose d by Nigeria and the United States43
during the drafting process of the ICRMW:
During the negotiations, the United  States occasionally expressed
ambivalence about the Convention. In 1986, the US Working Group
representative stated that a reservatio n to Convention article 16.9 would likely
be registered ‘if and when the pres ent Convention is submitted to the
Senate’.44
Unsurprisingly, upon ratification of  the ICCPR in 1992 the United States
made entitlement to compensation fo r victims of an unlawful arrest or
detention or a miscarriage of justice ‘s ubject to the reasonable requirement
of domestic law’.45
39 ICRMW art 18(3)(f).
40 Bicocchi (n 36 above) 4.
41 ICRMW arts 16(8) & ICCPR 9(4).
42 ICRMW arts 16(9) & 18(6) under criminal law .43 Bicocchi (n 36 above) 3.
44 Lyon (n 1 above)  407.
45 United Nations Treaty Collection Chapter IV Human Rights 4: International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights https://treaties.un.org/pages/
ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg _no=IV-4&chapter=4&lang=en#EndDec
(accessed 9 November 2015).82    Chapter 3
3.1.3 Consular assistance
In line with the Vienna Convention  on Consular Relations, a near-
universally ratified early UN instrument,46 the right to consular assistance
is mentioned early in the Convention: 
Migrant workers and members of their families shall have the right to have
recourse to the protection and assist ance of the consular or diplomatic
authorities of their State of origin or of a State representing the interests of
that State whenever the rights recognized in the present Convention are
impaired. In particular, in case of ex pulsion, the person concerned shall be
informed of this right without delay an d the authorities of the expelling State
shall facilitate the exercise of such right.47
The wording reflects the Vienna Conv ention’s concern in article 36(1)(c)
whereby ‘consular officers shall refrain from taking action on behalf of a
national who is in prison, custody or detention if he expressly opposes such
action ’. This wording implies that activation  of consular protection is at the
request of the detainees. This is less clear in the ICRMW.
Nonetheless, the ICRMW includ es a more substantive set of
provisions in relation to informatio n on and access to consular assistance
for migrant workers and members of th eir families ‘arrested or committed
to prison or custody pending trial or … detained in any other manner’.48
The wording covers both penal and administrative detention. 
The ICRMW generally expands at greater length on the essential
constituents of the right to liberty and security of migrant workers andmembers of their families than corresponding provisions in the ICCPR.49
This addresses the particular ‘situati on of vulnerability in which migrant
workers and members of their families frequently find themselves owing,among other things, to their absence from their State of origin’.50 CMW
members emphasised the need for consular assistance quite soon after the
Committee had begun to  hold its sessions: 
The Committee recommends that consular services respond more effectively
to the need for protection of Egyptian migrant workers and members of their
families, and, in particular, provide the necessary assistance to those in
detention and promptly issue travel documents to all Egyptian migrant
workers and members of their families who wish or have to return to Egypt. It
46 Vienna Convention on Co nsular Relations 1963 art 36.
47 ICRMW art 23.
48 ICRMW art 16(7).
49 ICRMW arts 16 & 17; ICCPR arts 9 & 10; JAR Nafziger & BC Bartel ‘The Migrant
Workers Convention: Its place in  human rights law’ (1991) 25 International Migration
Review 771 782.
50 ICRMW Preamble.  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     83
also recommends that the mechanisms for re ceiving complaints from migrant
workers be improved and generalize d in all embassie s and consulates.51
3.1.4 Right to legal assistance
Legal assistance is guaranteed by the ICRMW in relation to criminal
proceedings on similar terms to the ICCPR.52 T h i s  i n c l u d e s  f r e e  l e g a l
assistance.53 However, ICRMW provisions on consular assistance include
the possibility for migrants ‘arrested or committed to prison or custodypending trial or … detained in any other manner’ through representatives
of consular or diplomatic authorities ‘to make arrangements with them for
his or her legal representation’.54
3.2 Conditions of detention
ICRMW provisions on treatment in detention are much more substantive
than related provisions in the ICCPR.55 The ICRMW drafters, cognisant
of migrants’ special vulnerability, ad dressed both administrative detention
– a rarer occurrence for nation als – and criminal proceedings.56 For
instance, whenever a migrant is ‘deprived of his or her liberty’ ICRMW
provides that state authorities should pay attention to potential problemsencountered by family members especially spouses and minor children.57
Migrants in detention are to enjoy the same rights as nationals in particular
with respect to visits by members of  their families – a provision not
included in the ICCPR ‒ and are protected against being made to bear any
cost arising from detention.58 There are occurrences of domestic law
provisions for detainees to bear the cost of detention.59 In some countries
migrants placed in pre-deportation i mmigration detention have to bear the
cost for transport back to their country of origin and at times face indefinite
detention when they are unable to pay for those costs.60
51 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families – EGYPT, CMW (25 May 2007),
UN Doc CMW/C/EGY/CO/1 (2007) para 47.
52 ICRMW art 18(3)(b)& ICCPR art 14(3)(b).
53 ICRMW art 18(3)(d) & ICCPR art 14(3)(d).
54 ICRMW art 16(7)(b) & 16(7)(c).55 ICRMW art 17 and ICCPR art 10.
56 ICRMW art 17(3).
57 ICRMW art 17(6).58 ICRMW arts 17(5), 17(7) & 17(8).
59 ‘The detainees must cover the costs of their stay in the centre, unless they have no
funds, in which case costs are covered by the state budget (Ali ens Act 2006, Article
62)’ in Global detention project ‘S lovenia detention profile’ (2010).
60 Global detention project ‘Turkey detention profile’ (2014); ‘Lebanon detention profile’
(2014) and ‘Egypt detention profile’ (2014).84    Chapter 3
3.2.1 Treatment in detention
Similar to the ICCPR, the ICRMW fo resees that ‘migrant workers and
members of their families who are deprived of their liberty shall be treated
with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human
person’. In keeping with the specific  needs of migrants, the ICRMW adds
a reference to the need to respect ‘their  cultural identity’. This would imply
for instance that religious practices and food taboos should be taken into
consideration.61
3.2.2 Protection against torture and ill-treatment
The Universal Declaration provision pr ohibiting torture or cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment was first elaborated on in bindingform in the ICCPR, which framed it as a non-derogable right.62 The
ICRMW recalls the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment adopted in 1984 in its
Preamble and includes a specific prov ision to protect migrant workers and
members of their families.63
3.2.3 Separation from convicted criminals
The ICRMW also includes a specific provision relating to the segregation
of accused persons from convicte d criminals found in the ICCPR.64
Furthermore, in recognition of the fa ct that, generally, immigration law
violations are not treated as criminal offences, the ICRMW provides that
migrants detained ‘for violation of pr ovisions relating to migration shall be
held, in so far as practicable, separately from convicted persons or personsdetained pending trial’.65
According to the travaux préparatoires  France and Germany expressed
concern about the separation of migr ant workers from other prisoners in
the first reading of the draft which stated: 
Any migrant worker or member of his or her family who is detained in a State
of destination for infraction of the provisions concerning migration shall be
housed in suitable accommodation (under  judicial control) separate from the
prisons or other centers of detentio n or imprisonment for offenders or
criminals.66 
61 ICCPR art 10(1) & ICRMW art 17(1).
62 Universal Declaration art 5; ICCPR arts 4 & 7.
63 ICRMW art 10.64 ICRMW art 17(2) & ICCPR art 10(2)(a).
65 ICRMW art 17(3).
66 Cf. A/C.3/42/1, para 26 & Cf. A/C:3/41/3,  para 225 in Bicocchi (n 36 above) 3.  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     85
3.3 Vulnerable groups
The ICRMW does not apply to refugees and stateless persons whose
protection is covered in other international treaties.67 There is no reference
to children in detention in the Conven tion, except in relation to problems
that might arise for minor children as a consequence of deprivation of
liberty of their parents.68 Consideration of the best interests of the child is
nowhere to be found. Although both the Convention on the Rights of the
Chlid (CRC) and the ICRMW were adopted within thirteen months of
each other, the CRC’s substantive prov isions protecting children against
arbitrary detention and requesting th at detention be ‘a measure of last
resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time’ are not to be found
in the ICRMW.69 The same applies for the CRC procedural safeguards:
Every child deprived of his or her libert y shall have the right to prompt access
to legal and other appropriate assistance, as well as the right to challenge the
legality of the deprivation of his or  her liberty before a court or other
competent, independent and impartial au thority, and to a prompt decision on
any such action.70 
Separation of juveniles from adults due to their age and status is only
foreseen in the ICRMW if they are accused or imprisoned.71 Some
Scandinavian states involved in drafting the ICRMW – Sweden, Norway
and Finland – insisted on the fact that the separation should not beobligatory.72 Women are not referred to explicitly in the ICRMW, a fortiori
in relation to safeguards in detention. However, the document does use
inclusive language and its provisions  apply equally to men and women and
extend special protection to family members:
Whenever a migrant worker is deprived of his or her liberty, the competent
authorities of the State concerned shal l pay attention to the problems that
may be posed for members of his or her family, in particular for spouses and
minor children.73
3.4 Non-custodial measures
Following the terms of article 9(3) ICCPR, article 16(5) ICRMW further
cautions about detention in custody wh ile awaiting trial and foresees the
67 ICRMW art 3(d); 1951 Convention relati ng to the Status of Refugees & 1954
Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons.
68 ICRMW art 17(6).
69 CRC art 37.
70 CRC art 37(d).71 ICRMW arts 17(2), 17(4).
72 Report of the open-ended Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and TheirFamilies, GA (10 October 1986), UN Do c A/C.3/41/3 (1986)para 228 http://hr-
travaux.law .virginia.edu/migrant -workers (accessed 27 October 2017).
73 ICRMW art 17(6).86    Chapter 3
possibility of release ‘subject to gu arantees’. This is a measure currently
advocated for by many civil society na tional and international campaigns
and promoted by human rights experts and mechanisms as an alternative
preferable to detention.74
4 Detention monitoring : The CMW and the HRC75
4.1 CMW
The CMW, like other treaty monitoring bodies, is tasked with examining
implementation of the relevant treaty at the national level. In order to do
so, it examines reports submitted by state parties which include responses
to a list of issues drawn up by the Committee in advance of examinationof the report in public session, some of which relate to various aspects of
detention. CMW members also use information received from civil
society, national human rights instit utions and relevant  intergovernmental
organisations to complement informat ion submitted by stat es, in particular
concerning practices. 
As illustrated in Figure 1 and deve loped in Section 5, states which
practice immigration detent ion on a larger scale – mostly western states –
do not come under CMW scrutiny. In addition, it is likely that a number of
countries of origin  in the South with little or no inwards migration flows –
such as the Philippines, Mali and Tajikistan – ratified the ICRMW withPart VI in mind.
76 Part VI contains a handful of provisions relating to
protection of a state party’s own nationals abroad , about to migrate or upon
return.
74 International Detention Coalition There are alternatives: A handbook for preventing
unnecessary immigration detention  (revised edition) (2014).
75 Immigration detention relevant CMW and HRC recommendations were initially
identified in the Universal Human Rights  Index (UHRI) database maintained by
OHCHR. However four CMW sessions si nce mid-2013 were not recorded in UHRI as
of November 2015 – from th e 19th through to the 22nd session – and results were
added to UHRI statistics by the author. All charts in this section have been created bythe author.
76 Promotion of sound, equitable, humane and lawful conditions in connection with
international migration of workers and members of their families.  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     87
Figure 1: breakdown of the 51 ICRMW state pa rties by regional groups as of July 2017
Detention issues were raised for the first time by civil society during the
second session of the CMW, before the Committee began examining state
parties’ reports in 2006.77 Since then the CMW has examined 37 initial
reports, 5 country situations in the absence of an initial report (non-
reporting states), and twelve pe riodic reports during 26 sessions.78
According to the UN Universal Hu man Rights Index (UHRI) database
and the OHCHR Treaty Bodies databa se the Committee has issued some
60 recommendations related to immi gration detention from 2006 to July
2017.79 
Upon closer analysis, CMW recommendations can be further broken
down into some 85 discrete recommendations distributed along some
broad thematic clusters. These include: the need for state parties to providestatistics on detention; conditions  of detention (overcrowding, food,
medical care and hygiene, investigat ion and sanctions for ill-treatment);
length (indefinite, to shortest poss ible); respect of international and
77 See World Federation of Trade Unions in Committee on the Protection of the Rights
of all Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families Seco nd Session Summary
Record of the 15th Meeting, ICRMW (7 July 2005), UN Doc CMW/C/SR.15 (2005).
78 OHCHR ‘Committee on migrant workers'  http://www .ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/
CMW/Pages/CMWIndex.aspx (accessed 21 June 2015) and Sessions for CMW:
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families (accessed 29 July 2017).
79 This result was obtained through using the database advanced annotation searches in
June 2015 and updated in July 2017 to construct searches with the following
keywords: ‘detention, detain, arrest, prison, and apprehended’ cross-referenced withthe ‘migrants, migrant workers, non-citizens  and refugees and asylum-seekers’ filters
by affected persons. A search using the ‘right to  liberty’ filter only yielded half the final
results analysed. 
88    Chapter 3
ICRMW norms and standards including safeguards against arbitrary
detention (exceptional and last reso rt, case by case determination, due
process, legal criteria); and procedur al standards (access to information,
legal aid, effective legal remedies, due process in judicial and
administrative proceedings, appeal, co mplaints procedures). Other issues
include legal (separation from convicted criminals) and gender segregationand administrative detention in dedicated facilities.  
The highest number of CMW th ematic detention-related
recommendations deal with consular assistance for nationals abroad  and
concerns about detention of nationals abroad . Recommendations for
detention as a last resort come second, followed by information on
statistics. Third come recommendation s on conditions of detention; and
finally the need for immigration dete ntion to be in line with ICRMW
articles 16 and 17 and to respect intern ational standards. State parties that
have received the highest number of immigration de tention-related
recommendations include Turkey, Senegal, Mexico, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ecuador and Belize. 
Although the ICRMW does contain some provisions on consular
assistance as detailed above, the predominance of recommendations on
consular assistance is deeply para doxical. The ICRMW does primarily
focus on protection of civil, politica l, economic, social and cultural rights
of migrant workers and members of their families to be extended by
governments and authorities in receiving or transit  countries. A geopolitical
reading of the ICRMW ratification sp read as illustrated in Figure 1,
however, helps decipher why the CM W would more frequently emphasise
consular assistance from the viewpoint of states of origin and not receiving
states.
The ICRMW is a multilateral human ri ghts treaty aimed at ‘protecting
the rights’ of migrant workers and members of their families and not an
instrument primarily aimed at dimi nishing or regulating migratory
movements. Scholars have highlighted that some state parties such as Sri
Lanka did expect the ICRMW to afford some protection to their own
citizens abroad, including when they are detained: 
There are no signs that migration has decreased since ratification and, there
has been little use of the ICMR vis-à-vis receiving countries, by government
representatives … On the whole, despit e ratification of the UN Convention,
the general perception is that Sri Lankan migrants are frequently subjected toindecent working conditions, non- payment of wages, physical and
psychological harassment and discriminatory practices.80
80 I Robyn et al ‘Impact of ratifying the 1990 UN Convention on the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Family: Case studies of the Philippines and
Sri Lanka’ (2005) 10.  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     89
The monitoring work of the CMW is  made difficult by an absence of
statistics on the practice and scope of  immigration detention as state parties
rarely come forth with such data. There is also a marked tendency in
various parts of the world to use euphemisms for immigration detention
and places of detention which at times makes the practice invisible.81 
Besides examination of state partie s’ reports, and building a set of
detention-related questions in the list of issues given to state parties aheadof examination of reports, the CMW, like other human rights treaty
bodies, has adopted two general comments. General Comment 2 (GC2) on
the rights of migrant workers in an ir regular situation and members of their
families includes a substantive sect ion on protection against arbitrary
arrest and detention including issues of liberty and security and protection
against inhumane trea tment in detention.82 In keeping with human rights
treaty bodies’ practice, the CMW held  a Day of General Discussion ahead
of drafting GC2 which included a disc ussion on ‘[t]he criminalization of
migrant workers in an irregular situation and members of their families,and their vulnerability to exploitation, abuse and arbitrary detention’.83 As
a result of the discussion the Gene ral Comment contains strong language
against criminal sanctions for irregular migration:
Criminalizing irregular entr y into a country exceeds th e legitimate interest of
States parties to control and regula te irregular migration, and leads to
unnecessary detention. While irregular entry and stay may constitute
administrative offences, they are not cr imes per se against persons, property
or national security.84
Since the CMW expanded on detentio n safeguards in GC2 its members
have recently adopted st rong recommendations to decriminalise irregular
migration and against detention of children:85
The Committee recalls that irregular entr ance into a country or expiration of
authorization to stay is an administra tive infraction, not a criminal offence.
Consequently, such situation cannot imply a punitive sanction. TheCommittee recalls that children should ne ver be detained on the basis of their
or their parents’ immigration status, and urges the State party to: (a) Remove
from its legislation any provision that considers any irregular immigrationsituation as a criminal offence.
86
81 M Grange ‘Smoke screens: Is there a co rrelation between migration euphemisms and
the language of detention?’ Global De tention Project Working Paper 5 (2013) 4.
82 CMW (28 August 2013), UN Doc CMW/C/GC/2 (2013) paras 23-48.
83 Committee on Migrant Workers ‘Day of General Discussion on the rights of migrant
workers in an irregular situation an d members of their families’ (2011).
84 General Comment 2 (n 82 above) para 24.
85 Grange & Majcher (n 4 above) 281-84 .86 Concluding Observations on Belize in the absence of a report, CMW (26 September
2014), UN Doc CMW/C/BLZ/CO/1 (2014) para 27; Observations finales
concernant le rapport initial du Maroc, adoptées par le Comité à sa dix-neuvièmesession, CMW (8 October 2013), UN Doc CMW/C/MAR/CO/1 (2013) para 26;
Concluding Observations on the second periodic report of El Salvador, CMW (2 May
2014), UN Doc CMW/C/SLV/CO/2 (2014).90    Chapter 3
4.2 HRC
According to the UHRI UN database the Human Rights Committee
(HRC) adopted 80 recommendations re lated to immigration detention
during the period from 2000 to 2016 an d with 169 state parties (as opposed
to some 60 for the CMW for a nine year period and only 51 state parties).87
More than half of the HRC recommen dations were directed to Western
states although they only represent 19 per cent of state parties to the
ICCPR.
Figure 2: breakdown of 169 ICCPR state parties by regional groups as of July 201788
The highest number of HRC thematic recommendations in relation to
immigration detention deal with mu ch more hardcore safeguards than
consular protection highlighted in  CMW Conclusion Observations. The
HRC primarily emphasises the need for alternatives to detention;detention as a last resort and for the shortest possible time; the need to
reconsider mandatory detention and to  revise immigration detention for
non-immigration purposes (security, an ti-terrorism); criteria for detention
of asylum-seekers; and the use of dedicated facilities. State parties with the
highest number of immigration-relate d recommendations include: Turkey,
Malta, Australia, Austria, the Czec h Republic, Finland, France, Greece,
Canada and Ireland. Despite long established due process and procedural
safeguards for nationals deprived of liberty in these countries HRC
87 Although the HRC began examining state parties report in 1977 UHRI only includes
recommendations as of 2000.
88 The State of Palestine, a UN non-member observer state is a state party to the ICCPR,
but does not belong to a UN regional group.
  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     91
recommendations highlight the lowe r level of legal safeguards for
immigration detainees. Due to the ne ar universal ratification of the
ICCPR, the HRC is able to review ma ny aspects of immigration detention
under different legal systems and in country situations with large-scale
immigration detention and can issue recommendations on practices such
as mandatory detention – a rarer op portunity for the CMW – and the need
to consider alternatives to detention.
On the eve of the establishment of the CMW, civil society
organisations carried out a mapping st udy of the treatment of migrants’
rights issues across all treaty bodi es’ recommendations over a decade.
Upon invitation from the UN Secretar iat, the study was presented to the
CMW’s newly elected members during its second session in 2005, by way
of an induction into migrants rights as the majority of members were not
familiar with the work of UN treaty  monitoring bodies. Unsurprisingly,
the findings of the study for HRC and Committee against Torture (CAT)
recommendations related to migrants mostly focused on detention issues:
Migrant-related issues in CAT conclusions are mostly to be found in
concluding observations on Europe an countries and in connection with
detention and removal of foreigners in an irregular situation, often asylum-
seekers but possibly also irregular migrants. The main concern of the
Committee against Torture regarding migrant workers is the excessive use of
force and discriminatory practices by the police, especially in detention prior
to expulsion and during expulsion pr ocedures. Those issues are common to
most Committees, but they are more detailed under CA T which takes into
account other aspects beyond police br utality when examining detention and
removals. CAT’s recommendations are also more specific.89
As mentioned in the introductory section above, the individual
communications procedure whereby the CMW could receive individual
complaints after exhausti on of national remedies has not yet come into
force.90 This is a serious flaw if comp ared with HRC and CAT practice as
it means that the CMW is deprived of the opportunity to issue
authoritative interpretations of the ICRMW. The HRC has adoptedlandmark views on issues related to  immigration detention including for
instance with respect to defining what constitutes arbitrary detention. The
HRC has ruled, for example, that detention for periods of over four years
and two years was arbitrary even if entry had been illegal as the state could
not provide justification for the continued detention without a review.91
89 ICMC & December 18 ‘The UN treaty monitoring bodies and migrant workers: A
Samizdat’ (2004) 15; I Slinckx ‘Migrants’ rights in UN  human rights conventions’ in
De Guchteneire et al Migration and human rights: The United Nations Convention on
Migrant Workers' Rights  (2009) 130 & 135.
90 ICRMW art 77 provides for entry into force following a declaration by ten state parties
that they recognise to competence of the CMW to receive individual complaints. As of
July 2017 only El Salvador, Guatemala,  Mexico and Uruguay have made this
declaration.
91 A v Australia  HRC Comm (30 April 1997) 560/1993; C v Australia  HRC Comm (13
November 2002) 900/00.92    Chapter 3
The HRC has also ruled that continue d indefinite detention and lack of
legal safeguards allowing detainees to  challenge effectively the grounds for
their indefinite detention is not justified.92 CAT, in a communication that
was not found admissible on grounds related to the authors of the
communication, did however comment that Spain exerted jurisdiction
including during detention of persons in Mauritania: 
[It] maintained control over the persons on board the Marine I [ship] from the
time the vessel was rescued and througho ut the identification and repatriation
process that took place at Nouadhib ou. In particular , the State party
exercised, by virtue of a diplomatic  agreement concluded with Mauritania,
constant de facto control over the alleged victims during their detention in
Nouadhibou. Consequently, the Committe e considers that the alleged victims
are subject to Spanish jurisdiction in sofar as the complaint that forms the
subject of the present communication is concerned.93
This brief comparison of the CMW and HRC treatment of immigration
detention demonstrates that although the ICRMW often includes more
targeted safeguards to protect migrant workers in detention,
implementation of these guarantees is  limited in the absence of a higher
rate of ratification. In this context,  the HRC would seem to offer a stronger
avenue for protecting the rights of mi grants in detentio n. Considering that
the ICCPR has 169 state parties and has generated 80 detention-related
recommendations since the beginning  of the millennium, the Covenant
and its monitoring body clearly stand out as a pivotal protection tool for
migrant workers in immigration detention. 
5 Western non-ratification
The ICRMW was adopted without a vote and, according to one of the
drafters, members of the drafting Wo rking Group ‘did not vote on any
single issue’: 
Since the theoretical majority consisted of the developing countries of which
the majority were states of origin, a ma jority vote might have produced results
biased against the industrial countries of which the majority are countries of
employment. This might have been coun terproductive in terms of ratification
and thereby also prevented an implem entation of the provisions for the
benefit of migrant workers residing in non-ratifying states. 94
Despite this optimistic reading West ern states have not ratified the
Convention. And if industrialised countries do not feel the need to protect
92 J et al v Australia  HRC Comm (30 April 2016) 2233/2013.
93 JHA v Spain  (Marine I) CAT (21 November 2008) CAT/C/41/D/323/2007.
94 J Lonnroth ‘The International Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families in the contex t of international migration policies: An
analysis of ten years of negotiation’ (1991) 25 The International Migration Review 724.  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     93
migrant workers and members of their families, why would the rest of the
world want to do so? This domino effect has been observed by scholars:
Usually, a lot of pressure is put on developing countries by western
countries to become state parties to certain conventions but no pressure at
all has been asserted with regard to this Convention (for the obvious
reason: no western co untry has ratified).95
Figures 3 and 4 are a graphic representation of the ugly duckling
syndrome that designates the ICRMW as the weak link amongst noncharter-based UN human rights mechanisms.
Figure 3: Ratification of core internatio nal human rights treaties as of July 2017
Although Western states alle gedly object to Part III granting rights to all
migrant workers – irrespective of thei r migration status – the rights listed
in this part are already largely prov ided for in other core international
human rights treaties they have alread y ratified. In particular, with respect
to the right to liberty and security and physical integrity, most of the
ICRMW articles were lifted from the ICCPR and the Convention againstTorture. The political boycott on ra tification by Western countries –
compounded with risk and security  geared migration management and
externalisation of migration and asylum  policies described above – has far
95 I Robyn et al (n 80 above) 49.
94    Chapter 3
reaching consequences as safe guards in the ICRMW cannot be
operationalised in countries that  detain on a larger scale. 
Figure 4: Regional Membership  Distribution as of July 201796
Research into the official position of  states shows that ignorance of the
actual content of the ICRMW compounded by lack of political will are themain reason behind the lack of ratification.97 Western refusal to be bound
by the one core human rights treaty that might cause them embarrassment
has led to accusations of double standards.98 
Westerns states’ negative mind se t about the ICRMW also impacts on
development of CMW interpretation of norms relevant to immigration
detention. Section 6 below studies th e strength and limitations of CMW
monitoring of the ICRMW. It includes a brief analysis of the effects of thisnon-ratification by industrialised count ries on the monitoring and scope of
implementation of the ICRMW by the relevant treaty monitoring body.
96 There are 193 UN members and two non-members (Holy See and Palestine). However
this UN membership chart includes other non-members (typically small island states)
that have ratified some of the core international human rights treaties. For instance,
although not ratified by the United States the CRC has 196 state parties. Turkey is a
member of both WEOG and Asia-Pacific, while Australia and New Zealand are
members of the Western and Other Group as are Canada and the United States.
97 E Macdonald & R Cholewinski ‘The ICRMW and the European Union’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 89 above) 362-64.
98 M Grange & M d’Auchamp ‘Role of civil society in campaigning for and using the
ICRMW’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 89 above) 78; Grange (n 2 above) 22.
  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     95
6 Strengths and limi tations of the CMW modus 
operandi  and monitoring
As detailed above, similar to other ‘category’ human rights treaties, the
ICRMW often pays particular attention to rights issues specific to the
situation of migrant workers  and members of their families. The CMW has
begun to develop interpretations of ICRMW provisions on the basis of a
decade of examination of state parties’  reports, in particular on protection
against arbitrary arrest and de tention in General Comment 2.
By contrast with the HRC, the CMW has had fewer opportunities to
adopt authoritative positions and to develop and identify the scope and
limits of ICRMW provisions including on immigration detention.
However, as all ICRMW state parties have ratified the ICCPR, national
legislators and policy makers, judges and lawyers still have the benefit of
authoritative statements by the HRC on deprivation of liberty including its
case law.99 Compared to another ‘category’ treaty such as children,
ICRMW drafters did not have the comfort of working on a human group
that enjoyed near universal support, with the added strength of a major UN
agency – UNICEF – putting its weig ht behind it. For instance, the
ICRMW does not attempt to set limits on the length of detention while the
CRC to some extent does.100 Nor does the ICRMW define the types of
places where migrants can be detained.
Some human right experts have argued that in administrative
detention guarantees for immigratio n detainees are weakened. According
to the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention:
In the majority of the cases of admi nistrative detention with which the
Working Group has dealt, the underlying national legislation does not
provide for criminal charges or trial. Consequently, the administrative rather
than judicial basis for this  type of deprivation of liberty poses particular risks
that such detention will be unjust, unreasonable, unnecessary or
disproportionate with no possibility of judicial review .101 
Wilsher supports this analysis and argues that the ‘inexorable move
towards administrative de tention’ has destroyed sa feguards. He concludes:
The duration of detention is left to ex ecutive priorities, degrees of efficiency
and fate. Due process is said not to be required because detention is not
99 General Comment 35, article 9 (Liberty and security of person), HRC (16 December
2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/GC/35 (2014) para 18; General Comment 15: The position
of aliens under the Covenant, HRC (11 April 1986) para 7 & 9.
100 CRC art 37(b) provides that detention or imprisonment of a child should be for the
shortest appropriate period of time.
101 Deliberation No 9 concerning the definition and scope of arbitrary deprivation of
liberty under customary international law, Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
(24 December 2012), UN Doc A/HRC/22/44 (2012) para 70.96    Chapter 3
intended as a punishment. Such detention periods have, however, often far
exceeded the standard sentence for any crime associated with border
crossing.102
In this context, within the broader dy namics of the strengthening of treaty
bodies, a CMW general comment on detention, or even better a joint
general comment across va rious human rights treaty monitoring bodies to
capitalise on practice and jurisprude nce would be very useful. It could
emphasise the need for safeguards in re lation to the duration and time limit
on administrative detention. In part icular, it would bridge some gaps in
relation to weaknesses in the ICRMW in  relation to the special safeguards
to protect women migrants, build on the CRC Committee’s strong position
against detention of children103 and the need for due process of law
guarantees as part of the right to a fair trial. 
Beyond the unique ratification pattern for the treaty it is tasked with
monitoring, the CMW is hampered by an other three negative factors. It is
plagued by particularly  heavy non-reporting dynamics. At the
Committee’s second session 23 initial report s by state parties were already
overdue.104 This is close to half of the countries which are parties to the
Convention. In mid-2015 18 state parties had not yet submitted their initial
report, including Turkey, the only we stern state to have ratified the
Convention.105 This low rate of compliance includes four state parties that
have also  not submitted their initial report to HRC106 and seven which
have omitted to submit their initial report to CAT.107 A remaining group
of ten state parties have failed to su bmit their initial report to the CMW
only.108 This poor reporting record by states with at times brittle
democratic traditions ne gatively impacts on protection of the human rights
of migrants.
Another serious limitation is that many CMW members nominated
and elected by state parties hold positions closely linked to their countries’
executive which runs counter to th e need for independent expertise in
decision making. At the first sessio n of the CMW, in March 2004, Carla
Edelenbos, then Secretary of the Committee, had to diplomatically remind
102 Wilsher (n 8 above) 349.
103 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Malta, adopted by the
Committee at its Sixty-Second Session ( 14 Jan-1 February 2013), CRC (18 June 2013),
UN Doc CRC/C/MLT/CO/2 (2013) para 58(a).
104 International Catholic Migration Commission ‘Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Member s of their Families 25- 29 April 2005 – 2nd
session: Update on Advocacy activities f or the promotion of the Convention’ (2005) 2.
105 Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights ‘Late and non-reporting states’
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/TreatyBodyExternal/LateReporting.aspx(accessed 21 June 2015).
106 Bangladesh, Cape Verde, Guinea, and Timor Leste. 
107 Bangladesh, Cape Verde, Niger, Nigeria, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles
and Timor-Leste.
108 Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Jamaica, Lesotho, Libya, Mauritania, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, and Turkey.  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     97
CMW members that they had been elected and were serving in their
individual capacity , as per ICRMW article 72(2)(b) and should therefore not
address each other with the ‘distinguished representative of XX country’,standard form of address used in UN political bodies such as the General
Assembly and the (then) Co mmission on Human Rights.109 
The absence of experts from the EU, the US, Canada and Asia/Pacific
on the CMW prevents the universalisation of human rights values foreseenin the UN Charter and the Universal Declaration. As High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein advocated before the Human
Rights Council:
The treatment of non-nationals must observe the minimum standards set by
international law . Human rights are no t reserved for citizens only, or for
people with visas. They are the inal ienable rights of every individual,
regardless of his or her location and migration status. A tendency to promote
law enforcement and security paradi gms at the expense of human rights
frameworks dehumanises irregular migrants, enabling a climate of violence
against them and further depriving them  of the full protection of the law .110
Finally, as observed above, the thrust of CMW recommendations to state
parties in relation to immigration detention surprisingly focuses on
consular assistance to nationals abro ad. A number of state parties seem to
have been guided by the need to protect their nationals abused and in
particular held in detention abroad ra ther than to protect non-citizens on
their territory, simply because they are mostly states of origin of migration
flows.111 The CMW at times reacts by making recommendations on
detention of nationals of state parties in foreign countries (ie to Honduras
in relation to detention of Honduran s migrants in Mexico and the United
States, and to Tajikistan in relation to the Russian Federation).112
Philippines, the first Asian country to ratify the ICRMW in 1995 did so inthe wake of the adoption of landmark legislation to protect its migrantworkers overseas, after a public outcry  in reaction to perceived government
failure to protect a Filipino domestic worker executed in Singapore. Nearly
a decade later, in responses to the CMW examination of its
 second
periodic report, the Philippines expressed regret that the Committee failed
109 Personal recollection of the author who participated in the first CMW sessions as an
NGO observer.
110 Opening Statement by Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussei n United Nations High  Commissioner for
Human Rights at the Human Rights Council 27th Session (2014).
111 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families Tajikistan, CMW (16 May 2012),
UN Doc CMW/C/TJK/CO/116 (2012) para 23( c); Concluding Observations of the
Committee on the second periodic report of Mali, CMW (1 May 2014), UN Doc
CMW/C/MLI/CO/2 (2014) para 27(a); Conc luding Observations on the second
periodic report of the Philippines, CMW (2 May 2014), UN Doc CMW/C/PHL/
CO/2 (2014) para 31.
112 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families Tajikistan (n 111 above);
Concluding Observations on  the initial report of Honduras, CMW (3 October 2016)
CMW/C/HND/CO/1 (2016) para 37.98    Chapter 3
to acknowledge its mechanisms to protect Filipinos outside of the country
both during repatriation from emergency situations in Libya, Syria,
Yemen and Egypt but also irregular migrants subject to expulsion ordersor victims of the recent crackdow n on undocumented workers in Saudi
Arabia.113 
As demonstrated above, one of the reasons why jurisprudence of the
CMW is largely underdeveloped is  because western countries have
maintained a negative political mind set about the ICRMW from the
outset. Combined with misunderstandings by countries of origin about the
effects of ratification, this has gene rated a jurisprudent ial quasi-paralysis
around the Convention and its implemen tation. Soon after adoption of the
Convention, ICRMW provisions relating to liberty and rights during
detention were described as ‘more elaborate … more enumerated’ in thefirst substantive compendium on the Convention.114 This dimension has
been overlooked by many European diplomats who have argued against
ICRMW ratification objecting that other core human rights treatiesadequately cover the protection needs of migrants and sometimes even
claiming that the ICRMW grants new rights to undocumented
migrants.115 This argument was never advanc ed against ratification of the
CRC adopted thirteen months before  the ICRMW and which enjoys near
universal ratification including by all European states.116 More recently,
over 700 recommendations for ratification of the ICRMW were made byUN member states since April 2008 within the Universal Peer Review
(UPR) mechanism established under  the Human Rights Council, 270 of
which were directed to members of the United Nations Regional Group ofWestern states (WEOG).
117 However the mindset against the ICRMW is
such that Western states stop short of using the UPR to make ICRMW
ratification recommendations to states from other regional groups. Anexception is Turkey, both a member of WEOG and of the Asian Regional
Group (and a state party to ICMR W since 2004) which has been making
many recommendations for ICRMW rati fication during UPR, indluding
to many western states. 
7 Conclusion
The ICRMW contains a comprehensiv e set of provisions to protect
migrant workers placed in detention because of their immigration status.
113 Philippines Mission to the United Nations and other International Organisations,
CMW (2 May 2014), UN Doc 0262/CJR (2014).
114 Annex International Migration Review Special Issue: UN International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families  (1991) 791.
115 M d’Auchamp ‘Rights of migran t workers in Europe’ (2011) 25.
116 The CRC has 196 state parties. Only one UN  member state has si gned but not ratified
the CRC, namely, the United States of America.
117 UPR Info Database of Recommendations https://www .upr-info.org/database/
(accessed 19 August 2017).  Safeguarding migrants against arbitrary detention     99
As befits a human rights instrument focused on a special category of
persons rendered vulnerable because they are in transit or reside in a
country other than their own, the ICRM W pays particular attention to the
specificity of migrants. For instance , migrant workers in detention are to
enjoy the same rights as nationals in particular with respect to visits by
members of their families – a provis ion not included in the ICCPR – and
are protected against being made to be ar any cost arising from detention.
Likewise, in both the criminal and administrative contexts, the ICRMW
emphasises the need for immigration de tainees to receive information in a
language they understand on the reas ons for arrest, on charges against
them and during court proceedings on the lawfulness of arrest or detention.
However, the protection of members of the families of migrant
workers and their specific rights in relation to immigration detention are
not made explicit. Although migrant women represent close to half of
international migrants since 1990, a gender approach has not been
explicitly mainstreamed th roughout the Convention a fortiori in relation to
women placed in detention. The sa me applies for migrant children,
whether unaccompanied or with their families. Nonetheless, following the
adoption of General Comment 2, so me recent recommendations by the
CMW do follow other international and regional human rights
mechanisms and push for alternatives to detention or even a prohibition on
detention of children.  Indeed, as this book goes to print,     the CMW and
CRC Committee   are releasing a landmark joint General Comment which
clearly prohibits immigratio n detention of children.
The full breadth of potential application of ICRMW safeguards during
administrative detention of migrants remains to be tested as countries withthe largest immigration detention estates evade scrutiny of their policies
and practice through non-ratification  of the Convention. The Committee
tasked with supervision of implementation of the ICRMW thus finds itselfin a quandary. On the one hand, as im migration detention is not a pressing
issue in the majority of the 51 state parties to the Convention, and due to
low reporting standards, the CMW cannot fully test the application norinterpret the breadth of immigration detention safeguards.
On the other hand, failure to achi eve universal ratification and the
absence of old industrialised countries and democracies on board the
ICRMW translates into somewhat weaker expertise amongst the CMW
members – nominated by current ICRM W state parties – with respect to
the exercise of the right to libert y and related procedural safeguards.
Although the CMW has begun adopting  general comments, monitoring of
implementation of the ICRMW suffers  a quasi-jurisprudence vacuum as
the individual complaints mechan ism has not yet been activated.
In this context, both the Convention and the CMW have received
considerably less scholarly and civi l society attention than the other
treaties and treaty monitoring bodies. Nonetheless, as immigration100    Chapter 3
detention spreads across all regions of  the world, and amid renewed civil
society coalitions and calls for ratifica tion, in particular during the Human
Rights Council’s UPR,118 the ICRMW and its monitoring mechanism
remain a central piece in the inte rnational human rights toolkit for
protection of the rights of migrant workers and members of their families
in immigration detention.
118 A Desmond ‘The triangle that could square the circle? The UN International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, the EU and the Universal Periodic Review’ (2015) 17 European Journal
of Migration and Law  39.101Stefanie Grant and Beth Lyon*
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
The UN Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of their Famili es (Migrant Workers Convention,
the Convention or ICRMW) broke ground in international law by
articulating baseline treatment for all migrants. But as the Convention
approaches its 30 year mark with only  51 state parties, it is an outlier
amongst the ‘core’ UN human rights instruments.1 This low level of
ratification reflects difficulty in shi fting the perception by many sovereign
1 The authors are grateful to Giulia Barbone and Azadeh Erfani for their research
assistance, and to Jane Connor, Pia Oberoi, Bradford Smith, and the reviewers,
including Alan Desmond, for their insights and advice; any errors are the authors’own. The chapter was completed prior to the intergovernmental consultations and
negotiations, set in train by the New York  Declaration of 19 September 2016, which
are due to culminate in th e adoption of a Global Compact on Migration in 2018.
1 The UN has adopted the term ‘core’ to describe these ten treaties. See United Nations
Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner ‘The Core International HumanRights Instruments and their monitoring bodies’ http://www.ohchr.org/EN/
ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CoreInstru ments.aspx (accessed 29 August 2016).  The ten
treaties are: (1) International Convention on the Elimination of all forms of RacialDiscrimination (CERD), Mar.  7, 1966, 660 UNTS 195 (entered into force 4 January
1969); (2) International Covenant on Civi l and Political Rights (CCPR), Dec. 16,
1966, 999 UNTS 171 (entered into force 23 March 1976); (3) International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cu ltural Rights (CESCR), Dec. 16, 1966, 993 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 January 1976); (4) Conv ention on the Elimin ation of All Forms of
Discrimination against Wo men (CEDAW), Dec. 18, 1979, 1249 UNTS 13 (entered
into force 3 September 1981); (5) Conven tion Against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatm ent or Punishment (CAT), Dec. 10, 1984, 1465 UNTS
85 (entered into force 26 June 1987); (6) Conv ention on the Rights  of the Child (CRC),
Nov . 20, 1989, 1577 UNTS 3 (ent ered into force 2 September 1990); (7) International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families (ICRMW), Dec. 18, 1990, 2220 UNTS 3 (entered into force 1 July
2003); (8) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), Dec. 13,
2006, 2515 UNTS 3 (entered into force 3 Ma y 2008); and (9) International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED), Dec. 20,2006, 2716 UNTS 3 (entered into force 23 December 2010); and (10) Optional
Protocol of the Convention against To rture (OP-CAT), Dec. 18, 2002, 2375 UNTS 237
(entered into force 22 June 2006).4CHAPTERINDIRECT  SUCCESS ? THE
IMPACT  AND  USE OF THE
ICRMW IN OTHER  UN FORA
*102    Chapter 4
states of migrants as intruders/supplic ants to one of migrants as rights-
bearing subjects. The struggle to es tablish the ICRMW takes place in the
context of vibrant activity around th e growing number of international and
regional human rights treaties focused on other vulnerable groups2 and
human rights concerns. In the United Nations alone, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, expert committees, individual experts,and other bodies work together with governments and civil society to
monitor human rights treaty impl ementation and undertake related
humanitarian work.3 The objective of this chapter is to provide an account
of how some of these UN processes are interacting with the Convention.4
The chapter does not provide a full account of how UN processes havehandled migration issues, but rather addresses the more technical issue of
the integration of the ICRMW itself into the work of other bodies.
The chapter divides its analysis of  the interactions between selected
UN processes and the Migrant Workers Convention into two categories,
substantive and institutional. In ea ch category, the discussion includes
both standing fora and special mechanisms of the UN. The standing fora
examined are the UN Human Rights Council, and the treaty bodies for the
nine other principal human rights tr eaties. We examine special procedures
that involve an overlap with the Migrant Workers Convention, including
the Special Rapporteurs on the Human Rights of Migrants and on
Trafficking in Persons, especially women and children. We also consider
some recent global gove rnmental processes around  migration outside the
UN. A limited time frame had to be selected: the focus of the analysis is
recent interactions (2013-2015), a scope that allowed for a closer survey of
the substantial volume of work produced by these mechanisms during the
period in question.
Since 1990, UN human rights treaty  bodies have interpreted and
reinterpreted their specific mand ates to include all migrants.5 This has led
2 The phrases ‘vulnerable people’, ‘vulnerable populations’, and ‘vulnerable
communities’ are common in international human rights policy. Indeed, so frequent is
the use of the term ‘vulnerable’ that in our view it has become a term of art. Emergingcriticism of the term raises the concern that using ‘vulnerable’ as an adjective
describing subordinated people may invoke victimhood and therefore essentialises and
disempowers the most deserving subjects of human rights. In this chapter, we continueto use these phrases despite these concerns, as we feel that at this juncture there is no
discussion, let alone consensus, on a repl acement term. In a number of instances
where we use the term, it is a direct quotation.
3 For example, the UN Human Rights Council, the ten Committees monitoring the ten
core human rights instruments, the International Labour Organization, agencies with
combined humanitarian and protection mandates such as the UNICEF and the Officeof the High Commissioner for Refugees, an d the ‘special procedures’ of the Human
Rights Council, through which experts promote human rights, currently through 39
thematic and 14 country-focused mandates. See  Annual Report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and Reports of the Office of the High
Commissioner and the Secretary-General Human Rights Bodies and Mechanisms,
HRC Council (29 January 2015), UN Doc A/ HRC/28/41 (2015) 3, noting that as of
January 2015, there were 77 mandate-holders.
4 For the purposes of this chapter, we see impact as supportive and normative references
to the Convention.   Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     103
to an increase in the inclusion of migrants’ rights in the work of all the
treaty bodies. But it has also led to over-lapping jurisdictions, the risk of
diverging interpretations, and of  different treaty bodies acting
independently to monitor obligations re lating to migrants’ rights in their
specific treaties.
The need for more co-ordination be tween treaty bodies is recognised
as a problem facing the UN treaty body system as a whole.6 One
consequence has been that even when specialised migration issues arise in
states’ reports that are addressed by the Convention, generally it is not
invoked by treaty bodies; they do not ty pically cite to the Convention even
regarding issues the Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW) has
addressed in its own Concluding Obse rvations. This trend is part of a
broader pattern of lack of cross- referencing by the treaty bodies. In
response, the CMW has advised that: 
[A] State’s obligation under the Conventi on must be read with respect to the
core human rights treaties and other relevant international instruments towhich it is a party. Although separate  and freestanding, these treaties are
complementary and mutually reinforcing.7
A number of UN human rights experts and mechanisms do make reference
to the Migrant Workers Convention, as has the High Commissioner forHuman Rights. For example, in his 2013 report, Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of migrants, François Crépeau noted that: 
Only 46 States have ratified the Intern ational Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. However,
it mainly restates rights that already fo llow from other treaties. All States have
ratified at least one of the other core international human ri ghts treaties and,
owing to the non-discrimination princi ple, are thus obliged to respect the
human rights of migrants, including those in an irregular situation.8 
5 See generally  S Grant ‘Migrants’ rights within the UN system: The first 60 years’ in
MD Dembour & T Kelly  (eds) Are human rights for migrants? (2011). 
6 The problem is not specific to the UN system. ‘Overlapping, concurrent or competing
claims to competence are co m m o n  i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  …  i n t e rn a t i o n a l  e x p e rt  b o d i e s  …
because each … is the product of a treaty arrangement that defines its range ofresponsibilities and each  is therefore independent of the other’ Y Tyagi The UN Human
Rights Committee: Practice and procedure (2011) 758. See Concept Paper on the High
Commissioner’s Proposal for a Unified Standing Treaty Body, Report by theSecretariat, International Human Rights Instruments (22 March 2006), UN Doc HRI/
MC/2006/2 (2006) para 23; E Tistounet ‘The  problem of overlapping among different
treaty bodies’ in P Alstn & J Crawford (eds) The future of UN human rights treaty
monitoring (2000) 383-401.
7 General Comment 2: On The Rights of Migrant Workers in an Irregular Situation and
Members of their Families, CMW Comm ittee (28 August 2013), UN Doc CMW/C/
GC/2 (2013) para 7.
8 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, François Crépeau,
GA (7 August 2013), UN Doc A/68/283 (2013) para 29 (Crépeau Report).104    Chapter 4
Although this statement may have seemed to dismiss the Convention,
in the same report the Special Rappor teur characterised the Convention as
a ‘crucial measure in relation to the human rights of migrants’.9 
In addition, the UN human rights mechanisms are virtually uniform in
making consistent calls for ratification of the ICRMW. But in government-
driven fora such as the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) and in the non-
UN Global Forum on Mi gration and Development,10 support for
ratification is sharply divided between proponent states in the Global
South and opponents or sceptics in the Global North.
2 Substantive interaction:  Overlapping protection 
and calls for ratification
We define substantive interaction as  UN human rights monitoring bodies
citing the Convention where relevant, either through invoking asubstantive Convention provision when this protection overlaps with their
own treaties, or by encouraging ratification of the Convention. The
following analysis first describes areas of overlapping protection betweenthe Convention and the other human rights treaties, reporting on the level
of citation to the Convention in th ese instances and highlighting missed
opportunities to use the Convention to underscore recommendations. Wethen track the same treaty bodies’ calls for ratification. 
As compared with the UN’s nine ot her principal human rights treaties,
one of the unique features of the ICRMW is that it combines very specific
provisions to protect a particular population – documented migrantworkers – with general provisions on both documented and more
vulnerable undocumented migrants, and on categories of rights, that
overlap with other human rights trea ties. For example, Part III of the
Convention, entitled Human Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of their Families, contains 24 provis ions that set forth protections which
are well established in other treaties, ranging from freedom of conscience,liberty and security and protection from  torture, to the right to leave and
return to one’s own country and the right to respect for one’s cultural
identity. Meanwhile, Part IV sets out additional rights which protect
‘Migrant Workers and Members of their Families who are Documented or
in a Regular Situation’, such as equality of treatment with nationals in thematter of access to vocational services and housing.
9 2013 Crépeau Report (n 8 above) para 39.
10 These mechanisms differ in that the UPR is an intergovernmental review process of
human rights issues within the Human Rights Council and the UN Global Forum onMigration and Development is an informal intergovernmental process without clear
institutional footing, but we link them he re because the normative statements of each
body are shaped and limited by individual governments.  Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     105
The historical reason for the overlap in Part III is that the delegates
who drafted the treaty were divided over whether to accord rights to
irregular or undocumented migrant workers.11 The compromise they
struck, after years of negoti ations, was to devote 35 articles of the treaty to
a near-full spectrum of fundamental human rights for all migrant workers
and family members, including those lacking regular status, while giving
additional protections for those with regular status. The 35 articles are
strikingly similar to the provisions of  the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR). At the time it was drafted, these articles
were filling a gap in the application of  existing protections: some treaties
had been understood to ex clude irregular migrants – ‘non citizens’ – from
specific provisions.12
Between 1990 and 2015, the UN, through its refugee agency,
UNHCR, continued to develop the existing international refugee
protection regime with new interpreta tions of refugee law to apply through
domestic refugee law and policy.13 In the same period, although the UN
has no agency with a protec tion mandate for migrants,14 it also – through
the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council –
began to give attention to migratio n as a human rights issue. However,
some UN member states were unwilling to accept even the extant migrant
rights treaties, namely the ILO Conventions and the ICRMW.15
11 See Office of the United Nations High Comissioner for Human Rights ‘Travaux
Préparatoires: Rights of All Migrant Workers (Part III of the Convention)’ http://
www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/migration/taskforce/docs/draftinghistoryrev1.doc(accesed 7 September 2016) 1-2; De Guchteneire et al (eds) Migration and human rights:
The United Nations Convention on Migrant Workers' Rights  (2008). 
12 See CERD (n 1 above) art 1(2). In 1980, a study prepared for the Sub Commission on
the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities concluded that ‘(t)he
wording of international instruments as they relate to aliens is unclear and imprecise,
“nationality” not being included in the non discrimination clauses’. The application of
the provisions of international instruments to aliens was ‘unclear and uncertain’;
existing means of implementation were ‘inadequate’. See International Provisions
Protecting the Human Rights of Non-Citi zens, Baroness Elles (August 1980), UN Doc
E/CN.4/Sub.2/392/Rev.1 (1980) para 366 (30 & 20). The Inter Governmental
Working Group of Experts characterised international human rights law for theprotection of migrants’ rights as ‘dispersive and fragmentary’. See Working Group of
Intergovernmental Experts on Human Rights of Migr ants, CHR (9 March 1999), UN
Doc E/CN.4/1999/80 (1999) para 103. 
13 See, eg , United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Guidelines on International
Protection No 9: Claims to Refugee Status based on Sexual Orientation and/or
Gender Identity within the context of Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention and/or its
1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, UNHCR (23 October 2012), UN Doc
HCR/GIP/12/09 (2012). 
14 In July 2016, the Internat ional Organisation  for Migration became a ‘Related
Organization’ to the UN: IOM ‘IOM Becomes a Related Organization to the UN’
25 July 2016 http://www .iom.int/news/ iom-becomes-related-organization-un
(accessed 13 October 2016). 106    Chapter 4
Meanwhile, the human rights situatio n of migrants worsened as numbers
rose in a globalising world where jobs could move freely, but workers
could not legally cross borders, leading to large irregular movements. In2004, the ILO reported that:
[F]or an unacceptably large proportion of migrants, working conditions are
abusive and exploitative, and may be characterized by forced labour, low
wages, poor working environment, a virt ual absence of social protection, the
denial of freedom of association and union rights, discrimination and
xenophobia, as well as social exclusion, all of which rob workers of thepotential benefits of working in another country. The development of labour
institutions for the protection of mi grant workers has lagged behind the
growth of migration.16
Governments increasingly treated mi gration as an enforcement problem
instead of developing meaningful low wage visa regimes to normalise and
regulate migration flows and protect labour rights.17 During these 25
years, world attention focused on se x-and-labour-trafficking, smuggling,
and child migration, creating a disc ourse of migrant-as-victim/survivor
that generally failed to gain policy pu rchase in terms of rights protection.
Instead, and especially after 2001, the enforcement-fo cused discourse of
migrant-as-criminal, and even as te rrorist, dominated the international
policy agenda, exacerbating the humanitarian plight of migrants.18
As awareness grew both of the importance of migration as a
transnational reality, and of human rights abuses against migrants, the UN
took those limited steps that were poli tically possible on an issue on which
states were reluctant – in some cases unwilling – to accept any multilateralintrusion into national sovereignt y; most notable is the General
Assembly’s High-Level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development (see section 2.3 below). In 2003, after proposals for a UN-
migration conference failed to find support amongst member states – fewer
than half even replied to a questionnaire soliciting their views – the then
Secretary-General Kofi A nnan encouraged states to address the issue of
15 The ILO Conventions dedicated to migrants continued at low ratification rates during
this period. See  ILO ‘Migration for Employment Co nvention (Revised), 1949 (No 97)’
http://www .ilo.org/dyn/normlex/ en/f?p=1000:11300:0::NO:11300:P11300_INST
RUMENT_ID:312242 (accessed 14 September 2016) (38 state parties as of 1990); ILO
‘Migrant Workers (Supplementary Prov isions) Convention, 1975 (No 143)’ http://
www .ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p= 1000:11300:0::NO:11300:P11300_INSTRUMEN
T_ID:312288 (accessed 14 September 2016) (14 state parties as of 1990). For an
overview of the protection of migrant workers’ rights under ILO and UN treaties, see
International Labour Office Towards a fair deal for migrant workers in the global economy
(2004) chap 4. 
16 HILO (n 15 above) para 126.
17 See, eg, F Crépeau ‘Foreword’ in  L Berg (ed) Migrant rights at work: Law’s precariousness
at the intersection of immigration and labour (2016)  xiii-xvi (2016) (noting border control
obsessions and populist-nationalist rants).
18 On forced migration and refugees, see generally E Fiddian-Quasmiyeh et al The Oxford
handbook of refugee and forced migration studies  (2014). Also A Betts Global migration
governance (2011). See, too, Report of the Specia l Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants, GA (20 July 2016), UN Doc A/71/40767 (2016) paras 8-18.   Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     107
international migration substantivel y, but outside the UN, through a
Global Commission on International Migration.19 Annan invited the
Commission to set a ‘strong ethical compass’ for policy makers, and tohelp ‘win broad acceptance for a normative framework that has human
rights at its heart’. He described the ICRMW as ‘the bill of rights for
migrant workers and their families in their new home countries’ and calledfor its ratification.
20 Although the Commission ’s report recommended
strengthening UN capacity for the protection of human rights, it did not
follow Kofi Annan’s lead in reco mmending that states ratify the
ICRMW.21
At the time when the Convention was adopted by the General
Assembly in 1990, there was consider able uncertainty even amongst legal
experts as to the degree to which human rights, although universal inprinciple, protected non-nationals, an d particularly non-nationals who had
no legal status, in practice.22 In one of the core treaties it even appeared
that discrimination on the ba sis of nationality was allowed.23 Faced with
this apparent contradictio n to universality, and with the assistance of an
expert report to the Human Rights Commission,24 treaty bodies asked
themselves whether, and how far, their individual mandates applied tomigrants. Between 2004 and 2009, they confirmed that states are generally
bound by the treaties to protect all migrants, regardless of legal status.25 
The Commission on Human Rights also gave increased attention to
migrant protection through the creation  of special procedures for which the
co-operation of states was required to operate effectively, but not their
19 Report of the Global Commission on International Migration ‘Migration in an
interconnected world: New directions for action’ (Geneva, 2005). See K Newland
‘Migration’s unrealised potential: The Report of the Global Commission on
International Migration’ (1 November 2005)  http://www .migrationpolicy.org/article/
migrations-unrealized-potential-report-global-commission-international-migration
(accessed 13 October 2016); S Grant ‘GCIM: Defining an “ethical compass” for
international migrat ion policy’ (2006) 44 International Migration 13. 
20 See UN Meeting Coverage and Press Rele ases ‘Secretary-General, in Lecture on
international flows of humanity, says human rights must be at the heart of migrationpolicies’ (21 November 2003), UN Doc SG/SM/9027 (2003). Kofi Annan, speaking
at the launch of the Global Commission on International Migration: UN Information
Service, ‘Win-win outcomes possible if approach to migration is rational,compassionate, Secretary-General Annan tells New Global Commission’
(10 December 2003), UN Doc SG/SM/9064 SOC/4632 (2003). 
21 Former Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon consistently urged states to ratify the
ICRMW; see eg, Report of the Secretary General ‘Promotion and protection of human
rights, including ways and means to promote the human rights of migrants’ GA
(7 August 2014), UN Doc A/69/277 (2014) paras 11 and 79(a).
22 See generally  S Grant ‘Migrants’ rights within the UN system: The first 60 years’ in
MD Dembour & T Kelly  (eds) Are human rights for migrants? (2011).
23 CERD (n 1 above) art 1(2): ‘This Conv ention shall not apply to distinctions,
exclusions, restrictions or preferences … between citizens and non citizens’. 
24 See D Weissbrodt The human rights of non citizens  (2008) 37.
25 The texts adopted by the Treaty Bodies are cited below . Also, see, for example,
M Satterthwaite ‘Crossing borders, claiming rights: Using human rights law to
empower women migrant workers’ (2005) 8 Yale Human Rights and Development Law
Journal  1.108    Chapter 4
approval of the experts’ findings. The Commission established the Special
Rapporteurship on the Human Rights of Migrants in 1999 and the Special
Rapporteurship on Trafficking in persons, especially women and children,in 2004.26 Beginning in 2006, the UN’s new Human Rights Council with
its innovative UPR process, created an important space for reviewing UN
m e m b e r s ’  c o m p l i a n c e  w i t h  h u m a n  r i g h t s  l a w ,  p r o v i d i n g  a  n e wopportunity to monitor migrants’ rights. 
As each of these processes moved forward, those involved had to
determine whether and how to interact with the CMW. As each
subsequent attempt to convince wealthy, destination states to ratify theConvention failed, some officials and advocates increasingly feared it was
a legal and political dead-end, despite fifty years of relatively steady human
rights treaty promulgation, ratifica tion and monitoring of vulnerable
populations in which migrants were represented, including as women and
children. As the following description reflects, the weight and institutional
momentum of that history kept explicit pessimism about the Convention’sprospects largely out of official statements. Most public statements by
inter-governmental agencies express nothing but support for the
Convention.
2.1 Treaty bodies
2.1.1 Human Rights Committee
The ICCPR established the Human Rights Committee (HRC) in 1976.
The ICCPR now has 169 state parties,  116 of which have accepted the
Committee’s jurisdiction to consider  individual complaints. One of the
oldest of the principal human rights treaties, the ICCPR was drafted tomake enforceable the civil and politica l rights contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. As orig inally drafted, the ICCPR contains
language excluding irregular migrants from article 12(1) (‘liberty ofmovement and freedom to ch oose [one’s] residence’).
27 The Convention
also omits nationality – as opposed to  ‘national origin’ – from its article
2(1) enumerated list of protected categories. However, in subsequentpronouncements, the Committee extended Covenant protections to
irregular migrants. In its General Comment  15 (1986) on the position of
aliens under the Covenant, the Comm ittee clarified that all but two
26 The mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants was created
pursuant to Resolution  1999/44 of the Commission on  Human Rights, while the
mandate of the special Rapporteur on traffi cking in persons, especially women and
children was created pursuant to Resolution 2004/110.
27 The ICCPR limited those rights to those ‘lawfully within the territory of a State’.   Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     109
provisions of the Covenant must be guaranteed without discrimination as
between non-nationals and citizens.28 In 2004, it was more specific: the
right must be available to ‘all individuals, regardless of nationality… suchas migrant workers … who might find th emselves in the territory or subject
to the jurisdiction’ of a state party.29
In the two-year period under consideration, the Committee paid
significant attention to the situatio n of migrants. Amongst its concerns
were the failure to respect non-re foulement (Malta, Peru, and Angola),30
the excessive detention or ill-treatment of detainees (Angola, Japan,
Latvia, Malta, and the United States),31 failure to guarantee legal
representation for unaccompanied children (Malta),32 ill-treatment of
migrants in deportation (Japan and Angola),33 confiscation of travel
documents (Chile),34 the need to increase access to health care (United
States),35 the need to train officials to screen for trafficking situations
(United States),36 the need to adopt affordable measures to hold employers
to account for domestic worker abuse (Hong Kong and Macao, China), theneed for Hong Kong, China to repeal a rule requiring departure within two
weeks after job termination,37 the need for Korea to guarantee the
Covenant rights to migrants,38 the need for Paraguay  to provide protection
28 Article 25 limits the rights to political participation, public service and the vote to
citizens, and art 13 provides due process rights to aliens in expulsion. See  General
Comment 15 on the position of aliens under the Covenant (Twenty-seventh session,
1986), Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations adopted by
Human Rights Treaty Bodies, HRC ( 1994) UN Doc HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1 (1994) 18,
paras 2 & 6. 
29 General Comment 31 on the nature of the general legal obligation on state parties to
the Covenant, CCPR Committee (29 March 2004), UN Doc CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/
Add.13 (2004) 10.
30 See Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Malta, CCPR
Committee (21 November 2014), UN Do c CCPR/C/MLT/CO/2 (2014). Concluding
Observations on the Fifth Periodic Repo rt of Peru, CCPR Committee (29 April 2013),
UN Doc CCPR/C/PER/CO/5 (2013); Conclu ding Observations on the Initial
Report of Angola, CCPR Committee ( 29 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/AGO/CO/
1 (2013). 
31 As above; Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Japan, CCPR
Committee (20 August 2014), UN Do c CCPR/C/JPN/CO/6 (2014); Concluding
Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Latvia, CCPR Committee (11 April2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/LVA/CO/3 (2014); Concluding Observations on the
Fourth Periodic Report of the United St ates of America, CCPR Committee (23 April
2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/USA/CO/4 (2014).
32 As above.
33 See n 31 and n 32 above. 
34 See Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Chile, CCPR
Committee (13 August 2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/CHL/CO/6 (2014).
35 n 31 above. 
36 As above.37 See  Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Hong Kong, China,
CCPR Committee (29 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/CHN-HKG/CO/3 (2013); For
Macao , China, see Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Macao , China,CCPR Committee (29 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/CHN-MAC/CO/1 (2013). 
38 See Concluding Observations on the Initia l Report of the Republic of Korea, CRPD
Committee (29 October 2014), UN Doc CRPD/C/KOR/CO/1 (2014). 110    Chapter 4
and rehabilitation to trafficking survivors,39 and the need to improve
language education for ethnic mi norities (Hong Kong, China).40 
Of the countries whose migrant rights record it considered, two
(Paraguay and Peru) are parties to the ICRMW. Given those ratifications,citation to the ICRMW would here have been appropriate, but would have
run counter to the HRC’s general prac tice. As a general matter, the HRC
does not cite to other treaties or treaty body jurisprudence.41 In none of the
migrant-related Concluding Observatio ns listed above did the HRC cite to
another treaty. Nor does the HRC generally cite to any other Committee’s
jurisprudence. However, when it recommended that Hong Kong, China,provide language education for langua ge minorities, the HRC noted it was
‘reinforcing’ a CERD recommendati on made to the same country.42 The
HRC might have similarly referenced  the findings of the CMW when it
recommended that Chile stop confisca ting travel documents, as the CMW
had made this recommendation to Chile three years before the HRC did
so.43
2.1.2 Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
Like the ICCPR, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (CESCR) was drafted to implement the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights, and en tered into force in 1976. A hundred-
and-sixty-five countries have ratifi ed CESCR, of which 22 have accepted
the Committee’s jurisdiction over indivi dual complaints of breaches of the
treaty. Also like the ICCPR, CESCR includes a provision limiting
protection for migrants in some circ umstances. Article 2(2) contains the
Covenant’s non-discrimination provis ion, which instructs member states
to respect Covenant rights ‘without di scrimination of any kind as to race,
colour, sex, language, religion, politica l or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status’, but article 2(3) provides that‘[d]eveloping countries … may determine to what extent they would
guarantee the economic rights recogniz ed in the present Covenant to non-
nationals’.
44
Unlike the ICCPR, CESCR had no monitoring body until 1985, when
the UN Economic and Social Council created the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The Committee has interpreted the
39 See Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Paraguay, CCPR
Committee (29 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/PRY/CO/3 (2013). 
40 n 37 above.
41 The Committee monitors implem entation of the ICCPR, but has no direct role in the
implementation of any other international human rights treaty. See Tyagi (n 6 above)
758. 
42 As above.43 Consideration of Reports su bmitted by States Parties under art 74 of the Convention,
CMW Committee (19 October 2011), UN Doc CMW/C/CHL/CO/1 (2011) 21.
44 CESCR, arts 2(2) and 2(3).  Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     111
treaty to extend protection to all mi grants, most notably in its 2009 General
Comment 20: ‘The Covenant rights apply to everyone including non-
nationals, such as refugees, asylum -seekers, stateless persons, migrant
workers and victims of in ternational trafficking, regardless of legal status
and documentation.’45 As a result of its protection for all migrants,
CESCR also sets a higher standard by filling at least two gaps in theICRMW. Article 12 CESCR contains a right ‘to the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of physical and mental health’, while the
ICRMW guarantees only ‘any medical care that is urgently required forthe preservation of their life or the avoidance of irreparable harm to their
health’.
46 Similarly, the Migrant Workers Convention lacks a protection
for the right to housing.47
In other General Comments, th e Committee further confirmed
CESCR protections for migrants, including the right to protection of
cultural identity,48 and the right to participate in social security or at the
least a refund of contributions.49 Notably, in its General Comment 18 on
the Right to Work, the Committee cited the Migrant Workers Convention,
stating the principle of nondiscrimination as set out in article  2(2) CESCR
and in article  7 ICRMW: 
[S]hould apply in relation to employ ment opportunities for migrant workers
and their families. In this regard th e Committee underlines the need for
national plans of action to be devise d to respect and promote such principles
by all appropriate measures, legislative or otherwise.50 
In the two years under review, the Committee on ESCR did not make
reference to the substantive provisions of the Convention, although it did
give detailed consideration to relevant issues. For example, the Committeerecommended a number of measures for Tajikistan to improve protection
for its expatriate and returnee nationals, as well as their families.51 The
Committee also raised concerns about access to justice for migrants in
45 General Comment 20 on non-discrimination in economic, social and cultural rights,
CESCR Committee (2 July 2009), UN Doc E/C.12/GC/20 (2009) 30.
46 ICRMW (n 1 above) art 28. See also the contribution of Georgopoulou et al to this
volume.
47 Cf CESCR (n 1 above) art 11(1). 
48 General Comment 21 on the right of everyone to take part in cultural life, CESCR
Committee (21 December 2009), UN Doc E/C.12/GC/21 (2009) E.6.
49 General Comment 19: The ri ght to social security, CESCR Committee (4 February
2008), UN Doc E/C.12/GC/19 (2008).
50 General Comment 18 on the the right to work, CESCR Committee (6 February 2006),
UN Doc E/C.12/GC/18 (2006) 18. One year earlier, in General Comment 16 on the
equal right of men and women to the enjoym ent of all economic, social and cultural
rights, CESCR Committee (13 May 2005) , UN Doc E/C.12/2005/3 (2005) 10, the
Committee had included migrant status in its non-discrimination statement but did
not reference the Migrant Workers Convention. 
51 Concluding Observations on the Combined Second and Third Periodic Reports of
Tajikistan, CESCR Committee (25 Ma rch 2015), UN Doc E/C.12/TJK/CO/2-3
(2015) 22-24, 32 and 34. 112    Chapter 4
Vietnam,52 the Czech Republic,53 and Azerbaijan,54 and raised equal
worker protection for irregular migrants with Japan.55 
2.1.3 Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD)
monitors the International Conventi on on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination (ICERD), a 1966 treaty with 178 state parties, 57 of which
have recognised CERD’s competence to consider individual cases. In
2004, CERD issued General Reco mmendation 30 on discrimination
against non-citizens,56 replacing an earlier General Recommendation that
had excepted distinctions by a state on  the basis of nationality from the
definition of discrimination on the basis of article 1(2).57 This significant
re-interpretation of its previous ap proach required that most measures
taken against irregular migrants must be proportional to the achievement
of a legitimate aim.58
Between 2013 and 2015, CERD did not make substantive reference to
specific provisions of the Migrant Wo rkers Convention when it considered
migrants’ rights in particular count ries, but it did routinely call for
ratification of the Convention. Notably, in multiple concluding
observations, CERD stated that the country whose record was under
examination, ‘bearing in mind the indivisibility of all human rights’59
should ratify the Migrant Workers Convention, ‘which has directrelevance to racial  discrimination’.60
52 Concluding Observations on the Second to Fourth Periodic Report of Viet Nam,
CESCR Committee (15 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/VNM/CO/2-4 (2014).
53 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of the Czech Republic,
CESCR Committee (23 June 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/CZE/CO/2 (2014).
54 Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Azerbaijan, CESCR
Committee (5 June 2013), UN Do c E/C.12/AZE/CO/3 (2013) 21. 
55 Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Japan, CESCR Committee
(10 June 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/JPN/CO/3 (2013) 21. 
56 General Recommendation 30, on discrimination against non-citizens, CERD
Committee (Sixty-Fourth Session, 2004), UN Doc CERDC/64/Misc.11/rev .3 (2004).
Differences of treatment based on citizenship or immigration status will constitute
discrimination if the criteria for different tr eatment, judged in the light of the objectives
and purposes of the Convention, are not applied in pursuit of a legitimate aim or are
not proportional to its achievement (para 4).
57 See CERD Committee (n 56 above) para 39. 58 General Recommendation 11 on Non-Ci tizens, CERD Committee (Sixty-Second
Session, 1994), UN Doc A/48/18 at 112 (1994).
59 See, eg,  Concluding Observations on the Nineteen th to Twenty-First Periodic Reports
of Cameroon, CERD Committee (26 September 2014), UN Doc CERD/C/CMR/
CO/19-21 (2014); Concluding Observations on the Combined Seventh to Ninth
Periodic Reports of Japan, CERD Commit tee (26 September 2014), UN Doc CERD/
C/JPN/CO/7-9 (2014); Concluding Observatio ns on the Combined Seventh to Ninth
Periodic Reports of the United States of  America, CERD Comm ittee (25 September
2014), UN Doc CERD/C/USA/CO/7-9 (2014).
60 See, eg,  Concluding Observations on the Co mbined Twentieth and Twenty-First
Periodic Reports of Poland, CERD Comm ittee (19 March 2014), UN Doc CERD/ C/
POL/CO/20-21 (2014); Concluding Observatio ns on the Combined  Eighth and Ninth  Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     113
Of all the core treaty monitoring  bodies other than the CMW, CERD
was the most actively focused on mi gration issues during the two years
under review. At the intersection of  discrimination and migration, for
example, CERD pressed for statistics -gathering on migrants (Cameroon,61
Japan,62 Kazakhstan,63 Luxembourg),64 action against racial profiling
(United States),65 protection from discrimina tion in education, housing
and employment against migrants (Poland,66 Cyprus),67 and curbing hate
speech by politicians (Russian Federation).68 None of these countries has
yet ratified the ICRMW, though one (Cameroon) has signed.69
2.1.4 Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women 
Adopted in 1979, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women counts 189 ratifying nations, 109 of which
have acceded to the individual comp laints jurisdiction of the treaty’s
monitoring body, also known as the CEDAW. In the two years of
Concluding Observations under re view, the CEDAW rarely cited to
treaties beyond its jurisdictional treaty,70 and did not cite to any
substantive provisions of the ICRM W. It has, however, made many
observations and recommen dations relevant to the situation of migrant
workers and their families. In reviewing gender concerns in state parties,
the CEDAW has made observations and recommendations regarding a
60 Periodic Reports of Uzbekistan, CE RD Committee (14 March 2014), UN Doc
CERD/ C/UZB/CO/8-9 (2014); Concluding Observations on the Fourteenth and
Seventeenth Periodic Reports of Luxemb ourg, CERD Committee (13 March 2014),
CERD/C/LUX/CO/14-17 (2014); Concluding Ob servations on the Twentieth to the
Twenty-Second Periodic Reports of the Russian Federation, CERD Committee
(17 April 2013), UN Doc CERD/C/RUS/CO/20-22 (2013).
61 CERD Committee (n 59 above) 6.62 CERD Committee (n 59 above). 
63 Concluding Observations on the Combined Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of
Kazakhstan, CERD Committee (14 March 2014), UN Doc CERD/C/KAZ/CO/6-7
(2014) 16.
64 CERD Committee (n 59 above) 6.
65 CERD Committee (n 59 above) 8, 18.66 CERD Committee (n 60 above).
67 Concluding Observations on the Seventeenth to Twenty-Second Periodic Reports of
Cyprus, CERD Committee 10 (23 September 2013), UN Doc CERD/C/CYP/CO/17-22 (2013).
68 CERD Committee (n 60 above) 12.
69 See  United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights ‘Status of
Ratification Interactive Dashboard’ http://indicators.ohchr.org/ (accessed 31 July
2016).
70 The CEDAW made a general reference in one Concluding Observation: ‘the
Committee notes with concern the many discriminatory provisions in laws, such as the
minimum age of marriage for girls in the Family Law … which are contrary to the
Convention a nd other international hu man rights instruments .’ Concluding Observations
on the Initial Report of Qatar, CE DAW Committee (9 March 2014), UN Doc
CEDA W/C/ AT/CO/1 (2014) para 15 (2014 CEDA W Concluding Observations on
Qatar) (emphasis added).114    Chapter 4
number of issues concerning migr ant women and girls. Amongst the
Committee’s concerns, for example, are health care (Greece,71 Qatar,72
Cambodia,73 Andorra,74 Dominican Republic),75 including contraceptive
services (Cyprus,76 Hungary),77 education (Greece,78 Finland,79
Denmark,80 Austria),81 and trafficking (Cyprus,82 Dominican Republic,83
Qatar,84 Cameroon,85 Lithuania,86 Poland).87 Of these Concluding
Observations, two related to parties to the Migrant Workers Convention:
Cambodia and Cameroon.88
Over the years CEDAW has also issued several General
Recommendations touching on the rights of migrant women and girls.Most notably, in its 2008 General Recommendation 26 on women migrant
workers, the Committee analyses the situation of women migrant workers
and makes recommendations for protecti ng their human rights. It focuses
on situations of trafficking but does not exclude the concerns of other
women migrant workers. In paragr aph two of General Recommendation
26, CEDAW makes an interesting statement about the ICRMW: 
71 Concluding Observations on the Seventh Periodic Report of Greece Adopted by the
Committee at its Fifty Fourth Sessi on, CEDA W Committee (26 March 2013), UN
Doc CEDA W/C/GRC/CO/7 (2013) 32-33.
72 2014 CEDAW Concluding Observations  on Qatar (n 70 above) para 48.
73 Concluding Observations on the Combined Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Cambodia, CEDAW Committee (28 October 2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/ KHM/
CO/4-5 (2013) 38.
74 Concluding Observations on the Combined Second and Third Periodic Reports of
Andorra, CEDA W Committee (27 October 2013), UN Doc CEDA W/C/AND/CO/
2-3 (2013) 31-32.
75 Concluding Observations on the Combined Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of the
Dominican Republic, CEDAW Committee (30 July 2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/
DOM/CO/6-7 (2013) 37.
76 Concluding Observations on the Combined Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of
Cyprus, CEDA W Committee (1 March 2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/CYP/CO/6-7
(2013) 29-30.
77 Concluding Observations on the Combined Seventh and Eight Periodic Reports of
Hungary, CEDAW Committee (26 Ma rch 2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/HUN/CO/7-
8 (2013) 31.
78 CEDAW Committee (n 71 above) 26-27.
79 Concluding Observations on the Seventh Periodic Report of Finland, CEDAW
Committee (9 March 2014), UN Doc CEDAW/C/FIN/CO/7 (2014) 31.
80 Concluding Observations on the Eighth Periodic Report of Denmark, CEDAW
Committee (10 March 2015), UN Do c CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/8 (2015) 34.
81 Concluding Observations on the Seventh and Eighth Periodic Reports of Austria,
CEDAW Committee (22 March 2013), UN Doc CEDA W/C/AUT/CO/7-8 (2013)
33.
82 CEDAW Committee (n 76 above) 19-20.
83  CEDAW Committee (n 75 above) 26.
84 CEDAW Committee (n 70 above) 26.85 Concluding Observations on the Combined Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Cameroon, CEDA W Committee (9 March 2014), UN Doc CEDAW/C/CMR/CO/4-
5 (2014) 20-21.
86 Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of Lithuania, CEDAW
Committee (24 July 2014), UN Doc CEDA W/C/LTU/CO/5 (2014) 27.
87 Concluding Observations on the Combined Seventh and Eighth Periodic Report of
Poland, CEDA W Committee (14 November 2014), UN Doc CEDA W/C/ POL/CO/
7-8 (2014) 27.
88 See  Status of Ratification Interactive Dashboard (n 69 above).  Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     115
This general recommendation intends to contribute to the fulfilment of the
obligations of States parties to respect,  protect and fulfil the human rights of
women migrant workers, alongside the legal obligations contained in other
treaties, the commitments made under  the plans of action of world
conferences and the important work of migration-focused treaty bodies,
especially the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of their Families. While the Committee notes that theInternational Convention on the Protec tion of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families  protects individuals, including
migrant women, on the basis of their mi gration status, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women protects allwomen, including migrant women, against sex- and gender-based
discrimination.
89 
Given that article 7 of the Migrant Workers Convention ensures the rights
of the Convention shall be observed without discrimination on the basis of
sex, there is evidently overlap between the ICRMW and General
Recommendation 26. Indeed, the General Recommendation concludes
with a statement encouraging state parties 
to ratify all international instruments relevant to the protection of the human
rights of migrant women workers, in particular, the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families.90
2.1.5 Committee on the Rights of the Child 
The 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child is the most widely ratified
of the ten principal human rights tr eaties, with 196 state parties and 34
subject to the individual complaints jurisdiction of the CRC. Article 22 of
the Convention requires that refugee and unaccompanied children shallreceive appropriate protection and humanitarian assistance in the
enjoyment of applicable rights set fo rth in the present Convention and in
other international human rights or  humanitarian instruments to which
the said States are Parties.91 
In 2005, the Committee on the Rights of the Child issued General
Comment 6 on Treatment of Una ccompanied and Separated Children
Outside their Country of Origin in which the Committee affirmed that ‘the
rights stipulated in the Convention apply to all children, including migrant
children’.92 
89 General Recommendation 26 on Women Migrant Workers, CEDAW Committee
(5 December 2008), UN Doc CEDAW/C/2009/WP .1/R (2008) 9.
90 CEDA W Committee (n 89 above) 29.
91 CRC (n 1 above) art 22.92 General Comment 6: Treatment of Unaccompanied and Separated Children Outside
Their Country of Origin CRC Committ ee (1 September 2005), UN Doc CRC/GC/
2005/6 (2005). 116    Chapter 4
In recent years, the Committee has not cited to substantive provisions
of the Migrant Workers Convention, bu t it has shown consistent concern
for the situation of migrant children. Amongst other actions, theCommittee has recommended that state parties keep statistics on migrant
children (China,93 Kuwait,94 Russian Federation,95 Portugal,96
Paraguay),97 register the birth of the children of migrants (China),98 and
ensure that governments take measures to secure maintenance from
parents working abroad (Saint Lucia).99 O f  t h e  s t a t e s  t o  h a v e  r e c e i v e d
these recommendations, only Paraguay is a party to the ICRMW.100
2.1.6 Committee against Torture
The Committee against Torture (CAT) monitors the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment, a 1984 treaty with 162 state parties, 83 of which have
accepted the Committee’s competence to consider individual complaints.
The Convention against Torture contai ns a critically important provision
for migrants, stating in article 3 that no country may deport a migrant – ‘a
person’ – to a country where he or she would face torture. On the basis of
this mandate, CAT takes a direct inte rest in and hears frequent individual
complaints regarding due process in deportation, and individual
deportation and extradition decisions. In the two years under review, CAT
made no substantive reference to the ICRMW, but did urge state partyattention to many torture-related mi gration issues, such as training of
officials who enforce immigration laws (Cyprus,
101 Lithuania,102
93 Concluding Observations on the Combined Third and Fourth Periodic Reports of
China, CRC Committee (29 October 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/CHN/CO-3-4 (2013)
18.
94 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Kuwait, CRC Committee
(29 October 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/KWT/CO/2 (2013) 18.
95 Concluding Observations on the Report Submitted by the Russian Federation under
Article 8, Paragraph 1, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of theChild on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, CRC Committee
(25 February 2014), UN Doc CRC/C/OPAC/RUS/CO/1 (2014).
96 Concluding Observations on the Report Submitted by Portugal under Article 8,
Paragraph 1, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Co nflict, CRC Committee (24 February 2014),
UN Doc CRC/C/OPAC/PRT/CO/1 (2014).
97 Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Paraguay Submitted by Portugal
under Article 8, Paragraph 1, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the Involv ement of Children in Armed Conflict, CRC Committee
(25 October 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/OPAC/PRY/CO/1 (2013) 12-13.
98 CRC Committee (n 93 above) 39-40.
99 Concluding Observations on the Combined Second to Fourth Periodic Reports of
Saint Lucia, CRC Committee (8 July 2014), UN Doc CRC/C/LCA/CO/2-4 (2014).
100 See Status of Ratification In teractive Dashboard (n 69 above). 
101 Concluding Observations on the Fourth Report of Cyprus, CAT Committee (16 June
2014), UN Doc CAT/C/CYP/CO/4 (2014) 11.
102 Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Lithuania, CAT Committee
(17 June 2014), CAT/C/LTU/CO/3 (2014) 18.  Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     117
Poland103 and Ukraine)104 and detention policies (Australia,105
Croatia,106 Lithuania,107 Thailand108 and the United States of
America).109
2.1.7 Committee on the Rights of  Persons with Disabilities 
Since it was adopted by the UN General Assembly in 2006, the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has garnered 174ratifications, including 91 declarat ions recognising its Committee’s
jurisdiction over individual complaints.110 In the two years under review,
the Committee made no reference to  the ICRMW nor spoke on migration
issues.
2.1.8 Committee on Enforced Disappearances
The International Convention for th e Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance counts 57 ratifications and 21 acceptances of
individual jurisdiction since its adoption by the General Assembly in 2006.
The Committee on Enforced Disappeara nces has made no reference to the
ICRMW, but in recent years has ra ised several concerns relating to
migration. Amongst its recommendati ons are the need for training of
migration officials (the Netherlands,111 Mexico),112 the need for due
process in deportation (Spain),113 and to ensure the return of migrants’
remains to their home countries when they die abroad (Mexico).114
103 Concluding Observations on the Combined Fifth and Sixth Periodic Reports of
Poland, CAT Committee (23 December 2013), UN Doc CAT/C/POL/CO/5-6
(2013) 14.
104 Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Ukraine, CRC Committee
(12 December 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/UKR/CO/6 (2014).
105 Concluding Observations on the Combined Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Australia, CAT Committee (23 December 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/AUS/CO/4-5
(2014).
106 Concluding Observations on the Combined Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Croatia, CAT Committee (18 December 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/HRV/CO/4-5
(2014).
107 CAT Committee (n 102 above), 17.
108 Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Thailand, CAT Committee (20 June
2014), UN Doc CAT/C/THA/CO/1 (2014).
109 Concluding Observations on the Combined Third to Fifth Periodic Reports of the
United States of America, CAT Co mmittee (19 December 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/
USA/CO/3-5 (2014).
110 Though adopted by the UN General Asse mbly on 13 December 2006, the Convention
was not opened for signat ure until 30 March 2007. 
111 Concluding Observations on the Report Submitted by the Netherlands under Article
29, Paragraph 1 of the Convention, CE D Convention (10 April 2014), UN Doc CED/
C/NLD/CO/1 (2014).
112 Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 29, Paragraph 1, of
the Convention, CED Conventi on (17 April 2014), UN Doc CED/C/MEX/1 (2014).
113 Concluding Observations on the Repo rt Submitted by Spain under Article 29,
Paragraph 1, of the Convention, CED Convention (12 December 2013), UN Doc
CED/C/ESP/CO/1 (2013).
114 CPED Convention ( n 1 above).118    Chapter 4
2.2 Additional monitoring bodies
2.2.1 Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants
In 1999, the UN Commission on Huma n Rights established the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants.115 Of all the
special mechanisms, the Special Rapporteur’s mandate is most closelyaligned with the Migrant Workers Convention.116 The mandate was
proposed in 1998 by an expert wo rking group, mandated by the
Commission on Human Rights to report on the human rights of migrants.The Working Group took vulnerabilit y as its criterion. It recommended
the creation of ‘an international me chanism to deal with human rights
issues affecting different groups of migrants’. The Working Group notedthe ‘lack of a consistent and focused approach to a vulnerable group’, and
that several important migrant groups, including certain categories of
migrant workers, remained outside the scope of the ICRMW. Moreover,‘all the indications are that there wi ll be additional delay before the
Convention, and thus its monitoring mechanism, becomes
operational’.
117 
The mandate was thus envisioned as complementary to the work of
the treaty bodies, including the fu ture CMW. The Special Rapporteur’s
mandate requires its holder to examine ways and means to overcome the
obstacles existing to the full and effect ive protection of the human rights of
this vulnerable group, and sets out four main functions: to ‘request and
receive’ information on rights viol ations; to make recommendations to
prevent and remedy violations; to pr omote the ‘effective application’ of
relevant international norms; and to  recommend actions at the national
and international levels to eliminat e violations of migrants’ rights.118 
115 The Commission on Huma n Rights (HRC) Resolution  1999/44; since then, the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur has been extended by Commission on Human
Rights Resolutions 2002/62 and 2005/47 and Human Rights Counc il resolutions 8/
10, 17/12 and 26/19. As the UN website notes: ‘The mandate of the Special
Rapporteur covers all countries, irrespecti ve of whether a State has ratified the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, of 18 Decemb er 1990.’ OHCHR, ‘Special Rapporteur on
the human rights of migrants’ http://www .ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Migration/SRMigrants/Pages/SRMigrantsIndex.aspx (accessed 18 December 2015).
116 See T Lesser ‘The role of United Nations special procedures in protecting the human
rights of migrants’ (2009) 28 Refugee Survey Quarterly 139.
117 Reports of the Inter Governmental Working Group of Experts on the Human Rights
of Migrants, UNCHR (10 March 1998), UN Doc E/CN.4/1998/76 (1998) para 48;
Specific Groups and Individuals, Migrant Workers, Repot of the Special Rapporteur,
Ms Gabriela Rodri?guez Pizarro, UNCH R (27 December 2004), UN Doc E/CN.4/
2005/85 (2004) paras 123-24. See E/CN.4 /1999/80 (n 12 above) para 123.
118 For the full text, see  HRC Resolution 1999/44 (n 115 above) para 3.   Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     119
The Special Rapporteur was also invited 
within the framework of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and all
other international instruments, to requ est, receive and exchange information
on violations of the human rights of  migrants from Governments, treaty
bodies … special rapporteurs for various human rights questions … and torespond effectively to  such information.
The current mandate requests the Special Rapporteur ‘to take into
consideration relevant human rights instruments of the United Nations to
promote and protect the human rights of migrants’.119 
Thus the Convention is not specifically referred to in the mandate,
except as a ‘relevant human rights instrument’, although there is indirect
reference to the Committee on Migrant Workers as one of the treaty
bodies. The mandate holder during  the period under review, François
Crépeau, did not see this as a limitati on to discussion that the Convention
can play a wider role. For example, noting the absence of any UN
migration agency, and that IOM remained outside the UN, the 2015Crépeau report comm ented that in order to ‘i nclude’ IOM in the United
Nations, it would amongst other measures, 
need to be given a legal protection mandate and guided by the core
international human treaties, including the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of TheirFamilies.120
2.3 Support for Ratification
2.3.1 High Commissioner for Human Ri ghts and the Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights
The High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, whose mandate covers the full range of
human rights,121 have supported the Convention, urging states to ratify.
Speaking on International Migran ts Day in 2011, High Commissioner
Navi Pillay said: 
More than 20 years ago, States recognized that migrants needed specific
protection and brought the Convention in to existence … it is high time that
these same States now unblock the poli tical will to ratify and effectively
implement this important treaty. 
119 CHR Resolution 1999/44 (n 115 above) pa ra 5; Resolution 26/19 paras 2 & 3.
120 2013 Crépeau Report (n 8 above) para 112. 
121 See  High Commissioner for the Promotion and Protection of All Human Rights, GA
(20 December 1993), UN Doc A/RES/48/141 (1 993), see 4(a) (including in the High
Commissioner’s mandate, ‘[t]o promote an d protect the effective enjoyment by all of
all civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights’).120    Chapter 4
In her speech, she noted that the Convention made clear ‘the link
between migration and human righ ts’, recognised the ‘specific
vulnerabilities of migrant workers’ and offered ‘guidance on nationalmigration policies’.122
The Office’s 2012-2013 Management Plan named migration as one of
its six Strategic Priorities, and pledged to strengthen partnerships and
outreach activities towards ratifica tion of the Convention, ‘including
through its multiple presences at region al and national levels’. To this end,
the Office would ‘continue to engage with governments, parliamentarians,
trade unions and civil society actors’, and the High Commissioner wouldraise the issue of ratification of the Convention during country visits and
in relevant international fora.123
OHCHR’s 2014 report ‘The Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of
Migrants in an Irregular Status’ re ferred repeatedly to the Convention’s
importance as both a normative inst rument and as a guide for national
migration policy making; the report drew attention to the value of Part VI
as ‘explicitly’ providing ‘a framework for human rights-based
policymaking on migration’: 
For instance, State parties are enjoined  to maintain appropriate services to
deal with questions abou t international migration of workers and members of
their families and formulate and implem ent policies on migration, exchange
information with other State parties, provide information to employers and
workers on policies, laws and regulations, and provide information andappropriate assistance to migrant workers and members of their families (art
65).
2.3.2 UN Human Rights Council Universal Periodic Review
The UN General Assembly establis hed the Human Rights Council, and
the Council’s UPR, in 2006. The Human Rights Council is the UN’s
governmental forum for human rights, and the successor to theCommission on Human Rights. The UPR is an innovative process created
to ensure a public gove rnment-to-government revi ew of human rights. In
the UPR cycle, the UPR Working Group solicits three written reports, one
from the government whose performance is under review, and two from
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, one reflectinginput from UN agencies and the other reflecting civil society comments.
Following a series of civil society- driven sessions, the Working Group
holds a dialogue in which any country may put questions to
122 UN Human Rights, Office of the High Commissioner ‘Human rights are not a matter
of charity’ (20 December 2011)  http://www .ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/
HRAreNotMatterOfCharity.aspx  (accessed 13 October 2016). 
123 OHCHR Management Plan 2012-2013: Workin g for Results, ‘Migration’ http://www
2.ohchr.org/english/ohchrreport2011/we b_version/media/pdf/9_Migration.pdf
(accessed 13 October 2016).   Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     121
representatives of the country under review. The Working Group then
generates a report containing a reco rd of the dialogue and a series of
recommendations, each ascribed to the country that generated it. Thecountry under review may choose to accept or to ‘note’ (reject) each
recommendation in a voluntary inter-sessional communication, and is
expected to provide an update on im plementation of the recommendations
in the ensuing cycles of the UPR.
Since 2008, the year the UPR’s proc esses began, most countries have
been through the review cycle twice. As the process unfolds, the UPR is
proving to be a site of significant advocacy for the Convention.124 Of the
countries that have not ratified the Convention, virtually every one to pass
through the UPR has received one or  more written recommendations to
ratify, and many have been question ed about the Convention during the
live dialogue. The countries most rout inely pressing other states to ratify
are Ecuador, the Philippines, Mexico, Indonesia, and Turkey, but at least
43 countries have made these recommendations, most but not all of whichare ICRMW state part ies or signatories.125 These recommendations reflect
an unprecedented level of public pre ssure on non-ratifying countries, not
only to accede to the treaty, but also to give and justify their reasons forfailing to do so. To date, wealthy countries frequently reject any ICRMW
ratification recommendation without fu rther explanation. If a justification
for non-ratification is provided, countries typically assert that theirdomestic laws already provide – or improve upon – the Convention’s
protections.
126 Less frequently, governments reject recommendations that
124 See  A Desmond ‘The triangle that could square the circle? The UN International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, the EU and the Universal Periodic Review’ (2015) 17 European Journal
of Migration and Law  36. Discussion of the UPR was omitted from the previous portion
of the article because the authors did not encounter instances of substantive cross-
referencing to the ICRMW , even though concerns relating to migration frequentlyarise in UPR proceedings.
125 Albania, Algeria, Argentin a, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Cuba, DemocraticRepublic of Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras,
Indonesia, Iran, Kyrgyzstan, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan,Tajikistan, Trinidad & Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, and Uruguay. See Status of
Ratification Interactive Dashboard (n 69 above). 
126 For recent examples, see Report of the Human Rights Council on its Eighth Session,
Vice-President and Rapporteur: Mr Alejandro Artucio, HRC Council (1 September
2008), UN Doc A/HRC/8/52 (2008) paras 314, 606, 877, 961, documenting various
country rejections in 2008: inland (‘rejects recommendation to ratify ICRMW because
existing national and European law already conforms with basic rights of migrants’);
Czech Republic (‘does not consider signin g the ICRMW because of existing national
and international protections for migrants ’); Ukraine (‘rejected recommendation by
Mexico to ratify ICRMW because of existing and proposed national laws and
European law on migrant rights’) and Romania ( ‘because existing national and
European law already protects migrants’) .122    Chapter 4
they ratify the Convention on the ground that the treaty conflicts  with their
domestic regimes.127
2.3.3 Treaty bodies 
As the review of their work has shown, although they make very little
substantive reference to the Migrant Workers Convention, the human
rights treaty monitoring bodies do ac tively advocate its ratification. During
the two years under review, of the nine  principal monitoring bodies apart
from the CMW, one – the HRC – congratulated several state parties on
having ratified the Migr ant Workers Convention.128 Another six
monitoring bodies went further, recommending ratification of the
Convention in their concluding observ ations. For example, in recent years
the Committee on ESCR urged 16 of the state parties whose records itreviewed to ratify the ICRMW (Finland,129 Slovenia,130 Nepal,131
Serbia,132 Uzbekistan,133 Denmark,134 Austria,135 Kuwait,136 Belgium,137 
127 Artucio (n 126 above) para 775 ( rejecting recommendation to ratify ICRMW ‘because
of conflict with domestic laws ’); Andorra’s 2010 statement in Report of the Working
Group on the Universal Periodic Review Andorra: Addendum,  Secretariat of the
Human Rights  Council (Sixteenth Session, 2011) UN Doc A/HRC/16/8/Add.1
(2011) 4 (rejecting ratification  of ICRMW because, ‘despite great overlap with current
national legal protections, Andorran law does not provide for any other categories of
migrant workers (eg frontier or temporary workers) to benefit from the same rights aslegally residing or Andorran workers’).
128 See  Concluding Observations on Belize in th e Absence of a Report, CCPR Committee
(26 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/BLZ/CO/1 (2013) 5(b) (Belize); ConcludingObservations on the Third Periodic Report of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, CCPR
Committee (6 December 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/BOL/CO/3 (2013) 4(d) (Bolivia);
Concluding Observations on  the Initial Report of Indonesia (21 August 2013), UN
Doc CCPR/C/IDN/CO/1 (2013) 4(a) (Indones ia); Concluding Ob servations on the
Second Periodic Report of Kyrgyzstan , CCPR Committee (23 April 2014), UN Doc
CPR/C/KGZ/CO/2 (2014), B(d) (Kyrgyzsta n); Concluding Observations on the
Initial Report of Mauritania, CCPR Committee (21 November 2013), UN Doc
CCPR/C/MRT/CO/1 (2013) 3(a) (Mauritani a); Concluding Observations on the
Initial Report of Mozambique, CCPR Committee (19 November 2013), UN Doc
CCPR/C/MOZ/CO/1 (2013) 4 (Mozambique).
129 Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Finland, CESCR
Committee (17 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/FIN/CO/6 (2014) 31. 
130 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Slovenia, CESCR
Committee (15 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/SVN/CO/2 (2014) 31.
131 Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Nepal, CESCR Committee
(12 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/NPL/CO/3 (2014) 30.
132 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Serbia, CESCR
Committee (10 July 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/SRB/CO/2 (2014) 37.
133 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Uzbekistan, CESCR
Committee (13 June 2014) UN), UN  Doc E/C.12/UZB/CO/2 (2014) 29.
134 Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of Denmark, CESCR
Committee (6 June 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/DNK/CO/5 (2013) 25.
135 Concluding Observations on the Fourth Periodic Report of Austria, CESCR
Committee (13 December 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/AUT/CO/4 (2013) 26.
136 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Kuwait, CESCR
Committee (19 December 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/KWT/CO/2 (2013) 17(recommending accession to ICRMW).
137 Concluding Observations Concerning the Fourth Periodic Report of Belgium, CESCR
Committee (23 December 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/BEL/CO/4 (2013) 26.  Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     123
Montenegro,138 Romania,139 Lithuania,140 Monaco,141 Belarus,142
Iran,143 Togo).144 The CERD,145 CRC,146 CEDAW,147 and CAT148 are
similarly proactive, urging ratification  upon most, though not all, of the
non-ratifying countries that come before them.
138 Concluding Observations on the Initia l Report of Montenegro, CESCR Committee
(15 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/MNE/CO/1 (2014) 27. 
139 Concluding Observations on the Combined Third to Fifth Periodic Reports of
Romania, CESCR Committee (9 Dece mber 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/ROU/CO/3-5
(2014) 27.
140 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Reports of Lithuania, CESCR
Committee (24 June 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/LTU/CO/2 (2014) 28.
141 Concluding Observations Concerning the Second and Third Periodic Reports of
Monaco, submitted as a single docume nt, CESCR Committee (19 June 2014), UN
Doc E/C.12/MCO/CO/2-3 (2014) 27.
142 Concluding Observations on the Combined Fourth to Sixth Periodic Reports of
Belarus, CESCR Committee (13 Decemb er 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/BLR/CO/4-6
(2013) 32.
143 Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, CESCR Committee (10 June 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/IRN/CO/2 (2013) 33.
144 Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Togo, Adopted by the Committee at
its Fiftieth Session, CES CR Committee (3 June 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/TGO/CO/1
(2013) 38.
145 See, eg,  Concluding Observations on the Nineteenth to Twenty-First Periodic Reports
of Cameroon, CERD Committee (26 September 2014), UN Doc CERD/C/CMR/
CO/19-21 (2014) 20 (recommending Came roon ratify the ICRMW); Concluding
Observations on the Combined Nineteen th to Twenty-First Periodic Reports of
Sweden, CERD Committee (23 Septem ber 2013), UN Doc CERD/C/SWE/CO/19-
21 (2013) 22, with Concluding Observations on the Sixteenth to Nineteenth Periodic
Reports of Belgium, CERD Committee (14 March 2014), UN Doc CERD/C/BEL/
CO/16-19 (2014) (not urging ra tification of the ICRMW , al though Belgium is not yet a
party to the ICRMW , and the document contains several concerns and
recommendations relating to migrants).
146 See  Concluding Observations on the Combined Third and Fourth Periodic Reports of
China, CRC Committee (29 October 2 013), UN Doc CRC/C/CHN/CO/3-4 (2013)
98; Concluding Observations on the Combined Third and Fourth Periodic Reports ofLuxembourg, CRC Committee (29 Octo ber 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/LUX/CO/3-4
(2013) 52; with Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of China submitted
under article 8 of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in arme d conflict, CRC Committee (29 October 2013),
UN Doc CRC/C/OPAC/CHN/CO/1 (2013) (not  urging ratification of the ICRMW ,
although China is not yet a party to the ICRMW and the document discusses the
importance of registering migrant children, a right protected in ICRMW article 29).
147 See, eg , Concluding Observations on the Combined Sixth and Seventh Periodic
Reports of the Democratic Republic of  the Congo, CEDAW Committee (30 July
2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/COD/CO/6-7 (2013)  45; Concluding Observations on
the Combined Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of the Dominican Republic,CEDA W Committee (30 July 2013) UN Doc CEDA W/C/DOM/CO/6-7 (2013) 48,
with Concluding Observations on the Seventh Periodic Report of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,  CEDAW Committee (30 July 2013), UN Doc
CEDA W/C/GBR/CO/7 (2013)(not urging ratifi cation of the ICRMW , although the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is not yet a party to the
ICRMW and the document contains discussion of immigrant women (par 56)).C
148 See, eg,  Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of the Holy See, CAT
Committee (17 June 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/VAT/CO/1 (2014) Section C;
Concluding Observations on the Combined Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports ofAustralia, CAT Committee (23 Dece mber 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/AUS/CO/4-5
(2014) Section C; compare Concluding Observations on the Combined Third to Fifth
Periodic Reports of the United States of America, CAT Committee (19 December2014), UN Doc AT/C/USA/CO/3-5 (2014) (not urging ratification of the ICRMW ,
although the United States of America is not yet a party to the ICRMW and the
document contains several recommendations concerning migrants (sec C)).124    Chapter 4
2.3.4 Special Rapporteurs
As discussed above, while the Specia l Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants has described the Migrant Workers Convention as an instrument
that overlaps with existing protections,  he nevertheless recognises it as an
important element in the migrant rights regime. In his recommendationsto countries pursuant to country visi ts, the Special Rapporteur routinely
urges non-state parties to ratify th e Convention. For example, in a 2015
report on the management of Europe ’s external borders, he urged EU
member states to ‘reconsider’ their ‘general refusal’ to ratify the ICRMW
noted that their unwillingness to ratify the Convention ‘reflects the
intention to not be held accountabl e for human rights abuses against
undocumented migrant workers’.149
Another mechanism particularly relevant to migrants is the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur on traffick ing in persons, especially women and
children. Although the ICRMW is not referred to in the Human RightsCouncil’s resolution establishing the mandate,150 on occasion the Special
Rapporteur’s reports do include calls for ratification of the Convention.151
For example, in 2010, the Special Rapp orteur urged ratification of the
Convention, stating ‘[t]he protection of the human rights of migrants is of
paramount importance in preventi ng exploitation that leads to
trafficking’.152
2.3.5 Recent processes around migration
In 2006, the UN General Assembly co nvened a High-Lev el Dialogue on
Migration and Development; that this was the first ever discussion ofmigration by the General Assembly demonstrates the unwillingness of
states to undertake multilateral enga gement with migration. This meeting
led to bi-annual meetings of the Global Forum on Migration and
149 Report of the Special Rappo rteur on the human rights of  migrants, François Crépeau,
‘Banking on mobility over a generation: Follow up to the regional study on the
management of the external borders of the European Union and its impact on the
human rights of migrants’ HRC Coun cil (8 May 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/29/36
(2015) paras 58 and 118. See also, for exampl e, Report of the Special Rapporteur on
t h e  h u m a n  r i g h t s  o f  m i g r a n t s :  F r a n ç o i s  C r é p e a u :  F o l l o w - u p  m i s s i o n  t o  I t a l y  ( 2 - 6
December 2014), HRC Council (1 May 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/29/36/Add.2 (2015)
Recommendation A.1(d); Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants, François Crépeau: Addendum: Mission to Malta (6-10 December 2014),
HRC Council (12 May 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/29/36/Add. 3 (2015)Recommendation A(1)(c).
150 Mandate of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, Human Righ ts Council (17 July 2014), UN Doc A/HRC/RES/26/8 (2014).
151 Report of the Special Rapporteur on traf ficking in persons, especially women and
children, Joy Ngozi Ezeilo, GA (9 August 2010), UN Doc A/65/288 (2010) 68;
Report of the Special Rapporteur on traffi cking in persons, especially women and
children, Joy Ngozi Ezeilo, Addendum, Missi on to Italy, HRC Council (1 April 2014),
UN Doc A/HRC/26/37/Add. 4 (2014)89(a).
152 Ezeilo (n 151 above) 68.   Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     125
Development (GFMD), a ‘voluntary, informal, government-led process
open to all UN member states’, but outside the UN. As of June 2017, ten
GFMDs have taken place, punctuated  by a second High-Level Dialogue
in 2013. Each of these meetings feat ured country delegation deliberations
and statements and included civil society participation. The reports
summarising the earlier meetings reflect a pattern of strong support forratification of the Convention on the part of civil society and ‘a number of’
country delegates.153 Statements in support of the treaty are generally
followed by softening or demurral statements from ‘other’ delegatesstressing alternative steps that should take priority over ratification, such
as ‘look[ing] at how countries implement migrants’ rights in practice ’.154 
At the 2010 GFMD, at least one delegate went even further,
registering an oblique but unmistakable vote of no confidence for theConvention: 
While some stressed the importance of states adopting existing treaties on
protecting migrants, a view was expresse d that there is a need to review UN
conventions that have only been ratified by a few states.155 
In 2011, the civil societ y delegates’ statement included its strongest
language in support of the Migrant Workers Convention: 
Although there is little co nsensus as yet as to the form that global governance
might take, civil society agrees that whatever system develops must have anindisputable basis in normative frameworks. Such norms exist in the UN
Migrant Workers Convention – not an ex ception but rather one of the ... core
international human rights  treaties. The reticence of developed countries in
particular to ratify the UN Migrant Workers Convention is disingenuous to
their own often better traditions of ap preciating rights, and unhelpful with
respect to other countries that need to ratify an d respect the Convention.156 
More recently, governments favourin g the Convention appear to have
grown even more reticent in the GFMD context, while civil society actors
continue their annual ca ll for ratification. The Declaration of the 2013
High-Level Dialogue went so far as to 
153 For example,  Global Forum on Migration and Deve lopment First Meeting, Brussels,
July 9-11, 2007: Summary Report, 16 (‘a number of states’); Global Forum on
Migration and Development, Third Meeting,  Athens 2-5 November 2009: Integrating
Migration Policies into Development Strategies for the Benefit of All: Report of the
Proceedings, 27 (‘a number of delegates’).
154 Report of the Swedish Chairmanship of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development 2013-2014:  Unlocking the potential of migration for inclusive
development, 46 (emphasis in original).
155 Fourth Meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD):
Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, 8-11 November 2010 ‘Partnerships for migration and human
development: Shared prosperity – Shared responsibility’ Report of the Proceedings, 17.
156 Fifth Meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD): GFMD
2011 Concluding Debate, Geneva, Switzerlan d: 1-2 December 2011 ‘Taking action on
migration and development – Coherence, capacity and cooperation’ Report of the
Proceedings, 2.126    Chapter 4
[n]ote the contribution of applicable international conventions, including the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families, to the international system for the
protection of migrants.157 
This lukewarm endorsement contrasts with the statement in the same
Declaration encouraging stat es to ratify ‘relevant international instruments
on preventing and combating trafficking in persons and smuggling of
migrants’.158 In 2016, the report from th e Millennium Summit reflected a
call from the Secretary-General mentioning the ICRMW and calling
generally for ratification.159 The final resolution of the UN General
Assembly High Level Plenary on  Addressing Large Movements of
Refugees and Migrants called on states to ‘consider ratifying or accedingto’ the Convention.160
3 Institutional interaction  
As the preceding description reflecte d, most direct references to the
Migrant Workers Convention are supp ortive, with the Global North’s
negative attitudes manifesting th emselves in more oblique ways.161 In
spite of its slow ratifi cation rate and low number of state parties, the
Migrant Workers Convention functions institutionally much like the other
human rights treaties. Administrative support for the CMW is comparable
with that of other treaty monitoring bodies, although there would be
incrementally more funding if the number of ratifications increased.However, it does not have the same level of agency support as, for
example, the Committee on the Rights of the Child receives from
UNICEF, although the ILO consiste ntly participates in Committee
deliberations. François Crépeau has fl oated the novel idea that IOM, now
a related UN organisation, should act as a support agency, and
‘institutional champion’ to the ICRMW, with similar mutual benefits tothose which flow from UNICEF’s support for the Committee of the Rights
of the Child.
162 
157 Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development,
GA (21 January 2014), UN Doc A/Res./68/4 15 (2014).
158 Declaration of the High-l evel Dialogue (n 157) 17. 
159 Follow-up to the Outcome of the Millennium Summit ‘In Safety and Dignity:
Addressing Large Movements of Refugees and Migrants’ Report of the Secretary-
General, GA (21 April 2016), UN Doc A/70/59 (2016) para 88.
160 n 159 above, para 48.161 For analysis of government attitudes toward the Convention, see  A Pécoud ‘The
politics of the UN Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights’ in this volume.
162 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the hu man rights of migrants, GA (20 July 2016),
UN Doc A/71/40767 (2016) para 120: ‘This litt le ratified Convention would benefit
from an institutional champion able to muster adhesion to its principles. Such a
responsibility would contribute to strengthening the human rights culture within IOMand provide it with an appropriate normative tool to measure its action and to
negotiate projects with states. IOM would thus complement the important work of the
United Nations Committee on Migrant Work ers, in the same way that UNICEF and  Impact and use of the ICRMW in other UN fora     127
A recent example of institutio nal interaction which is to be
commended is the decision that a General Comment on child migrants is
to be jointly authored by the Committe e on the Rights of the Child and the
CMW. This is a welcome development, and compares favourably with the
CEDAW’s sole authored 2008 General Recommendation on women
migrant workers. 
Like other human rights treaty  monitoring bodies, the CMW is
composed of individuals nominated by the ratifying countries. Each
ICRMW state party may nominate one person for election ‘from among
its own nationals’163 who is an expert ‘of high moral standing, impartiality
and recognized competence in the field covered by the Convention’.164
The Committee is the only treaty body composed exclusively of membersfrom the Global South, which reflects  the failure of northern states to
ratify.165
A 2012 report from the Geneva  Academy of International
Humanitarian Law and Human Rights highlights another aspect of the
CMW’s composition: the number of me mbers with links to government.
The report, entitled ‘The Independence of UN Human Rights Treaty Body
Members’, examines the professional background of treaty body members.
The report quotes the Addis Ababa Guidelines for the Independence andImpartiality of the Treaty Body Memb ers, adopted at a meeting of treaty
body leaders in 2012: ‘(t)he independen ce and impartiality of treaty body
members is compromised by the political nature of their affiliation with the
executive branch of the State.’166
As with other treaty bodies, the CMW members are elected and serve
‘in their personal capacity.’167 However, the report documents that, as of
2012, the CMW had the highest percent age of members with an executive
branch affiliation: 9 out of 14 members – 64 per cent.168 The average for
all human rights treaty bodies was 32 per cent,169 with the Human Rights
Committee lowest at 5 per cent170 and the CEDAW Committee the
162 the Committee on the rights of the ch ild are complementing each other in the
implementation of the Convention  on the rights of the child.’ 
163 ICRMW (n 1 above) art 72(2)(a).
164 ICRMW (n 1 above) art 72(1)(b).
165 V Chetail ‘The Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families’ in P Alston & F Megret (eds) The United Nations and
human rights: A ccritical appraisal  (forthcoming 2018). For an earlier article, see
C Edelenbos ‘Committee on Migrant Worker s and implementation of the ICRMW’ in
P De Guchteneire et al  (eds) Migration and human  rights: The United Nations Convention
on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (2009) 100-121.
166 Geneva Academy of International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights ‘The
independence of UN Human Rights trea ty body members’ (December 2012) 42
(Treaty Body Independence Report).
167 ICRMW (n 1 above) art 72(2)(b).168 Treaty Body Independence Report (n 166 above) 23.
169 Treaty Body Independence Report (n 166 above) 24.
170 Treaty Body Independence Report (n 166 above) 20.128    Chapter 4
second highest, with 52 per cent.171 Institutionally, monitoring of the
Convention reflects some effects of the treaty’s rejection by the Global
North, with less agency support an d a composition that skews toward
government official participation. 
The 2012 report did not speculate on the reasons why such a high
number of CMW members came from the executive branches of their
countries. One possible explanation is that treaty body members areunpaid, which is likely to have a number of indirect consequences,
including making membership more financially feasible for those in
government service, who can attend meetings in the course of theiremployment. 
4C o n c l u s i o n
United Nations human rights experts and mechanisms widely andfrequently acknowledge that the ICRMW provides the primary normativerights framework for migration. Fr equently though not uniformly, UN
mechanisms, the state parties to the Convention, and also non-state parties
from the Global South, urge wider rati fication of the treaty. All actors have
been slower to embrace the treaty substantively, though here the
Convention is likely to benefit from  the increasing trend towards cross
referencing of the core treaties, fo r example through the UPR and the use
of joint general comments. 
One recurring theme in the history of  human rights law is the tension
between national sovereignty and international standard-setting; this
tension tends to increase where those in  need of protection are not citizens.
But, over time, states have generally recognised the value of international
oversight systems. States increasingly  accept oversight even of sensitive
issues concerning migrants’ rights under other, more widely ratified,
human rights treaties. What were of ten presented as mutually exclusive
treaty regimes, with the ICRMW being negatively contrasted with the
other core treaties, tends now to be seen as positive, and as constituting –in the words of the CMW – a ‘compl ementary and mutually reinforcing’
system of legal protections. With time the Committee is becoming better
positioned to articulate and advocate a human rights approach to
migration. Its work is increasingly needed to provide both individual
protection and a comprehensive fr amework for rights-based policy-
making, as migration is pushed to a higher place on the UN and
multilateral agendas.
171 Treaty Body Independence Report (n 166 above) 21.129Athanasia Georgopoulou , Tessa Antonia Schrempf & Denise Venturi
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
The United Nations International Conv ention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families1 has
enjoyed comparatively little support an d is lagging behind in numbers of
ratifications in comparison to the other core UN human rights treaties.
This relatively low rate of ratificati on has often been explained by reference
to the claim that the Convention is superfluous in the international human
rights framework, as the rights it protects are already enshrined at both
international and national level.2 
The aim of this chapter is to challenge this assumption and establish
the added value of the ICRMW’s substantive provisions by drawing on
three clusters of rights: entry and stay rights , health and social security rights ,
and the overarching issue of  access to justice.  For the purpose of analysing
the benefits of the Convention, we compare its provisions with other
existing international law provisions  and standards. References are also
made to regional human rights system s, particularly that of the European
Union (EU). This choice is motivated by the fact that no single EU
member state has yet signed or ratified the Convention. Moreover, EU
legislation contains provisions applic able to migrants and migrant workers
that are binding on all EU member states: given the highly developed and
complex nature of the human rights protection system in the EU, it isworth asking whether ratification of the ICRMW by EU member states
would confer protection on migrants in the EU beyond what is currently
available to them. A significant difference  lies in the level of protection and
freedoms guaranteed to EU citizens (ie nationals of any of the 28 EU
member states) as opposed to so-called third country nationals (TCNs).
Possibly, ratification of the Convention by EU member states would have
1 ‘Convention’, ‘ICRMW’, or ‘Migrant Workers Convention’.
2 E MacDonald & R Cholewinski The Migrant Workers Convention in Europe  (2007) 60.5CHAPTERPUTTING  THINGS  INTO
PERSPECTIVE : THE ADDED
VALUE  OF THE ICRMW’ S
SUBSTANTIVE  PROVISIONS130    Chapter 5
a greater de facto effect on raising th e level of protection with respect to
TCNs, who do not enjoy the high standards of rights protection available
to EU nationals, arguably creating greater political tension on the EUlevel.
The first section deals with entry and stay rights , while the second
analyses health and social security rights. These rights clusters were chosen to
highlight two points: first, how varied the provisions of the ICRMW areregarding the potential life realities covered by its substantive articles; and
second to show how, whilst a great variety of substantive rights find
protection under the Convention, many of these rights, to a differingextent, are covered in other internat ional-law provisions. The aim of the
present contribution is to demonstrat e, notwithstanding this reality, the
added value(s) the Convention brings to  the table, the areas where it simply
duplicates existing rights, and the si tuations where it goes beyond other
rights provisions, guaranteeing furthe r protection for migrant workers and
their families.
In a third section, the right to effe ctive remedy is sketched and located
in the context of access to justice and th e realisation of rights on a national,
regional and international level. Whilst  this section intercepts partly with
the one on entry and stay rights  and that on health and social security, it shows
the added value the Convention as a system or instrument has regarding
people’s access to justice in the sense of the enforcement of the rights
provided for in the Convention.
2 Entry and stay of migr ant workers and members 
of their families
The Convention applies to the entire migration process,3 namely to: 
[P]reparation for migration, departure, transit and the entire period of stay
and remunerated activity in the State of employment as well as return to the
State of origin or the State of habitual residence.4 
This part of the contribution will look at the concepts of entry, stay and
return of migrant workers and members of their families in a broad sense,
so as to encompass all situations link ed to and of potential impact on the
different stages of the migration process.
3 P de Guchteneire & A Pécoud ‘Introduction: The UN Convention on Migrant
WorkersRights’ in P de Guchteneire et al (eds) Migration and human rights: The United
Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (2009) 8.
4 Art 1(2).  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     131
2.1 The Convention’s comprehensive protection system
The Convention’s structure requires the distinction between two
subgroups of provisions on entry and stay, depending on their scope: whilesome, namely, articles 8-35 which make up Part III of the Convention, are
applicable to all migrant workers, othe rs, namely, articles 36-56 in Part IV,
only concern migrants in a regular situation.5
Part III constructs a sy stem of basic protection for all migrant workers,
regardless of their administrative stat us. To start, article 8 enshrines the
right of migrant workers and members of their families to leave any state,
including their state of origin, as  well as their right to return.6 This right is
fundamental to permit the movement of people and, therefore, of
international labourers.7 Article 22 details a safeguard enshrined in several
instruments, namely the prohibition of collective expulsion of migrant
workers, requiring a case-by-case appr oach and establishing precautions as
t o  h o w  e x p u l s i o n s  s h o u l d  b e  c a r r i e d  o u t .  I t  a l s o  s t a t e s  t h a t  t h e  p e r s o n
subject to expulsion ‘shall have a reasonable opportunity before or afterdeparture to settle any claims or wages and other entitlements’.8 In
addition, expulsion ‘shall not in itself  prejudice any rights of a migrant
worker … including the right to re ceive wages and other entitlements’.9 By
including this specific provision, the Convention underlines the value of
migrants' work and reaffirms the specif ic feature of work-driven migration.
In fact, expulsion in itself cannot constitute a valid reason to deprivemigrant workers of their rights and wages.10 
As a provision, article 33(1)(b) requir es states to take all appropriate
measures to guarantee the right to information regarding conditions of
admission and other matters enabling  migrant workers ‘to comply with
administrative or other formalities’. Placing ‘specific responsibility’11 on
states vis-à-vis migrant workers, this has a twofold effect: besides
promoting regular and informed migration for the benefit of both migrantsand states,12 it also acknowledges the particular challenges faced by
5 De Guchteneire & Pécoud (n 3 above) 8. 
6 See restrictions in art 8(1).
7 D Stephens ‘Establishing a positive right to migrate as a solution to food scarcity’
(2014) 31 Emory International Law Review  186.
8 Art 22(6).
9 Art 22(9).10 Art 56(2) provides migrant workers in a regular position with a supplementary
safeguard, as they can never be expelled for the purpose of depriving them, or their
family members, ‘of the rights arising out of the authorization of residence and thework permit’.
11 M Grange Strengthening protection of migrant workers and their families with international
human rights treaties: A do-it-yourself kit  (2006) 47.
12 See L Bicocchi ‘Rights of all migrant workers (Part III), Travaux Preparatoires’ http://
www .ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Migration/Pages/HumanRightsFramework.aspx
(accessed 21 May 2015) 6.132    Chapter 5
migrants, as they may not be familiar with the culture of the country of
employment.13
As for the rights granted only to mi grant workers in a regular situation
(Part IV), article 37 reiterates the right to information, specifying that itcovers ‘all conditions applicable to their admission ... their stay and the
remunerated activities’. In contrast to article 33, this provision focuses on
work-related issues, taking for granted that once migrants are in a regularsituation they are already info rmed about how to comply with
administrative matters. 
While the aforementioned articles establish basic guarantees for the
initial stages of migration, Part IV also  contains provisions  related to stay,
termination of employment and return to countries of origin. In order to
avoid protection gaps and prevent situations of irregularity, the
Convention sets up a link be tween residence and employment,14 stating
that the authorisation to reside shall be  granted ‘for at least the same period
of time’15 as the authorisation to work. Along the same lines, articles 49(2)
and 51 set up protection in case of di smissal from work, specifying that this
does not affect, per se , the residence authorisation.16 However, this
standard applies differently to migrant workers who are ‘allowed freely to
choose their remunerated activity’17 and those who are not. The former
sub-group is enabled to retain residence authorisation ‘at least for a period
corresponding to that during which '[migrant workers] may be entitled to
unemployment benefits’.18 The latter, instead, might avoid falling into a
situation of irregularity only if their authorisation is not dependent upon
‘the specific remunerated activity for which they were admitted’.19 
Avoiding situations of irregularity is also the goal pursued by article
50,20 which considers the issue of residence permits for family members in
case of death of the migrant worker or dissolution of marriage. The
wording used is significant: states  of employment shall ‘favourably
consider granting family members … an authorization to stay’.21 Thus
article 50 does not imply any obligation to actually grant such permission.
While Parts III and IV establish states’ obligations vis-à-vis  migrants
and their families, Part VI considers labour migration in the broader inter-
13 K Spieß The UN Migrant Workers Convention: An instrument to strengthen migrants’ rights in
Germany  (2007) 5-7.
14 Grange (n 11 above) 47.
15 Art 49(1).16 The authorisation of residence is not automatically withdrawn by the ‘mere fact of the
termination’ of the employment, article 49(2).
17 Art 49(2).18 Art 49(3).
19 Art 51; However, the article recognises the right to ‘seek alternative employment,
participation in public work schemes and retraining during the remaining period oftheir authorization to work’.
20 Grange (n 11 above) 47.
21 Art 50(1).  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     133
state framework, aiming at promot ing ‘sound, equitable, humane and
lawful conditions’ for migrant workers and their families.22 To this end,
article 65 requires states to formulate and implement adequate policies forinternational migration of workers and to provide them with ‘appropriate
information’23 on residence authorisations, also encouraging co-operation
among states involved in the migration process.24 
While the Preamble of the Convention spells out the role of human
rights as an effective tool to curb the exploitation of irregular migrant
workers, article 68 requires collabor ation amongst states to prevent and
deter irregular movements and irregu lar employment of migrant workers,
particularly to discourage their exploitation.25 The Convention does not
specify the content of the measures to be taken; it can thus be argued that
it ‘potentially covers both contro l measures and pre-emptive policies’.26
Moreover, although not providing for any right to regularisation, the
Convention encourages states to adopt measures to avoid prolonged
situations of irregularity,27 suggesting also criteria to apply when
considering regularisation.28
2.2 The international human rights framework on entry and 
stay
The right to leave any country, including that of origin, and the
symmetrical right to return, are enshrined in several human rights
instruments. They are stated in ar ticle 13(2) Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (Universal Declarat ion) and reiterated by article 12
ICCPR; both provisions apply to ‘e veryone’, without distinction between
people travelling for example for reasons of tourism, and regular or
irregular migrants.29 Such provisions establish a general framework,
which the Convention specifies in rela tion to migrant workers. Notably all
these documents consider only the right to emigrate, not the right toimmigrate and therefore to enter another state.30 While this might be
regarded as an asymmetry,31 it ultimately can be rooted in the desire to
ensure state sovereignty.
22 Grange (n 11 above) 22.
23 Art 65(1)(c).
24 Art 65(1)(b).25 Art 68(1)(b) & (c).
26 B Ryan ‘In defence of the Migrant Workers’ Convention: Standard setting for
contemporary migration’ in SS Juss (ed) The Ashgate research companion to migration law,
theory and police  (2013) 500.
27 Art 69(1).
28 Grange (n 11 above) 50; Ryan (n 26 above) 500.29 General Comment 27: Article 12 (Freedom of movement, HRC (2 November 1999),
UN Doc CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.9 (1999) paras 8-9.
30 L Berg ‘At the border and between the crac ks: The precarious position of irregular
migrant workers under internatio nal human rights law’ (2007) 8 Melbourne Journal of
International Law  13.
31 Berg (n 30 above) 13.134    Chapter 5
When it comes to expulsion, arti cle 13 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) affords protection only to ‘lawfully’
resident aliens. Therefore, its scope is narrower than that of article 22 of the
Convention, which instead covers bo th regular and irregular migrants.32
Within the framework of the Council of Europe (CoE), migrant
workers are considered by the European Social Charter (ESC) and the
European Convention on the Legal Status of Migrant Workers(ECLSM).33 However, both treaties apply only to migrant workers who
are nationals of a contracting party;34 moreover, the latter also requires
migrants to be in a regular situation.35 Such restrictions undermine the
equal enjoyment of migrant workers’ rights, widening the gap between
workers coming from different areas of the world.
2.3 A closer look: The admission  of migrant workers in the 
EU
The decision to analyse EU legislation concerning the entry and stay of
migrant workers is motivated by the EU’s competence in the field ofmigration.36 Article 79 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union (TFEU) serves as the basis to develop a common European
immigration policy. As stated in the first paragraph of this article, suchcommon policy is aimed at efficently  managing migration flows as well as
ensuring the fair treatment of TCNs. Notwithstanding this framework,
while the EU has a common system of  external border management and is
moving towards a common asylum system, the same cannot be said for
labour migration. Member states have shown reluctance towards the
harmonisation of rules on access to the labour market, and are loath to
cede sovereignty in this area.37 This is illustrated by the fact that while
recent years have seen  the adoption of important labour migration
directives (such as the ‘Blue Card’ directive, or di rective 2014/36/EU on
third-country seasonal workers), arti cle 79(5) TFEU specifically provides
for the right of member states to determine volumes of admission of TCNs
coming from third countri es for labour purposes. 
32 Similar to art 8 of the UN, Declaration on the human rights of individuals who are not
nationals of the country in  which they live, GA (13 December 1985), UN Doc A/
RES/40/144 (1985) which refers to the rights of aliens lawfully  residing in the territory
of a state.
33 P Boeles et al European migration law  (2009) 226-227.
34 Recital 19 ESC and art 1(1) ECLSMW .
35 Art 1(1) ECLSMW refers to migrant workers who have been ‘authorised’ to reside,
while para 2 reduces the scope by excluding certain categories, eg seasonal and
frontiers workers.
36 M D'Auchamp Rights of migrant workers in Europe  (2011) 15 ss; S Peers et al (eds) EU
immigration and asylum law (text and commenta r y ) :  S e c o n d  r e v i s e d  e d i t i o n ,  v o l u m e  2 :  E U
immigration law  (2012) 1-9 ss.
37 Boeles (n 33 above) 225.  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     135
EU directives on labour migration and the provisions of the
Convention seem to have a different  scope and purpose. In fact, the
adoption of ad hoc  directives shows how EU legislation on labour
migration is aimed at regulating ce rtain specific occurrences in the EU
labour market, yet leaving EU member states the prerogative to determine
the number of migrant workers admitted  to their territories. Conversely,
being a human rights treaty, the Conventi on aims to establish a set of rights
pertaining to migrant workers as such.38 
2.4 Balancing states’ sovereignty and migrant workers’ rights
The trade-off between the management of international labour migration
and the respect for migrant workers’ hum an rights on the one hand and the
consideration for states’ sovereig nty on the other hand is the  fil rouge of this
section of the present analysis.
Clearly, the Convention does not envisage any specific procedure
regarding the admission of migrant workers, nor does it create any direct
obligation on state parties to welcome migrant workers.39 This is made
explicit by article 79, stating that the Convention does not impair the rightof each state party to establish the criteria governing admission of migrant
workers and members of their families and it is further reiterated by articles
34 and 35: the former emphasises migrants’ obligation to comply with‘laws and regulations’, including those on administrative status, while the
latter explicitly rejects an y right to regularisation.
Matters of entry, transit, stay, retu rn and regularisation are sensitive
issues that relate to states’ sovereignty and to their power to admit or refuseentry to their territory. Nevertheless, the Convention takes significant
steps, particularly encouraging the promotion of ‘sound and equitable
conditions for international migration’
40 by reiterating general obligations
and rights and tailoring them to the specific reality of migrant workers.
Furthermore, article 69 may represent an effective tool with which to
prompt member states to pursue avenues to further protect the rights ofmigrant workers, especially those belonging to particularly vulnerable
g r o u p s  o f  m i g r a n t  w o r k e r s .  A s  t h i s  provision requires states to 'take
appropriate measures' to ensure that th e situation of irregularity does not
continue,41 the Convention requires states to undertake suitable measures
related to entry and stay of TCNs, the latter being the category of migrantworkers who could find themselves in a situation of irregularity within the
EU. As pointed out by Ryan, the Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW)
38 E MacDonald & R Cholewinski (n 2 above) 74.
39 D’Auchamp (n 36 above) 18.
40 Art 35.
41 Art 69(1).136    Chapter 5
has made clear the potential of the Conv ention in relation to regularisation
and thus, to a broader extent, to entry and stay conditions.42 
3 Health and social secu rity rights of migrant 
workers and members of their families
As explained above, the extent and nature of the rights granted by the
ICRMW varies according to the catego ries of migrant workers concerned.
The present section will first explore the Convention’s provisions related
to social security and health rights ; and subsequently put them in the
context of other existing intern ational and regional mechanisms. 
3.1 The Convention’s health and social security rights system
3.1.1 All migrant workers regard less of administrative status
Article 27 of the Convention recognises the right to social security for all
migrant workers, on an equal basis with the nationals of the state of
employment. In line with the general non-discrimination clause in article
7, states bear the burden of proof for any different treatment of migrantworkers.43 Notwithstanding this general provision, the CMW has found
multiple vulnerabilities arising from migrant workers’ life realities.
Migrant domestic workers, for example, are often excluded from nationalsocial security systems.44 The Committee has noted that the: 
[L]ack of social security benefits and of gender-sensitive health care coverage
further increases the vulnerability of  migrant domestic workers and their
dependence on their employers.45
The Committee further clarified that wherever migrant workers are
granted benefits in domestic legislat ion, a deprivation of these benefits
merely due to a lack of a reciprocity agreement between states is notpossible.46 However, article 27(2) acknowledges that the right to social
security for migrant workers may not exist in some national legislation.47
In this case, migrant workers should be entitled to reimbursement of the
amounts they contributed to the nati onal social security system while
working in the country.48 Seeking to expand the protection of migrant
workers, the Committee interprets wide ly the notion of ‘social security’ in
42 Ryan (n 26 above). 
43 General Comment 2 on the rights of migrant workers in an irregular situation, CMW
(28 August 2013), CMW/C/GC/2 (2013) (CMW GC 2) para 67.
44 General Comment 1 on migrant domestic workers, CMW (23 February 2011),
CMW/C/GC/1 (2011) (CMW GC 1) para 19.
45 CMW GC 1 para 24.46 CMW GC 2 para 68.
47 D’Auchamp (n 36 above) 32.
48 CMW GC 2 para 69.  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     137
order to include ‘social insurance’ and ‘existing non-contributory social
benefits’49 or even a right to ‘emergency so cial security’ in cases of extreme
poverty and vulnerability.50
As regards the right to medical care, it is rest ricted to urgent cases.51
However, interpreting this provision with provisions in some of the other
core human rights instruments,52 the Committee attributes broader
obligations to state parties, en compassing primary health care,
immunisation against majo r infectious diseases and emergency obstetric
care for migrant women, amongst others.53 
The mere fact of being in an i rregular situation should not impede
access to medical care for migrant workers.54 Elaborating on this
provision, the Committee makes a furt her distinction between health care
provisions and immigration control, discouraging states from requiring
medical records of migrant workers in an irregular situation or ‘conducting
immigration enforcement operations on or near facilities providing
medical care’.55 By making this suggestion, the Committee very directly
addresses states' immigration control practices and the de facto  obstacles
capable of impairing the enjoyment of rights granted to migrant workers in
an irregular situation. 
3.1.2 Migrant workers in a regular situation
A more robust set of rights is grante d to migrants in a regular migration
status.56 Regarding access to social and health services, equality of
treatment with nationals of the st ate of employment is guaranteed,
‘provided that the requirements for pa rticipation in the respective schemes
are met’.57 Some additional social security rights, such as protection
against dismissal, unemployment be nefits and access to public work
schemes, are granted by article 54(1).
Moreover, the right to access to social and health services58 applies
equally to all categories of documen ted migrant workers mentioned in the
Convention: frontier, seasonal, it inerant, project-tied, specified-
49 CMW GC 2 para 70.
50 CMW GC 2 para 71.51 ICRMW art 28.
52 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, GA (16 December
1966) (CESCR) art 12 & Convention on the Rights of the Child, GA (20 November
1989) (CRC) art 24.
53 CMW GC 2 para 72.
54 ICRMW art 28.55 CMW GC 2 para 74.
56 L Nessel ‘Human dignity or state sovereignty? The roadblocks to full realization of the
UN Migrant Workers Convention’ C in V Chetail & C Bauloz (eds) Research handbook
on international law and migration  (2014) 334.
57 ICRMW art 45(1)(c).
58 Art 43(1)(e) & 45(1)(c).138    Chapter 5
employment and self-employed migrant workers.59 In relation to project-
tied workers, particular emphasis is  placed on state responsibility for
ensuring their protection through at least one social-security system, either
that of the state of origin or the state of temporary residence.60
3.2 The international human rights framework on health and 
social security
The Committee has stated that ‘a State’s obligation under the Convention
must be read with respect to the core human rights treaties and other
relevant international instrume nts to which it is a party’.61 Following this,
there exists a wide range of relevant provisions in different international
legal documents, including several of the other core UN human rights
instruments,62 some conventions of the Inte rnational Labour Organisation
(ILO)63 and a number of regional instru ments, for example in Europe. In
addition to these international legal  instruments and the respective UN
treaty bodies,64 there are specific UN charter-based procedures65 aimed at
the protection of the rights of migrant workers. 
3.2.1 UN legal instruments
CESCR in article 9 provides for the ri ght of everyone to social security,
including social insurance. This pr ovision has been interpreted by the UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural rights (Committee on
ESCR) as including ‘refugees, asyl um-seekers, internally displaced
persons, returnees, non-nationals ...’66 Furthermore, especially for
‘migrant workers who have contributed to a social security scheme’, the
Committee on ESCR suggests that they  should be able either to benefit
from that contribution or retrieve it, if they leave the country.67
The right to the highest attainable standard of health is covered in
article 12 CESCR. In this contex t the Committee on ESCR has affirmed
that states are 
59 ICRMW arts 57-63.
60 ICRMW art 61(3).
61 CMW GC 2, para 7.
62 CESCR; CRC; Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDA W), GA (18 December 1979); and International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of  Racial Discrimination, GA (21 December 1965) (CERD).
63 ILO Conventions Nos 97 & 118.64 D Weissbrodt & J Rhodes ‘United Nations treaty bodies and migrant workers’ in
V Chetail & C Bauloz (eds) Research handbook on international law and migration  (2014).  
65 Eg the 5/1 procedure, the UN Special Ra pporteur on the human rights of migrants
and the UPR; see Weissbrodt & Rhodes (n 64 above) 305.
66 Committee on ESCR GC 19 para 31.
67 Committee on ESCR GC 19 para 36.  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     139
under the obligation to resp ect the right to health by, inter alia , refraining from
denying or limiting equal access for al l persons, includin g ... asylum seekers
and illegal immigrants, to preventive, cu rative and palliative health services.68
Furthermore, the Committee on ESCR interprets the notion of ‘other
status’, which appears at the end of  the non-discrimination clause, as
including ‘non-nationals, such as refugees, asylum-seekers, stateless
persons, migrant workers and vict ims of international trafficking,
regardless of legal status and documentation’.69 While the above
interpretations might seem to be broadening the scope of the respective
articles, the general notion of obligations under CESCR and their
progressive realisation clause applies throughout,70 potentially rendering
the protection afforded to migrant workers, under CESCR, relatively weak
and dependent on each state’s capacities. 
The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination (CERD) in article 1(2) provides ‘for the possibility
of differentiating between citizens and non-citizens'.71 However, the
Committee on the Elimination of  Racial Discrimination (CERD
Committee) extends states’ obligation s so as to include the removal of
‘obstacles that prevent the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural
rights by non-citizens, notably in the areas of education, housing,employment and health’.72 The obligation on state parties to CERD to
combat discrimination against non- citizens, as interpreted by the CERD
Committee, requires the active removal of obstacles, thereby going beyondthe view of the Committee on ESCR that CESCR requires states to refrain
from limiting equal access to health care.
Identifying women as a particularly vulnerable group, CEDAW
protects women's right to health care under article 12. The Committee onthe Elimination of Discrimination  against Women (CEDAW Committee)
interprets this provision to require states to give ‘special attention to the
health needs and rights of women belonging also to vulnerable and
disadvantaged groups, such as migrant women’.
73 Being arguably one of
the most advanced interpretations given by this Committee, General
Recommendation 26 on women migrant workers74 ‘has essentially recast
68 Committee on ESCR GC 14 para 34; see al so De Guchteneire & Pécoud (n 3 above)
127. Please note that the authors of the present chapter disagr ee with the wording of
this quote with respect to ‘illegal immigran ts’. We are of the firm belief that no
individual is ever as such ‘illegal’. More politically correct and legally accurate terms
include ‘undocumented migrants’ and ‘migrants in an irregular situation’. 
69 Committee on ESCR GC 20 para 30; see also Weissbrodt & Rhodes (n 64 above) 320.
70 ‘Progressive realisation’ under CESCR obliges states to, to the maximum of their
available resources, comply with CESCR provisions. Although complemented by thenon-retrogression clause, CESCR obligations on state parties remain relatively weak in
comparison to the other core UN human rights treaties. 
71 CERD Committee GC 30 para 1.72 CERD Committee GC 30 para 29.
73 Weissbrodt & Rhodes (n 64 above) 324; see also CEDAW GC 24 para 6.
74 CEDA W Committee GC 26.140    Chapter 5
the CEDAW as a second Migrant Workers Convention that highlights
protection that women migrant workers require due to their status as
migrants and their gender’.75
Protecting another particularly vu lnerable group, namely children,
CRC in article 24 ensures the right of every child to the ‘enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of health ’. According to the Committee on the
Rights of the Child (CRC Committee), states should pay close attention to
vulnerable children and respect the principle of non-discrimination when
formulating health care and education policies:76 ‘This includes girls,
children living in poverty ... children  from migrant families ... refugee and
asylumseeking children’.77 This complements the ICRMW insofar as it
specifically mentions children. The vulnerability of migrant children in
relation to health issues has be en stressed several times by the CRC
Committee.78 Furthermore, the right of every child to benefit from social
security, including social insurance,  is protected under article 26 CRC,
where the wording of the article – ‘eve ry child’ – implies the inclusion of
migrant children.
In addition to the core UN human rights treaties, the ILO, with its
main goal being the protection of workers around the world, provides for
protection of migrant worker s through its own conventions.79
3.2.2 Regional legal instruments on health and social security rights 
References to social security and health rights for migrant workers can be
found in several regional human rights  instruments: for example article 9
(right to social security) and article 10 (right to health for everyone) of the
Additional Protocol to the Amer ican Convention on Human Rights
(ACHR) in the Area of Economic, Soci al and Cultural Rights (Protocol of
San Salvador), and article 16 (right to  enjoy physical and mental health) of
the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR).
This section focuses, however, on the system of protection in place in
the CoE as well as in the EU. The former is covered by the ESC and thelatter by the EU Charter on Fundamental Rights. Whilst extensively
providing for social security and health rights, the ESC has very limited
application. There is, however, a landmark decision of the European
Committee of Social Rights (ECSR), which found a violation of the right
of children and young persons to so cial, legal and economic protection.80
75 Weissbrodt & Rhodes (n 64 above) 325.
76 Weissbrodt & Rhodes (n 64 above) 328; see also CRC Committee GC 7 para 24.77 CRC Committee GC 7 para 24.
78 CRC Committee GCs 3, 6 & 7.
79 Eg ILO Conventions Nos 97, 118 and 143; for a more detailed account of the
protection provided by ILO Conventions pl ease see R Cholewinski’s contribution in
the present volume.
80 ESC art 17(1)(a).  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     141
Specifically addressing the right to have the health care these children
need, the case concerned French nati onal measures limiting the access of
children of migrants in an irregular situation to health care provisions.81 In
this context, the ECSR held that ‘l egislation or practice that denies
entitlement to medical assistance to foreign nationals, within the territory
of a State Party, even if they are there illegally, is contrary to the Charter’.82
At the EU level, the EU Charter recognises in article 34(2) an
entitlement to ‘social security benefits and social advantages’ for those
residing and moving legally within the EU. Article 35 acknowledges the
right to health care for all, with out distinction regarding migration or
residence status and in a much broader way than in article 28 ICRMW,
covering even preventive health  care. Furthermore, a number of  EU
directives exist, providing, for inst ance, a right of documented migrants to
social security entitlements,83 a right to a healthy workplace and social
security for highly skilled migrants84 and documented third-country
nationals employed seasonally;85 and, in the only directive addressing
undocumented migrants’ rights, a right to emergency health care, in the
context of returns procedures.86
Summing up, this section provided an overview of other applicable
provisions on migrant workers’ heal th and social security rights in
international and European law. As shown above, whilst all major
international human rights documents arguably contain relevant sets of
rights, it is usually the respective supervisory committees’ interpretations,
based on equal treatment and non-discri mination clauses that extend these
rights to refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants. In light of the above, it can
be said that the Convention, addressi ng directly migrant workers and their
families, notably enhances protec tion, in combination with the
interpretative work of the Committ ee, which is displaying an acute
appreciation of the life realities of migrant workers, especially those with
cumulative vulnerabilities. The spec ific mandate the Committee has, with
respect to migrant workers and their families, will always have an added
benefit when dealing with such spec ific social and legal phenomena as
81 De Guchteneire & Pécoud (n 3 above) 379; International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) v France  (8 September 2004) ECSR, Complaint No 14/2003.
82 FIDH (n 81 above) para 32.
83 Art 11(1)(d) Council Directive 2003/109/EC  of 25 November 2003 concerning the
status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents, EC (25 November 2003),
2003/109/EC (2003).
84 Art 14(1)(a) & (e) Council Directive 2009/ 50/EC of 25 May 2009 on the conditions of
entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified
employment, EC (25 May 2009), 2009/50/EC (2009).
85 Art 23(1)(a) & (d) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament
and the Council Towards a Reform of the Common European Asylum System and
Enhancing Legal Avenues To Europ e, EU (6 April 2016), COM/2016/0197.
86 Arts 14(1)(b) & 16(3) Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 16 December 2008 on common stan dards and procedures in member states
for returning illegall y staying third-country nation als, EC (16 December 2008), 2008/
115/EC (2008).142    Chapter 5
labour migration. A number of ex amples above illustrate how the
Committee has applied provisions to migrant workers' realities:
highlighting domestic migrant workers’  exclusions from social security,
elaborating extensively on irregularity and health rights, and speaking up
on the emergency healthcare provision, which is to be extended beyond the
mere text. This leads to the conclusion that the added benefit very muchlies in the mandate of the Committee and its understanding of the
Convention as an inclusive, non-disc riminatory human rights instrument.
4 Realising convention rights: Access to justice
The Convention offers a comprehensive system of interconnected rights of
migrant workers and their families , some areas of which have been
highlighted above, and requires state parties to establish a corresponding
legal framework. It thus implicitly covers the first two requirements foraccess to justice. However without a further core element of access to
justice, namely the right to an effective remedy, the de facto  realisation of
human rights, including those tailored  to the reality of migrant workers,
will not be possible. Succinctly put: ‘[f]or rights to have meaning, effective
remedies must be availabl e to redress violations.’87 In the context of
marginalised groups of society, who per definitionem  are more prone to
human rights violations,88 and traditionally face higher obstacles to access
to justice, this is all the more impo rtant. A prime example of this is the
Committee’s General Comment on migrant domestic workers.Acknowledging the multiple vulnerabil ities faced by this particular group,
the Committee noted that migrant do mestic workers are often unable to
seek remedies for violations by employer s. This is particularly difficult or
even impossible once people have left the country of employment, be it
voluntarily, when fleeing abusive work relationships,89 or by deportation.
The General Comment on migrant workers in an irregular status
underlines again the problem of mult iple vulnerabilities and equally
reflects the Committee’s holistic approach to migrant workers’ life realities
and interconnected human rights. As such, access to justice for irregular
migrant workers is considered to be limited as a consequence of their
constant fear of being re ported to authorities and subsequently deported,
which in turn leaves them more vulnerable to exploitation and abuse.90
Similar to the other core international human rights treaties, theConvention’s remedy system is understood as being twofold: first, theConvention requires state parties to provide for a system of effective
remedy on the national level (article 83), and second it gives competence
87 CRC Committee GC 5 para 24.
88 Eg CMW GC 1, para 7, me ntioning migrant domestic workers being at heightened
risk of abuse due to vulnerability based on their dependence and isolation, and the
mention of women domestic workers facing even higher risks due to issues such asgender-based violence, or irregular migrants.
89 CMW GC 1 para 17.
90 CMW GC 2 para 2.  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     143
to the CMW to act as a remedy system  on the international level (article
77).
4.1 Access to an effective remedy on the national level
The ICRMW prescribes in article 83 the right to an effective remedy. This
right to a remedy should be in plac e irrespective of whether or not a
violation of the Convention provis ion was committed by persons in an
official capacity. The respective claims should be reviewed by a competentjudicial, administrative, legislative or other authority provided for by law,
thus indicating the existence of a co rrelating duty to establish a legal
system, including institutions, that will be liable to deal with such claims.
The Committee has noted that ideally the authority dealing with remedies
should be a court.91 State parties further should ‘develop the possibilities
of judicial remedy’.92 Competent authorities should further ensure that
remedies then are enforced.93 To ensure access to justice for example for
migrant domestic workers, the Co mmittee has suggested that states
designate a domestic workers’ ombu dsperson and has advised opening
legal avenues of redress against employers who enjoy diplomatic
immunity, as well as access to co urts and legal mechanisms without
having to fear conseq uently being deported;94 thus taking into account the
realities of migrant domestic workers who face abuse of their human rights
and seek justice.
Vital to access to a remedy in practi ce is the general principle of non-
discrimination as provided for in article 7 of the Convention. With respectto undocumented migrants, this was reiterated in the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights’s (IAm Comm of HR) Advisory Opinion
18,95 arguably the most inclusive account of the human rights of
undocumented migrant workers. Whilst  provisions of non-discrimination
are, on the one hand, standard in international treaties such as the
ICRMW, and on the other hand consid ered non-exhaustive as regards the
grounds for discrimination enumerated, it  is ‘worth noting that the list in
the Convention is broader than those found in other human rights
conventions’96 such as, for example, the ICCPR and CESCR. The CMW
has acknowledged the special vulner ability of migrant domestic workers.
The difficulties they face in seeking redress for violations of, for instance,
their labour rights or other violations suffered as a result of an abusive work
91 CMW GC 2 para 53.
92 Art 83(b).
93 Art 83(c).
94 CMW GC 1 paras 49 and 50.95 Advisory opinion on juridical condition and rights of the undocumented migrants,
IACrtHR (17 September 2003) OC-18/03 (2003) para 126; in particular with respect to
the principle of non-discrimination see also the submission of Mexico reproduced inpart in Advisory Opinion 18.
96 The International Convention on Migrant Workers and its Committee, OHCHR, Fact
Sheet 24 (2005) 5.144    Chapter 5
relationship are compound ed by national provisions, which limit avenues
for legal redress, or explicitly  exclude domestic migrant workers.97
Another scenario which de facto  restricts access to domestic remedies for
migrant domestic workers is the risk of facing deportation in case
employment disputes are initiated,98 thus highlighting the link between
employment rights and questions of entry and stay as addressed above. 
The Convention’s wording of the obligation to provide for an effective
remedy in relation to similar prov isions in other international human
rights treaties requires some scrutiny . Though most treaties provide for an
effective remedy either explicitly or through interpretation by therespective treaty body, the extent of the remedy required differs. While the
ICCPR has exactly the same wording as the ICRMW,99 other treaties are
more restrictive. CEDAW for exampl e provides in article 2(b) that
legislative or other measures and, if necessary, a sanctioning system should
be adopted to prohibit all discriminati on against women. Further, effective
legal protection of women against disc rimination should be established on
an equal basis with men, and guaran teed through national tribunals and
other bodies.100 Article 6 of CERD provides for the obligation to ensure
effective remedies to anyone in the ju risdiction of a state party, including
the ‘right to seek from such tribuna ls just and adequate reparation or
satisfaction for any damage suffered as a result of discriminatory acts
falling under the convention’.101 When it comes to CESCR there is no
explicit mention of an obligation to  establish a system of or right to
remedies for rights violations. Nonetheless, it is possible to infer from
article 2 the existence of a right to an  effective remedy, which should be put
into place by state parties to CESCR.102 Article 14 of the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (CAT) on the other hand is  very much specifically adjusted to
the rights of victims of acts of tortur e, requiring that national legal systems
ensure that each victim ‘obtains redr ess and has an enforceable right to fair
and adequate compensation’.103 The Committee against Torture (CAT
Committee) has, in paragraph 2 of  its General Comment 3 on the
implementation of article 14, explicitly stated that the term ‘redress’ as
used in article 14 encompasses both the ‘concepts of “effective remedy”and “reparation”’. 
Effective remedy rights and obligations in regional human rights
treaties are similar to those on th e international level. The ACHR for
97 CMW GC 1 para 18.
98 CMW GC 1 paras 21 & 26(c).
99 ICCPR art 2(3).
100 CEDAW art 2(c).101 CERD art 6.
102 See eg Charter Committee on  Poverty Issues ‘Right to effective remedies. Review of
Canada’s Fourth and Fift h Periodic Reports under the ICESCR’ (May 2006) 33,
according to which failure to guarantee effective remedies constitutes a violation of
CESCR art 2.
103 CAT art 14(1).  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     145
example contains a very inclusive ‘right to judicial protection’ in its article
25, which should be ‘simple and prompt … or any other effective
recourse’.104 States have a correlating duty to ensure this right, to develop
systems of judicial protection and to enforce remedies when granted.105
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACHR) has repeatedly
highlighted the importance of this guarantee being ‘one of the basic
mainstays, not only of the American Convention, but also of the rule of
law in a democratic society’.106 
The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) equally
provides for a right to an effective remedy in article 13 ECHR. Thisprovision is, however, narrower in scope than article 25 ACHR for two
reasons. First, the understanding of remedy in the Inter-American system
is ‘strictly judicial ’,107 meaning recourse to a court or tribunal, whereas
article 13 ECHR demands an ‘effective remedy before a national
authority’.108 Provided safeguards of in dependence, impartiality and
procedure are in place, national authorities able to offer effective remediesare not limited to judicial bodies but may also be, for example, quasi-
judicial or administrative bodies.109 Second, the Inter-American
understanding of a remedy is that of an autonomous right, making it
independent of the violation of a substantive right under the ACHR; the
right to recourse in fact is extended , spanning also to ‘protection against
acts that violate his fundamental righ ts recognised by the constitution or
laws of the state concerned’.110 Article 13 ECHR, on the contrary, is linked
to the victim having an ‘arguable’ cl aim regarding a violation of one of the
substantive provisions as protected under the ECHR.111 
The ACHPR on the other hand does not expressis verbis  provide for a
right to effective remedy, yet the ju risprudence of the African Commission
has arguably developed this right in practice.112 In addition, article 7(1)
ACHPR sets forth that every individual  has the ‘right to have his cause
heard’, including the right to appeal ‘to competent national organs against
acts of violating his fundamental righ ts as recognized and guaranteed by
conventions, laws, regulations and customs in force’.
Summing up, the obligations under  the ICRMW at times duplicate
what is provided for at the national  and regional level with respect to
104 ACHR art 25(1).
105 ACHR art 25(2).
106 Maritza Urrutia v Guatemala  IACHR (27 November 2003) Ser C/No 103, para 117;
Ivcher-Bronstein v Peru  IACHR (6 February 2001) para 135.
107 L Burgorgue-Larsen & A Ubeda De Torres The Inter-American Court of Human Rights:
Case law and commentary  (2011) 678.
108 Burgorgue-Larsen & Ubeda De Torres (n 107 above) 679.
109 Burgorgue-Larsen & Ubeda De Torres (n 107 above) 679, n 12.
110 Burgorgue-Larsen & Ubeda De Torres (n 107 above) 680-681.111 O de Schutter International human rights law  (2014) 813.
112 GM Musila ‘The right to an effective remedy under the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights’ (2006) 6 African Human Rights Law Journal  442.146    Chapter 5
access to justice and effective remedy  requirements. However, in situations
where its substantive provisions offer more protection than other
instruments, as well as given that th e Convention is the only international
human rights treaty specifically addr essing the human rights of migrant
workers and their families, the provision is both novel and vital. This short
comparative analysis demonstrates firs t, the overarching importance of the
right to an effective remedy and correlative duties, and second the
comprehensive way in which the Convention provides for such a right.
This becomes ever more visible from  a recent report on severe labour
exploitation, where it was found that while access to justice is important to
victims, being ‘able to stay and to make a living’113 is the highest priority
for migrant workers from third countries as well as those from within theEU. Closely intertwined with this prioritisation is the main reason for
victims not reporting exploitation in the work place: fear of having to leave
the country.114 In practice, this means that victims of human rights
violations will frequently not seek re dress for violations of their rights,
report abuse or engage in any kind of activity that would put them at ‘risk’
of interaction with national authorit ies. Thus, fear of removal from the
country of employment frequently undermines the realisation of human
rights, and may for instance result in victims deciding not to seek remedies
for abuses, or not to seek medical ca re or support notwithstanding a need
to access medical services. This high lights the need for a comprehensive,
integrated approach to migrants’ rights which takes into account the entire
reality of migrant workers’ lives and includes effective enforcementmechanisms to ensure that righ ts are guaranteed in practice.
4.2 Access to international enforcement mechanisms
Another important provision in this co ntext is article 77, providing for the
competence of the CMW to receive and consider communications fromindividuals who claim to have suffered violation of their rights as set out in
the Convention. The provision however requires ten state parties to accept
the Committee’s competence under article 77 in order for the individualcomplaint mechanism to enter into force.  So far, however, only four states
have submitted declarations of the sort.
115
This though does not mean that migrant workers do not currently see
their rights recognised in the work of other UN treaty bodies. On the
contrary, the individual complaints mechanism under CEDAW is
accessible for documented and un documented women migrant workers,
113 Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA) ‘Sev ere labour exploita tion. Workers moving
within or into the EU’ (2015) 117.
114 FRA (n 113 above) 75.
115 By January 2017, El Salvador, Guat emala, Mexico and Uruguay had made
declarations recognising the competence of  the Committee to receive communications
from or on behalf of individuals subject to their jurisdiction claiming violation of their
individual rights as established by the Convention.  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     147
imposing relatively wide obligati ons on state parties. The CEDAW
Committee reiterated this point in a deci sion in July 2013, stating that the: 
[O]bligations of States parties [sho uld be] applied without discrimination  both to
citizens and non-citizens, including refugees, asylum seekers, migrant workers
and stateless persons, within their territory or effectiv e control, even if not situated
within the territory .116 
A tangible example of such state obligations is CEDAW’s guarantee to
expand domestic labour protection to women migrant workers which,
according to Hainsfurther, will nece ssarily have a bearing on labour
protection afforded to undocumented women migrant workers. Whilestates have no obligation to pr ovide employment for undocumented
women migrant workers, CEDAW read  in conjunction with Advisory
Opinion 18, obliges states to, once they have entered into employment,
guarantee labour rights.117 CEDAW applies to rights violations directly
attributable to states as well as those resulting from acts of private actors,
thus also including for instance recruitment agencies and private
employers.118 Consequently, CEDAW offe rs safeguards for women
migrant workers once a discriminatory element exists,119 be it through,
inter alia , abusive private acts, states’ failure to monitor recruitment and
employment, or the denial of access to justice.120 
In addition to the CEDAW Commi ttee’s General Recommendation
26 on Women Migrant Workers adopted in 2008, as well as its numerous
concluding observations dealing wi th the rights of women migrant
workers,121 several UN treaty bodies have  explicitly me ntioned migrant
workers in their concluding observatio ns; for example with respect to the
practice of withholding workers’ identity documents, such as the HRC,122
the Committee on ESCR,123 as well as the CERD Committee.124 As
regards individual complaints, trea ty bodies less explicitly use the
terminology ‘migrant workers’, though  they do address their rights when
breached. Examples include the CERD Committee, which found a
violation of workplace rights in a ca se concerning dismissal of a pregnant
116 YW v Denmark , CEDAW Committee (2 March 20 15) Communication No 51/2013
(emphasis added).
117 See J Hainsfurther ‘A right-based approach: Using CEDA W to protect the human
rights of migrant workers’ (2008-2009) 24 American University  International Law
Review 844J 
118 Hainsfurther (n 117 above) 873.
119 Hainsfurther (n 117 above) 859.
120 Hainsfurther (n 117 above) 874 .121 Hainsfurther (n 117 above) 860.
122 Concluding Observations on the Republ ic of Korea, HRC (28 November 2006), UN
Doc CCPR/C/KOR/CO/3 (2006) para 12; Co ncluding Observatio ns on Thailand,
HRC (8 July 2005), UN Doc CCPR/CO/84/THA (2005) para 23.
123 Concluding Observations on Kuwait, Co mmittee on ESCR (7 June 2004), UN Doc E/
C.12/1/Add.98 (2004) para 17.
124 Concluding Observations on Lebanon,  CERD Committee (1998) UN Doc A/53/18
paras 175 & 184; Concluding Observations  on Italy, CERD Committee (16 May
2008), UN Doc CERD/C/ITA/CO/15 (2008) para 17.148    Chapter 5
woman migrant worker,125 and the CAT Committee, which has, in a case
against Sweden, paid attention to seve ral steps of the labour migration and
subsequent asylum process of a migrant worker and his family;126 as well
as a similar communication of the HRC concerning a variety of rights
violations of members of a statele ss family of Palestinian origin who,
having lived and worked in Libya, a lleged to have faced discriminatory
treatment and abuse due to their ethnic and migration status.127
The present use of international fo ra for the enforcement of migrant
workers’ rights shows two things: first, that there is a need for an
international body that represents an additional layer of protection oncenational institutions and guarantees have proven to be ineffective or even
absent; and second, that currently migrant workers’ rights are being dealt
with via UN treaty bodies other th an the CMW. Consequently, in the
occurrence of a violation, victims will try to access a competent body
beyond the national level to seek access to justice for rights violations. 
In this light, the entry into fo rce of the Convention’s individual
complaint mechanism would be beneficial both to rights holders and statesalike. A single competent body on the international level with a mandate
to receive individual communications will create greater legal certainty for
all: the migrant workers who will natura lly be drawn to an institution that
has specific expertise to deal with rights abuses suffered by him or her; as
well as for concerned states, who will receive clear, consistent guidelines
and recommendations, which,  in turn, will make possible adequate, rights-
based policy responses. 
5C o n c l u s i o n  
The need to assess whether and to wh at extent the Convention has a value
per se has arisen from the criticism th at has been made regarding its worth
and usefulness in the context of the entire system applicable to the
protection of migrant workers’ rights.128 
The analysis carried out in the previo us sections has shed light on the
background to this debate and has provided arguments to support the
proposition that not only has the Convention a value in itself, but it also
has an added value that acquires even  greater relevance when compared to
other established internationa l and regional instruments.
125 Yilmaz-Dogan v the Netherlands  CERD Committee (29 September 1988)
Communication No 1/1984.
126 MAMA et al v Swede n CAT Committee (23 May 2 012) Communication No 391/2009.
127 AMH El Hojouj JumNo 391/2 v Libya  HCR (21 July 2014) Communication No 1958/
2010.
128 Ryan (n 26 above) 492.  The added value of the ICRM W’s substantive provisions     149
As a matter of fact, the varied range of rights covered in this
contribution shows that while each  cluster of human rights has been
enshrined as duties and rights in other existing provisions of internationaland regional human rights law, the Convention goes a step further.
Notably, it is unique in the sense th at it sets up a comprehensive system
which does not merely link in different categories of rights, such as civil
and political or economic, social and cu ltural rights, but rather it addresses
a specific group which no other inte rnational human rights treaty deals
with exclusively – the migrant worker and his or her family. 
This in itself has an added value,  namely, the creation of a coherent
mechanism in order to protect a broad category of migrants, thus
acknowledging its peculiar needs and inherent vulnerability. While some
of the articles in the Convention may duplicate existing rights provisions,
others complement the rights enshrine d in other human rights instruments.
The comprehensive and inclusive nature of the Convention results in a
situation where first, the human rights  of migrant workers are highlighted,
and second, where states explicitly have corresponding duties.
Further, the detailed nature of the Convention has to be emphasised.
Containing 93 articles, this document is the longest of the ten core
international human rights instruments.129 Whereas this may be raised as
an obstacle to ratification in the sense that it would make implementation
of the treaty challenging as it descri bes individuals' rights and correlative
state duties, it simultaneously creates a balance between these two poles ina twofold way: First, the focus of the Convention is on the rights and
welfare of migrant workers and their fa milies, specifically taking a holistic
view of the migrant experience, particul arly as it covers all stages of the
migration process and stresses the value of work as such as the driver of
migration. Second, the Convention ac knowledges the diversity of national
legal frameworks and grants states a certain margin of appreciation, for
instance by acknowledging the role of national legislation on certain issues
and by phrasing some of its provisio ns as recommenda tions rather than
obligations.
All these elements considered together contribute to determine the
ultimate added value of the Conven tion that, in a nutshell, can be
described as follows: a compilation of existing rights of migrant workers
under international human rights law,  welded together with a number of
additional guarantees as necessitated by the specific vulnerability of
migrant workers,130 and supported by a specif ic institutional framework,
129 A Desmond ‘The triangle that could square the circle? The UN International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members ofTheir Families, the EU and the Universal Periodic Review’ (2015) 17 European Journal
of Migration and Law  45.
130 D’Auchamp (n 36 above) 11.150    Chapter 5
to form the most holistic internatio nal human rights catalogue applicable
to anyone leaving their country of origin to work in another country.
Acknowledging and upholding su ch value appears particularly
relevant today. First, mobility, part icularly for reasons of carrying out
remunerated activities, co ntinues to rise in our globalised and conflict-
stricken world. Second, and paradoxic ally so, this comes at a time when
migrants’ rights are neglected and mi gration is very often addressed only
as a ‘problem’ rather than an opportun ity – both for states and individuals.
It is this inherent added value th at, after nearly 30 years, makes the
Convention all the more worthy of the support and attention of civilsociety, academia and the political world.151Ryszard Cholewinski
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
It is often said that legally bind ing standards and the institutional
governance of international migratio n do not sit well together. When it
comes to the admission of migrant work ers into their territories and labour
markets, governments generally prefer flexible policies that can be tailored
in response to changing economic conditions. The existence of and need
for binding international legal standa rds to regulate the conditions under
which migration takes place and the tr eatment of migrants is therefore
viewed with considerable suspicio n and scepticism, and sometimes with
downright hostility. This also reflects the preference by governments to
engage in forums outside of the Un ited Nations, which are state-led,
voluntary, informal and non-binding, and which give limited space to non-
state actors such as social partners , migrant associations and other civil
society organisations.1
This approach, however, gives far too much room to the role and
importance of state sovereignty in the regulation of the movement of
1 Senior Migration Specialist, International Labour Organisation (ILO). The views in
this article are those of the author and do not reflect in any way those of the ILO or itsconstituents.
1 See JB Grugel & N Piper ‘Global governance , economic migration and the difficulties
of social activism’ (2011) 26 International Sociology  435; Report by the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, François Crépeau: Global migration
governance, GA (5 August 2013), UN Doc A/68/283 (2013)22 para 121: ‘Migration
governance is becoming increasingly informal, ad hoc, non-binding and state-led,falling largely outside the United Nations framework in such forums as the Global
Forum on Migration and Development and regional consultative processes. This leads
to a lack of accountability, monitoring and oversight and the absence of a relationshipwith the formal normative monitoring mechanisms established within the United
Nations.’ This is slowly changing, however, with the commitment by UN member
states at the UN Summit to Address Large Movements of Refugees and Migrants inSeptember 2016 to adopt a Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
under UN auspices in 2018. New York De claration for Refugees and Migrants, GA
(3 October 2016), UN Doc A/RES/71/1 (2016) para 63.6CHAPTERWORKING  TOGETHER  TO
PROTECT  MIGRANT  WORKERS :
ILO, THE UN C ONVENTION
AND  ITS COMMITTEE
*152    Chapter 6
persons. Given its transnational natu re, regulation of migration cannot
solely be the concern of individual states, which can no longer be neatly
divided into destination, transit an d origin countries. According to the
International Labour Organisation (ILO), the movement of persons,
especially working women and men, is an integral characteristic of
globalisation that is reshaping the world of work in profound ways.2
International migration is now also recognised as a key feature of global
development. In September 2015, the UN General Assembly adopted the
2030 Agenda for Sustain able Development,3 which is aimed at all
countries, both developing and developed, and pledges to leave ‘no one
behind’.4 While migration was not a part of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), adopted in 2000, it feat ures in a number of places in the
2030 Agenda, thus affirming the impo rtant link between migration and
global development.5 The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in
SDG 10 on reducing inequality within  and amongst countries, contain the
following target: ‘Facilitate orderl y, regular, safe and responsible
migration and mobility of people, including through the implementation
of planned and well-managed migration policies’.6 While the contours of
this target remain to be articulated more clearly, the meaning of the other
key target referencing migration and sp ecifically migrant workers, which is
found in SDG 8 on promotion of ‘s ustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for
all’, is unequivocal: ‘Protect labour  rights and promote safe and secure
working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, inparticular women migrants, and th ose in precarious employment’.7
Implicit in the former target is th e understanding that the admission of
foreigners or migrants, including migrant workers, to the territory remainsin the purview of states, although this  h a s  t o  b e  r e a l i s e d  i n  a  s a f e  a n d
regular way, including through pl anned and well-managed migration
policies. ‘One-size fits all’ policies, however, are not the answer as theseneed to be tailored to the specific circumstances of migration, either to or
from a country (or both), with refere nce to the sub-regional or regional
context. On the other hand, protection of the labour rights of all workers,
including migrant workers, in the latte r target is viewed as the concern of
2 ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fa ir Globalization, 2008,  International Labour
Conference, 97th Sessio n, adopted on 10 June 2008, Prea mble, Recital 2. For the text,
see http://www .ilo.org/global/about-th e-ilo/mission-and-o bjectives/WCMS_099766
/lang--en/index.htm (accessed 26 June 2016).
3 Resolution 70/1: Transforming our w orld: The 2030 Agenda  for sustainable
development, GA (25 September 2015), UN Doc A/RES/70/1 (2015).
4 n 3 above, Preamble, Recital 2.
5 The 2030 Agenda Declaration recognises (n 3 above para 29): ‘[T]he positive
contribution of migrants for inclusive growth and sustainable development’ and that
‘international migration is a multidimensional reality of major relevance for the
development of countries of origin, transit and destination, which requires coherentand comprehensive responses’.
6 n 3 above, SDG Target 10.7.
7 n 3 above, SDG Target 8.8.  Working together to protect migrant workers     153
the entire international community, wi th the result that a level playing-
field of minimum internatio nal standards is essential.
These minimum international standa rds have already been developed.
They are found in international labo ur law and international human rights
law, and in the specific instruments adopted to protect migrant workers
and their families. Consequently, the application of flexible migration
policies in accordance with changing  economic conditions that do not give
sufficient attention to the human and labour rights of migrant workers are
the antithesis of global sustainable de velopment in all of  its dimensions. In
this sense, the need to protect ‘the interests of workers when employed incountries other than their own’, as highlighted in the ILO Constitution
almost 100 years ago,8 has come full circle. The Constitution also
proclaimed that ‘universal and lasting peace can be established only if it is
based upon social justice’9 and the Declaration of Philadelphia concerning
the aims and purposes of the ILO, adopted in 1944 and annexed to the ILO
Constitution, underscores that ‘labour is not a commodity’.10 When
applied to the situation of migrant workers, these principles resonate very
strongly with the 2030 Agenda fo r Sustainable Development, which
pledges that ‘no one will be left behind’ and underscores in SDG 8 thateconomic growth and decent work are closely interrelated.11
This chapter seeks to highlight the complementarities between
international labour standards and human rights law in protecting migrant
workers. These systems of law are no t mutually exclusive and overlap in
important areas. They have also bo th given specific consideration to
migrant workers. As non-citizens with a restricted immigration status and
often working in precarious and low-wage occupations, women and menmigrant workers are particularly at risk of exploitative conditions and
discrimination. The chapter assesses the UN International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of TheirFamilies (ICRMW)
12 and its synergies with th e specific instruments to
protect migrant workers previously adopted by the ILO’s International
Labour Conference, namely the Mi gration for Employment Convention
(Revised), 1949 (No 97) and the Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No 143), and their accompanying non-
binding Recommendations Nos 86 and 151.13 It is important to view these
8 ILO Constitution, 1919 (as amended). Fo r the text, see http://www .ilo.org/dyn/
normlex/en/f?p=1000:62:3632631635012707::N O:62:P62_LIST_ENTRIE_ID:2453
907:NO (accessed 26 June 2016).
9 n 8 above, Preamble, Recital 1.
10 International Labour Conference, 26th Session, Declaration concerning the aims and
purposes of the ILO, Philadelphia (10 Ma y 1944); ILO Constitution (n 8 above) para
I(a).
11 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (n 3 above) Preamble Recital 2 and SDG 8.
12 GA (18 December 1990), UN Doc A/RES/45/158 (1990).13 For the texts, see ILO NORMLEX – Information System on International Labour
Standards http://www .ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:1:0::NO
(accessed 26 June 2016).154    Chapter 6
instruments along a historical continuum and as mutually reinforcing.14
While there are varying rates of stat e ratifications for each of these
instruments, it is arguable that the fullest level of protection of migrantworkers can only be achieved with ratification and effective
implementation of all three,15 as each instrument contains unique
provisions which are not necessarily fo und in the other two. Similarly, and
as discussed below, the work of the ILO supervisory system and the
ICRMW’s supervisory body, the Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (hereafter‘the Committee’),16 is also mutually reinforcing. This is evident from the
Committee’s consideration of stat e party reports, the two General
Comments it has adopted to date on migrant domestic workers and therights of migrant workers in an irregular situation and members of their
families, and the days of general discussion held by the Committee that
have addressed the linkages betwee n migration and development, the
rights of migrant domestic workers, the rights of migrant workers in an
irregular situation, the role of migrat ion statistics, and labour exploitation
of migrant workers.
2 International labour st andards and human rights
While international labour law and international human rights law are two
distinct branches of law, they are cl osely related and indeed overlap. The
ILO fundamental principles and rights at work found in the eight coreconventions of the ILO addressing trade union rights, abolition of forced
labour, elimination of child labour and non-discrimination in employment
and occupation17 are also reflected in the sp ecific provisions of the core
international human rights  instruments, and part icularly the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (Universal Declaration) and the two
International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and
14 Indeed, 2015 was also the 40th anniversar y of the adoption of Convention No 143,
while 2014 was the 65th anniversary of the adoption of Convention No 97.
15 The ICRMW (n 12 above) has been ratified  by 51 state parties, while 49 and 23 state
parties have ratified Convention No 97 an d Convention No 143 respectively, although
only five countries (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Philippines,Tajikistan) have ratified  all three Conventions.
16 For a comprehensive overview of the functions and work of the Committee, see
V Chetail ‘The Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers andMembers of Their Families’ in  P Alston & F Megret (eds) The United Nations and
human rights: A critical appraisal  2nd ed (forthcoming 2018). Fo r an earlier article by the
former Secretary to the Committee, see C Edelenbos ‘Committee on Migrant Workers
and implementation of the ICRM W’ in P de Guchteneire et al  (eds) Migration and
human  rights: The United Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (2009) 100-121.
17 Freedom of Association an d Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948
(No 87); Right to Organise  and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No 98);
Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No 29) an d its 2014 Protocol; Abolition of Forced
Labour Convention, 1957 (No 105); Minimu m Age Convention, 1973 (No 138); Worst
Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (N o 182); Equal Remuneration Convention,
1951 (No 100); Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No
111). The ILO Declaration on Fundamental Pr inciples and Rights at Work, adopted  Working together to protect migrant workers     155
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR).18 Indeed, when it comes
to trade union rights, the ILO Freedom of Association and Protection of
the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (No 87) is expressly referred to inthe respective provisions of both Covenants.19
Moreover, the International Labour Conference has clearly
underscored that ILO fundamental principles and rights at work are
human rights.20 Many of the other international labour standards can also
be encapsulated in general human righ ts law, particularly economic and
social rights, such as the rights to work, to enjoyment of just and favourable
conditions of work, to social security, and to the enjoyment of the highestattainable standard of ph ysical and mental health.21
This close interaction between human  rights and labour rights was
reiterated by the ILO Director-General in his statement on Human Rights
Day on 10 December 2015:
The ILO continues to highlight the fundamental connection between human
rights and labour rights and the real ization of decent work for all: work
carried out in conditions of freedom , equity, security and human dignity.
The provisions of the two Covenants echo the fundamental principles and
rights at work concerning freedom from child labour and forced labour,
freedom from discrimination at work and freedom of association andcollective bargaining. They are enabli ng rights, underpinning fairness and
justice in the world of work. The rela ted ILO Conventions form an integral
part of the United Nations’ overall human rights framework.22
These rights are clearly very relevant to the protection of migrant workers
and the fair governance of labour migration. Indeed, when the
17 by the International Labour Conference at its 86th Session in June 1998, stipulates that
‘all Members, even if they have not rati fied the Conventions in question, have an
obligation arising from the very fact of membership in the Organization to respect, to
promote and to realize, in good faith and in accordance with the Constitution, the
principles concerning the fundamental rights which are the subject of those
Conventions’ (para 2). For the text of the Declaration, see http://www .ilo.org/
declaration/thedeclaration/textdeclaration/lang--en/index.htm (accessed 26 June
2016).
18 See respectively GA Resolution 217 A (III) (10 December 1948), UN Doc 999 UNTS
171; 999 UNTS 3.
19 See ICCPR (n 18 above) art 22(3) & CESCR (n 18 above) art 8(3).20 International Labour Conference, 101st Sess ion Resolution concerning the Recurrent
Discussion on Fundamental Principles and Ri ghts at Work Geneva (2012)
Conclusions, para 5, reaffirming the particular significance of fundamental principlesand rights at work ‘both as human rights and enabling conditions for the achievement
of the other ILO strategic objectives’. The Conclusions also acknowledged the fact that
certain population groups, including migrant workers, ‘are more exposed to violationsof fundamental principles and rights at work than others’ (para 11).
21 CESCR (n 18 above) arts 6, 7, 9 & 12 respectively.
22 ‘The fundamental connection between human rights and labour rights’ Statement of
the ILO Director-General on Human Rights Day (10 December 2015) http://
www .ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/who-we-are/ilo-director-general/statements-and-
speeches/WCMS_434604/lang--en/inde x.htm (accessed 26 June 2016).156    Chapter 6
independent ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of
Conventions and Recommendation (h ereafter ‘Committee of Experts’)
conducted a General Survey on the ei ght ILO fundamental conventions in
2012, migrant workers were identified as one of the population groups
subject to particular risks from violatio ns of the rights in these instruments,
especially violations relating to forc ed labour and equality of opportunity
and treatment and non-discrimination.23 Further attention is devoted to
this question in the Committee of Experts’ most recent General Survey on
the ILO migrant worker instruments,  which notes that the obligation to
respect the ‘basic human rights of all migrant workers’ in article 1 of
Convention No 143 includes, amongst other human rights, the
‘fundamental rights at work as embodied in the eight ILO fundamentalConventions and reaffirmed in th e ILO Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work, 1998’.24 Moreover, in examining the
government reports on the appl ication of the ILO fundamental
Conventions, the Committee of Experts has also drawn attention to ‘the
particular vulnerability of women migrant workers, especially those
employed in occupations such as domestic work, agriculture,manufacturing and the entertainment indu stry, to violations of their basic
human rights’.25
3 ILO Conventions on migrant workers and the 
ICRMW
The specific instruments adopted to govern labour migration and protect
migrant workers each have their pa rticular historical context. The
adoption of both ILO Conventions was informed by turbulent events
affecting Europe in particular. Conv ention No 97, which was a revised
version of an earlier Convention adopted in 1939 (but never ratified),26 has
a core equality of treatment betw een national workers and migrant
workers moving from countries with la bour surpluses to those with labour
shortages, a particular feature of much of western Europe in the aftermathof World War II. Convention No 97 was only concerned with migrant
workers moving in accordance with the laws at the time, who constituted
the bulk of such workers, and thus does not apply to migrant workers inirregular status. The context for the adoption of Convention No 143 was
very different. The oil crisis of  1973 and the subsequent economic
recession, resulting in a stop on la bour migration to western Europe, gave
rise to increased incidences of cl andestine or irregular migration and
23 International Labour Conference, 101st Sess ion, ‘Giving globaliz ation a human face’
General Survey on the fundam ental Conventions concerning rights at work in light of
the ILO Declaration on Social Justice f or a Fair Globalization (2012) paras 295 &
776-781.
24 International Labour Conference, 105th Sess ion, ‘Promoting fair migration’ General
Survey concerning the migrant w orkers instruments (2016) para 276.
25 ILO (n 24 above) para 280.
26 ILO Migration for Employme nt Convention, 1939 (No 66).  Working together to protect migrant workers     157
related abuses at the hands of human traffickers and migrant smugglers,
although the difference between trafficking and smuggling, with the
definition of ‘trafficking in persons’ focused on the purpose of exploitation,
was only fully articulated in separa te instruments adopted by the UN in
2000.27 While strengthening the provisions  on equal treatment for migrant
workers in a regular situation,28 Convention No 143 also seeks to address
irregular migration, including through member obligations to respect the
basic human rights of all migrant wo rkers, including those in irregular
status, and in collaboration with other Members.29 Indeed, the context for
the adoption of Convention No 143 is not too dissimilar from that leading
up to the genesis of the ICRMW in the concern with the increasing
violations of the human rights of a ll migrant workers, including those in
irregular status, discrimination and lack  of equality of treatment, and the
need for inter-state co-operation to ensure sound, equitable, lawful and
humane conditions in connection wi th the international migration of
workers.30 While both instruments apply to all migrant workers, the
ICRMW provides a considerably more complete list of rights in Part III
drawing on those found in the ICCPR and CESCR in particular, althoughthere are some inconsistencies, especia lly in regard to trade union rights,
which have since been clarified in  the Committee’s General Comment 2,
discussed in Section 4.2 of the chapter below.
In terms of process, an important difference was that Convention No
143 was negotiated relatively quickly,  while ICRMW took just over ten
years to gestate because of lengthy and arduous negotiations resulting in its
adoption by the General Assembly on 18 December 1990. Moreover, as
with most of the other core inte rnational human rights instruments,31
20 ratifications were required for its entr y into force, with the result that the
ICRMW only came into force around 13 years later in July 2003. Incontrast, Convention No 143 came into  effect much sooner (9 December
27 Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, and Protocol against Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air,
supplementing the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, UNGeneral Assembly Resolution 55/25 of 15 November 2000. Under the former
Protocol, ‘trafficking in persons’ is defined as ‘the recruitment, transportation, transfer,
harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other formsof coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position
of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the
consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose ofexploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the
prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services,
slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs’ (art 3(a)).The latter Protocol defines ‘smuggling of migrants’ as ‘the procurement, in order to
obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other material benefit, of the illegal entry of
a person into a state party of which the person is not a national or a permanentresident’ (art 3(a)).
28 Convention No 143 (n 13 above) Part II on Equality of Opportunity and Treatment.
29 n 13 above, arts 1 & 3 respectively.30 ICRMW (n 12 above) Parts II, III, IV & VI.
31 With the exception of the ICCPR (n 18 above) and CESCR (n 18 above) in respect of
which 35 ratifications were required for their entry into force.158    Chapter 6
1978) as only two ratifications are required for the entry into force of ILO
conventions.
As observed in the literature rela ting to the drafting of the ICRMW,
there was a lively debate whether it was even needed given that the ILO isthe specialised UN agency responsi ble for the world of work with a
mandate to establish minimum internat ional norms in this area, as indeed
has been noted above, and the risk of duplication or conflict with the ILO
standards that had already been adopted,32 namely Conventions Nos 97
and 143 and their accompanying Recomm endations. Nonetheless, it was
argued by the UN expert appointed to study the migrant workers’ questionthat the elaboration of future instruments relating to migrant workers
should involve the UN ‘to ensure th at all humanitarian aspects of the
problem are covered’ and that the ILO had acknowledged that itscompetence to deal with human rights in general was limited.
33 The scope
of ILO’s mandate when it comes to the protection of migrant workers is
insufficient to provide prot ection in its fullest sense,  particularly in relation
to social and cultural rights not directly linked to the workplace, such as
rights to education, culture and housing.  In this sense, therefore, a broader
instrument was justified in light also  of the tendency to supplement the
International Bill of Rights34 with specific instruments aimed at the
protection of the human rights of ce rtain categories of human beings who
are seen as particularly vulnerable. Consequently, the decade between1979 and 1989 saw the adoption of specif ic human rights treaties on the
Elimination of All Forms of Disc rimination against Women and the
Rights of the Child.35
While the wish to ensure the broade st protection possible for migrant
workers justified therefore the negotiation of an instrument within the UN,
the choice of this forum also had its disadvantages, which is reflected in a
32 M Hasenau ‘Setting norms in the United  Nations system: The Draft Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their Families in relation to
ILO in standards on mi grant workers’ (1990) 28 International Migration Review  133;
R Böhning ‘The protection of migrant workers and international labour standards’(1988) 26 International Migration  133; R Böhnin g ‘The ILO and the new UN
Convention on Migrant Workers:  The past and future’ (1991) 25 International Migration
Review  698. See also R Cholewinski Migrant workers in international human rights law:
Their protection in countries of employment  (1997) 141-142 and C Edelenbos ‘Committee
on migrant workers and implementation of th e ICRMW’ in De Guch teneire et al (n 16
above) 115.
33 Cholewinski (n 32 above) 140,  citing Exploitati on of labour th rough illicit and
clandestine trafficking (Draft recommendations submitted by Mrs Halima Embarek
Warzazi, Rapporteur), ECOSOC (9 Sept ember 1975) UN Doc E/CN.4.Sub.2/L.636
(1975) 1.
34 The term often used to describe the Universal Declaration (n 18 above), the ICCPR
(n 18 above) and CESCR (n 18 above) as a package containing the principal humanrights.
35 See respectively Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 1249 UNTS 13 (18 Decemb er 1979), and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, 1577 UNTS 3 (20 Nove mber 1989). Subsequently, the Convention
on the Rights of Persons wi th Disabilities, 2515 UNTS 3 (13 December 2006) was also
adopted.  Working together to protect migrant workers     159
number of weaker provisions in the eventual text of the ICRMW adopted
by the General Assembly in 1990 as co mpared with equivalent clauses in
the two ILO Conventions.36 International human rights treaties in the UN
are negotiated between governments, while in the ILO representative
employer and worker organisations also  play an important role, alongside
governments (represented by the labour  ministries) in the negotiation and
adoption of international labour standards. Consequently, the ICRMW
reflects a compromise view of stat es, while ILO Conventions Nos 97 and
143 reflect a broader compromise between governments and social
partners. While the ILO, in an observ er capacity, played an important role
in the negotiations on the text of  the ICRMW, and was thus able to
influence it, such a role is very di fferent from the ‘decision-making’ or
‘voting’ function that employer and worker delegates had in deliberations
over the two ILO Conventions concerning migrant workers.37 This
distinction needs to be kept in mind  when considering the texts of the
ICRMW vis-à-vis those of ILO Conventions Nos 97 and 143 and is also
the reason why it is important that all three legally binding texts should be
considered together.
4 ILO and the Committee on Migrant Workers: A 
mutually reinforcing relationship
Part VII of the ICRMW is concerned wi th its application in state parties
and the treaty body established to achieve this, namely, the Committee on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families. Given the close synergies between ILO’s work on migrantworkers and the ICRMW, the ILO features  explicitly in this part of the
ICRMW addressing its supervision.38 A sharing of information between
the ILO supervisory system and the Committee is mandated in Part VII of
36 See eg in particular the provisions addre ssing trade union rights (arts 26 & 40), access
to employment for documented migrant workers and members of their families (arts
52 & 53), and the important function of social dialogue which is largely absent fromthe ICRMW , with the exception of a reference in art 33(1)(b) to the possible role of
trade unions and employers in disseminat ion of information to migrant workers.
37 Indeed, the influential role played by social partners and particularly trade unions in
the standard-setting work of the ILO was one of the reasons why some developing
countries wished to negotiate the Convention  under UN auspices where they also have
an ‘automatic majority’. See R Böhning ‘The ILO and the New UN Convention on
Migrant Workers: The past and future’ (n 32 above) 700-701.
38 As noted by V Chetail ‘The Committee on th e Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families’ in Alston & Mégret (n 16 above) 3, however,
the Committee almost did not come into existence because a number of, mostly
Western, countries took the view that the ILO should assume the supervisory function
for the ICRMW . He cites (n 16 above, at n 12), the view of the United States which
supported such a role for the ILO in the light of its ‘lengthy experience’ and its
monitoring ‘machinery … through a detailed reporting system and well-established
system of direct contacts with member st ates’. Working Paper presented by the United
States of America, UN Doc A/C.3/ 35/WG.1/CRP .6 (19 November 1980), para
11(d), Annex VI to the Report of the Open Working Group, UN Doc A/C.3/35/13
(25 November 1980).160    Chapter 6
the ICRMW, with the UN Secretary-General required to transmit the state
reports submitted under the ICRMW and related information to the ILO
Director-General.39 The Committee is also obliged to invite the ILO to
appoint officials to participate, in a consultative capacity, in the
Committee’s meetings.40 This section of the chapter describes how this
interaction between the ILO and Committee takes place in practice withreference to the consideration of st ate party reports, the preparation of
general comments, days of general disc ussion as well as the organisation
of other events by, or in collaboration with, the Committee.
4.1 Consideration of state party reports
While, as noted above, the UN Secretary-General is required to transmit
state party reports and related inform ation to the ILO Director-General, he
also has the discretion, in consultati on with the Committee to send such
reports to other specia lised agencies and organs of the UN as well as
intergovernmental organisations, and to invite them to be present in
meetings.41 In practice, the Committee holds a ‘closed door’ meeting with
interested UN (normally ILO, the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR), the UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), and the International Or ganisation for Migration (IOM),
which became a related agency of th e UN in September 2016) and requests
them to provide any releva nt information in respec t of those state parties
which have submitted reports or have been requested to submit them. Inthe case of the ILO, this informat ion includes a compilation of recent
observations or direct requests42 to those governments by the principal
ILO supervisory body, the independent Committee of Experts, concerninglabour migration and the protection of migrant workers in respect of
relevant ILO instruments ratified by them. In addition to Conventions Nos
97 and 143, there may also be refere nces to observations and direct
39 ICRMW (n 12 above) art 74(2): ‘The Secretar y-General of the United Nations shall, in
due time before the opening of each regular session of the Committee, transmit to the
Director-General of the International Labour Office copies of the reports submitted bystates parties concerned and information rele vant to the consideration of these reports,
in order to enable the Office to assist th e Committee with the expertise the Office may
provide regarding those matters dealt with by the present Convention that fall withinthe sphere of competence of  the International Labour Organisation. The Committee
shall consider in its deliberations such comments and materials as the Office may
provide’.
40 ICRMW (n 12 above) art 74(5).
41 ICRMW (n 12 above) art 74(6). In practice , the reports and related information are
made available, soon after they have been  received, on the Committee’s website http:/
/www .ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CMW/Pag es/CMWIndex.aspx (accessed 26 June
2016).
42 ‘Observations contain commen ts on fundamental questions raised by the application
of a particular Convention by a state. These observations are published in the
Committee’s annual report. Direct requests relate to more technical questions or
requests for further information. They are not published in the report but arecommunicated directly to the governments concerned’. See Rules of the game: A brief
introduction to international labour standards  rev ed (2014) 102. All the observations and
direct requests are accessible from ILO NORMLEX (n 13 above).  Working together to protect migrant workers     161
requests concerning migrant worker s under the eight ILO fundamental
conventions, or other relevant instru ments, such as the Domestic Workers
Convention, 2011 (No 189) and the Private Employment AgenciesConvention, 1999 (No 181), which contai ns important provisions relating
to the recruitment of migrant workers,43 or specific technical conventions
such as those relating to social security44 or others such as the Nursing
Personnel Convention, 1977 (No 149). In formation on pertinent technical
co-operation projects implemented by the ILO in the countries concerned
is also normally provided.45
In recognition of the broader international framework for the
protection of migrant workers, th ese instruments are also commonly
referenced in the Concluding Observations prepared by the Committee
after consideration of a state party’ s report. Indeed, in its first ever
Concluding Observation,  to Mali, in May 2006, the Committee called
upon that country to accede  to Conventions Nos 97 and 143.46 Moreover,
the Committee also calls upon the state parties concerned, if they have notalready done so, to ratify the eight ILO fundamental rights conventions,
Conventions Nos 181 and 189,47 as well as other ILO Conventions.48
However, references by the Committe e in its Concluding  Observations to
43 NORMLEX (n 13 above). Convention No 181, art 7(1), contains the important
principle that recruitment fees or costs should not be charged to workers, including
migrant workers (‘Private employment agencies shall not charge directly or indirectly,
in whole or in part, any fees or costs to workers’), while art 8(1) obliges a member,‘after consulting the most representative organizations of employers and workers, [to]
adopt all necessary and appropriate measures, both within its jurisdiction and, where
appropriate, in collaboration with other Members, to provide adequate protection forand prevent abuses of migrant workers recruited or placed in its territory by private
employment agencies’.
44 See in particular the ILO Equality of Treatment (Accident Compensation)
Convention, 1925 (No 19), the Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention,
1952 (No 102) and the Equality of Treatmen t (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No
118).
45 Eg the ILO project on ‘Enhancing the governance of labour migration and the
protection of migrant workers’ rights in  Tunisia, Morocco, Egypt and Libya (2013-
2016)’ (IRAM), funded by the Swiss Agen cy for Development and Cooperation
(SDC). For more information on the projec t, see http://www .ilo.org/global/topics/
labour-migration/projects/WCMS_226517/ lang--en/inde x.htm (accessed 26 June
2016).
46 Concluding Observations on the initial report of Mali, CMW (31 May 2006), UN Doc
CMW/C/MLI/CO/1 (2006) 3, para 11. See also C Edelenbos ‘Committee on
Migrant Workers and implementation of the ICRMW’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 16
above) 107.
47 See eg Concluding Observations on the initial report of Timor-Leste, CMW
(8 October 2015), UN Doc CMW/C/TLS/CO /1 (2015) in which the Committee
(3, para 16) recommends that the state party consider ratifying or acceding, as soon as
possible, to ILO Conventions Nos 97, 143 an d 189; Concluding Observations on the
initial report of Guinea, CMW (8 October 2015), UN Doc CMW/C/GIN/CO/1
(2015), in which the Committee (2-3, para 12)  encourages the state party to consider
acceding, as soon as possible, to ILO Conventions Nos 97, 181 and 189 (Guinea has
ratified Convention No 143). See also Concluding Observations on the initial report of
Turkey, CMW (2 May 2016), UN Doc CMW/C/TUR/CO/1 (2016) in which the
Committee (4, paras 19-20), recommends that Turkey consider ratifying ILO
Conventions Nos 97, 143, 181 & 189.
48 Eg in Concluding Observations on Cabo Verde in the absence of a report, CMW
(8 October 2015), UN Doc CMW/C/CPV/CO/1 (2015) and Concluding162    Chapter 6
the observations and direct requests of the ILO Committee of Experts have
been much less frequent.49 For example, the Comm ittee referred explicitly
to one of the direct requests of the Committee of Experts in its ConcludingObservation on Bosnia and Herzegovina,  in relation to article 33 of the
ICRMW on the right of all migrant workers to information:
The Committee notes the existence of public employment services which
provide information on migration. The Committee, however, notes (as did the
ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions andRecommendations in its Direct request of  2008 in relation to the Migration
for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No 97)), that the existence of
official information services in itself is not enough to guarantee that migrantworkers are sufficiently and objectively informed on migration-related issues.
The Committee reiterates the concern of the ILO Committee of Experts that
there is inadequate protection for migrant workers from misleadinginformation from intermediaries who mi ght have an interest in encouraging
migration in any form, regardless of  the consequences for the workers
involved.
50
4.2 General Comments
To date, and as noted in the Introdu ction, the Committee has adopted two
General Comments on migrant domestic workers and the rights of migrantworkers in an irregular situatio n and members of their families.51 In
accordance with the obli gation in article 74 of the ICRMW, ILO officials
48 Observations on the init ial report of the Seychelles, CMW (14 September 2015), UN
Doc CMW/C/SYC/CO/1 (2015); the Committ ee (3, paras 14-15 & 3, paras 12-13),
respectively, also recommended that the state party consider acceding to the ILOMinimum Wage Fixing  Convention, 1970 (No 131) and the Safety and Health in
Construction Convention, 1988 (No 167). See also Concluding Observations on the
initial report of Turkey (n 47 above) 4, paras 19-20 with regard to ILO Convention No
131.
49 See also V Chetail ‘The Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families’ in Alston & Megret (n 16 above) 19.
50 Concluding Observations on the initial report of Bosnia and Herzegovina, CMW
(3 June 2009), UN Doc CMW/C/BIH/CO/1  (2009) 5, para 27. In 2009, the
Committee also raised concerns about the legal position in the Philippines affording
trade union rights for migrant workers lawfully residing and working in that country,
but only if they are nationals of a country which grants the same or similar rights toFilipino workers. In this regard, the Committee reiterated a 2008 direct request by the
ILO Committee of Experts in relation to th e application by the Philippines of the ILO
Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948
(No 87) calling on ‘the state party [to]  take the necessary measures, including
legislative amendments to se ctions 269 and 272(b) of the La bour Code, to guarantee to
all migrant workers and members of their families lawfully residing within thePhilippines the right to join, form and to form part of the leadership of, associations
and unions, in accordance with article 40 of the [ICRMW], as well as with ILO
Convention No 87, not subject to reciprocity’. Concluding Observations on the initialreport of the Philippines, CMW (22 May 2009), UN Doc CMW/C/PHL/CO/1
(22 May 2009) 7, para 34.
51 See respectively General Comment 1 on migrant domestic workers, CMW
(23 February 2011), UN Doc CMW/C/GC/1 (2011) and General Comment 2 on the
rights of migrant workers in an irregular situation and members of their families,
CMW (28 August 2013), UN Doc CMW/C/GC/2 (2013).  Working together to protect migrant workers     163
participated, in a consultative capaci ty, in the Committee’s meetings and
deliberations on the preparation of both General Comments, which raised
delicate issues in respect of IL O’s own standard-s etting work. This
collaboration between the ILO and the Committee was important to
ensure coherence in international la w between international human rights
and labour standards.
General Comment 1 on migrant domest ic workers had its genesis in a
day of general discussion on migran t domestic workers that the Committee
held in October 2009.52 It was published in February 2011, and so a few
months before the adoption of the ILO Domestic Workers Convention,2011 (No 189) and accompanying Re commendation No 201. While the
Committee’s deliberations over the rights of migrant domestic workers
undoubtedly gave important attention to this issue, as noted by onecommentator:
[T]he very timing of this General Co mment No 1 could be debatable. […]
The hidden purpose was perhaps to influence the negotiation of the ILOconvention – which contains specific pr ovisions on domestic migrant workers
– and arguably to increase the low visi bility of the [Committee]. Because of
the risk of adopting diverging standards, however, it would have been morecautious for the Committee to wait fo r the adoption of the ILO Convention
before detailing its own interp retation in a general comment.
53
It was therefore important to ensure potential consistency between both
instruments, which was particularly ch allenging for the ILO in light of the
fact that no official draft of the Co nvention was available at the time and
that negotiations over the text were  still to take place during the 100th
Session of the International Labour Conference.54 The only official
documents available were the law and pr actice report on ‘Decent work for
domestic workers’ discussed at the 99th Session of the International
Labour Conference in June 2010, which is cited by the Committee in theGeneral Comment, and the Conference report of the Committee on
Domestic Workers containing proposed  conclusions with a view to the
adoption of a Convention and a Recommendation.55 These documents
laid the groundwork for the negotiatio ns on the text of Convention No 189
(and accompanying Reco mmendation No 201) during the 100th Session in
2011. General Comment 1 contains a working definition of ‘domestic
52 See sec 4.3 below on ‘Days of general discussion’.
53 Chetail (n 49 above) 15 (footnote omitted).54 At around the same time, the ILO also worked closely with the European Union
Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) to ensure a consistent approach in the
preparation of FRA’s report on ‘Migrants in an irregular situation employed indomestic work: Fundamental rights challenges for the European Union and its
Member States’ (2011).
55 See respectively ILO, 99th Session, ‘Decent work for domestic workers’ Report IV(1)
(2010) and ILO, 99th Session ‘Report of the Committee on Domestic Workers:
Proposed Conclusions’ (2010) (124-132). Fo r both reports, see http://www .ilo.org/
ilc/ILCSessions/99thSes sion/lang--en/index.htm (accessed 26 June 2016).164    Chapter 6
worker’, which was subsequently in cluded in Convention No 189.56 It also
draws on the ILO evidence base by citi ng important data on the proportion
of domestic work in total employment in both developed andindustrialised countries.57 While no global or regional estimates of migrant
domestic workers were available at th e time, such figures have since been
released by the ILO, indicating th at 11.5 million of the 67.1 million
domestic workers in the world are inte rnational migrants (17,2 per cent of
the total), and that women comprise 74,4 per cent or about 8.5 million of
all migrant domestic workers.58 Finally, the General Comment also draws
attention to ILO fundamental conventi ons, and particularly those relating
to the elimination of child labour59 in outlining what kind of domestic
work should not be performed by minors.60
In adopting General Comment 2 on the rights of migrant workers in
an irregular situation and members of their families, the Committee
wished to clarify the application of the ICRMW to this particularly
vulnerable category of migrants. Th is entailed the sensitive task of
considering the rights afforded by the ICRMW to this group in light of the
other core international human rights treaties, in particular the ICCPR and
CESCR, and relevant ILO internatio nal labour standards. In General
Comment 2, the Committee underscores the particular importance of
international labour standards and their application to migrant workers,
including those in an irregular situation.
International labour standards adopted by the International Labour
Conference of the [ILO] apply to migrant workers, including those in an
irregular situation, unless  otherwise stated. The fundamental principles and
rights at work set out in the eight fu ndamental ILO Conventions apply to all
migrant workers, irrespective of thei r nationality and migration status. The
1998 ILO Declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work and its
56 General Comment 1 (n 51 above) 2, para 5, in which the Committee notes that ‘the
term “domestic worker” generally refers to a person who performs work within an
employment relationship in or for other people’s private homes, whether or not
residing in the hous ehold’. Convention No 189 (n 43 above and accompanying text),
defines ‘domestic work’ as ‘work performed in or for a household or households’ and
‘domestic worker’ as ‘any person engaged in domestic work within an employment
relationship’. See arts 1(a) & (b) respectively.
57 Namely, that domestic work accounts for between 4 and 10 per cent of total
employment (both female and male) in developing countries and between one and 2,5
per cent in industrialised countries. See General Comment 1 (n 51 above) 1, para 1,citing ‘Decent work for domestic workers’ (n 55 above) 6, para 20.
58 ILO  ‘Global estimates on migrant workers and migrant domestic workers: Results and
methodology’ (2015) xiii (Executive Summ ary) http://www .ilo.org/global/topics/
labour-migration/publications/WCM S_436343/lang--en/ind ex.htm (accessed
26 June 2016).
59 Conventions 138 & 182 (n 17 above).60 General Comment 1 (n 51 above) 10-11, para 56: ‘In line with the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and relevant [ILO] instruments, states should ensure that migrant
children do not perform any type of domestic work which is likely to be hazardous orharmful to their health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.
States shall refrain from adopting policies aimed at recruiting domestic migrant
children.’  Working together to protect migrant workers     165
follow-up requires all ILO member states to promote and realize the
principles concerning the fundamental rights enshrined in these Conventions.
A number of other ILO standards of general application and those containing
specific provisions on migrant worker s in the areas of employment, labour
inspection, social security, protection  of wages, occupational safety and
health, as well as in such sectors as agriculture, construction, hotels and
restaurants, and domestic work, are of particular importance to migrantworkers in an irregular situation. Lastly, in formulating national laws andpolicies concerning labour migration and the protection of migrant workers in
an irregular situation, states are also guided by ILO Convention No 97 …
Convention No 143 … and the accompanying Recommendations Nos 86 and151.
61
The most relevant ILO instrument to the protection of this group of
migrant workers is Convention No 143,  which explicitly addresses their
rights in Part I, with article 1 obliging members ‘to respect the basic human
rights of all migrant workers’, whic h, according to the ILO Committee of
Experts, refer to ‘the fundamenta l human rights contained in the
international instruments adopted by the United Nations in this domain,
some of which include the fund amental rights of workers’.62 In this regard,
the ILO Committee of Experts gives particular attention to the provisions
on fundamental principles and rights at work that apply to all migrant
workers contained in the ICRMW63 and underscores that ‘all migrant
workers’ includes migrants in an irregular situation.64 Given the synergies
between the ICRMW and Part I of Convention No 143, Convention No
143 features in General Comment 2. For example, the Committee
observes that the important obligation in article 22(6) of the ICRMW,
which enables a migrant worker affect ed by an expulsion decision to have
‘a reasonable opportunity before or after departure to settle any claims forwages and other entitlements due to hi m or her and any pending liabilities’
echoes article 9(1) of ILO Convention No 143.65 The Committee
underscores the need to ensure this ri ght in practice and proposes helpfully
that state parties apply the following three good practices to realise this:
(i) ‘grant migrant workers and their family members a reasonable period of
time prior to their expulsion to claim wages and benefits’; (ii) ‘considertime-bound or expedited legal proceedings to address such claims by
migrant workers’; and (iii) ‘conclude bi lateral agreements so that migrant
workers who return to their state of or igin may have access to justice in the
61 General Comment 2 (n 51 above) 6-7, para 12.
62 ‘Promoting fair migration’ (n 24 above) para 276. In th e accompanying footnote, the
Committee cites the Universal Declaration (n 18 above) and the nine core human
rights instruments, in particular the ICCPR (n 18 above), CESCR (n 18 above) and the
ICRMW (n 12 above).
63 ‘Promoting fair migration’ (n 24 above) para 277.
64 ‘Promoting fair migration’ (n 24 above) para 300.
65 Under art 9(1), migrant workers in an irregular situation and when their position
cannot be regularised ‘shall enjoy equality of treatment for [themselves] and [their]
family in respect of rights arising out of past employment as regards remuneration,
social security and other benefits’.166    Chapter 6
state of employment to file compla ints about abuse and to claim unpaid
wages and benefits’.66
In addition to Convention No 143, General Comment 2 draws upon a
number of other ILO instruments for gu idance across rights’ areas ranging
from discrimination in employment, protection of the children of migrant
workers in an irregular situation, ma ternity protection, the right to form
and join trade unions, labour inspec tion, and social security rights. In
consideration of article 25(1) of the ICRMW, which provides for equal
treatment of migrant workers, irrespective of their immigration status, with
nationals in respect of remuneration67 and other conditions of work and
terms of employment, the ILO Discrimination (Employment and
Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No 111) is explicitly cited by the
Committee. The ‘minimum age of employment’ is expressly identified as
a ‘term of employment’ in article 25( 1)(b), and the Committee observes,
moreover, that this shall equally appl y to migrant children and that the
minimum age shall not be less than 15 years, in accordance with article 2of the ILO Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No 138).68 It further notes
that the conditions of work and terms of employment, listed in articles
25(1)(a) and (b), are not exhaustive an d that ‘the equal treatment principle
also covers any other matter that, ac cording to national law and practice,
is considered a working condition or term of employment, such as
maternity protection’.69
General Comment 2 also addresses the delicate question of the scope
of trade union rights for migrant worker s in an irregular situation. Article
26 of the ICRMW protects the right of all migrant workers, including those
in irregular status, to join  trade unions and other associations protecting
their interests, but it does not provide for protection of the right to form
trade unions while this right is clearly enjoyed by migrant workers in a
regular situation in Part IV of the ICRMW.70 With reference to its General
Comment 1, the Committee underscores that ‘the right to organize and to
engage in collective bargaining is es sential for migrant workers to express
their needs and defend their rights, in particular through trade unions’.71
Moreover, it notes that article 26, when read together with other
66 General Comment 2 (n 51 above) 15, para 55.
67 With regard to the right of all migrant workers to equality of treatment in respect of
remuneration, the Committee emphasises (n 51 above) 17, para 63, that ‘[state parties]
should take effective measures against non- payment of wages, delay in payment until
departure, transfer of wages into accounts that are inaccessible to migrant workers, or
payment of lower wages to migrant workers, especially those in an irregular situation,
than to nationals’.
68 General Comment 2 (n 51 above) para 61.
69 n 51 above, para 62. See also the IL O Maternity Protection Convention, 2000
(No 183).
70 ICRMW (n 12 above) art 40(1) reads: ‘Migrant workers and members of their families
shall have the right to form  associations and trade unions in the state of employment for
the promotion and protection of their economic, social, cultural and other interests’
(my emphasis).
71 General Comment 2 (n 51 above) 17, para 65.  Working together to protect migrant workers     167
international human rights instruments,  may create broader obligations for
state parties to both the ICRMW and these instruments. In this regard, the
Committee observes that article 2 of  the ILO Freedom of Association and
Protection of the Rights to Organise Convention, 1948 (No 87)72 and
article 22(1) of the ICCPR (which also refers explicitly to Convention No
87), both apply to migrant workers in an irregular situation.73 Moreover,
the Committee points out, with reference also to General Comment 1, that
article 26 contains a number of related entitlements, such as the ‘right to
participate in meetings an d activities, and to seek the assistance, of trade
unions and any other associations establ ished in accordance with law’ and
that state parties are therefore obliged to 
ensure these rights, includ ing the right to collective bargaining, encourage
self-organisation among migrant worker s, irrespective of their migration
status, and provide them with information about relevant associations thatcan provide assistance.74
With a view to guaranteeing that migrant workers in an irregular situation
are able to enjoy their rights arising from employment, including past
employment, as well as other social rights, the Committee underscores in
General Comment 2, with reference to the ILO Labour InspectionConvention, 1947 (No 81), the need to maintain a ‘firewall’ between the
activities of social and labour market institutions, such as labour inspection
services, and immigration enforcement authorities: 75
[S]tates parties should also step up inspections of places where migrant
workers are routinely employed and instruct labour inspectorates not to share
data concerning the migration status of migrant workers with immigration
authorities, as their primary duty is to secure the enfo rcement of the legal
provisions relating to conditions of wo rk and the protection of workers while
engaged in their work, in accordance wi th [Article 3(1)(a) of ILO Convention
No 81].76
72 Article 2 of Convention No 87 (n 17 ab ove) which applies to both workers’ and
employers’ organisations is unequivocal: ‘Workers and employers, without distinction
whatsoever , shall have the right to establish and, subject only to the rules of the
organisation concerned, to join organisations of their own choosing without previous
authorisation’ (my emphasis).
73 General Comment 2 (n 51 above) 17-18, para 65.
74 n 51 above, para 65.
75 In ‘Promoting fair migration’ (n 24 abov e) para 482, the ILO Committee of Experts
refers to its 2006 General Survey on labour inspection in  which it po inted out that
‘cooperation between the labour inspectorate and immigration authorities should be
carried out cautiously keeping in mind that the main objective of the labour inspectionsystem is to protect the rights and interests of all workers, and to improve their working
conditions, rather than the enforcement of  immigration law . Where a large proportion
of inspection activities relate to verifying the immigration status of migrant workers,this may mobilize considerable resources in terms of staff, time and material resources,
to the detriment of those allocated to the inspection of conditions of work and deter
them from making complaints’.
76 General Comment 2 (n 51 above) 17, para 63. The need for such ‘firewalls’ has also
been recently underscored by the Council of Europe’s European Commission against
Racism and Intolerance (ECRI). See ECRI General Policy Recommendation 16 on168    Chapter 6
With regard to social security rights , article 27(1) of the ICRMW, which
applies to all migrant workers, includ ing those in irregular status, provides
that the right of migrant workers to social security is subject to the
applicable bilateral and multilateral  treaties and that the competent
authorities of the state of origin and state of employment can at any time
establish the necessary arrangements to determine the modalities of the
application of this norm. In this re gard, the Committee refers to the ILO
Multilateral Framework on Labour Mi gration, recommending that state
parties to the ICRMW should consider: 
[E]ntering into bilateral, regional or multilateral agreements to provide social
security coverage and benefits, as we ll as portability of social security
entitlements, to regular migrant worker s, and, as appropriate, to migrant
workers in an irregular situation.77
The Committee has also embarked on the preparation of a Joint General
Comment with the Committee on the Rights of the Child on the human
rights of children in the context of in ternational migration, with the goal of
contributing ‘to improving the protecti on of the human rights of children
[who] are, in the context of intern ational migration, in a particular
situation of vulnerability’.78 This General Comment will aim to focus on
th e  h u m an  r i gh t s  s i tu a t i on  of  a  n u mb e r  o f  cat e go r i e s  o f c h i l d r en  i n  t h e
context of migration, including chil dren who migrate with their parents
who are migrant workers, children born to parents who are migrantworkers in transit and destination co untries, and children left behind by
their parents (or one of them) who have migrated to another country.79
The proposed rights’ themes to be covered by the General Comment
include issues of particular concern to  the ILO, such as equality and non-
discrimination, the right to health, the right to social security, and the right
76 Safeguarding Irregularly Present Migrants from Discrimination, adopted on 16 March
2016 http://www .coe.int/t/dghl/monitori ng/ecri/activities/GPR/EN/Recommen
dation_N16/REC-16-2016-016-ENG.pdf (acces sed 26 June 2016). The principle of
firewalls in this Recommendation is expressed as follows: ‘Taking into account that the
practical protection of the human rights of all persons, including those irregularly
present within the jurisdiction of member states, requires the strict separation of
immigration control and enforcement activiti es from other state and private services;
taking into account that this also requires the creation of firewalls to prevent, both in
law and practice, state and private sector actors from effectively denying human rightsto irregularly present migrants by clearly prohibiting the sharing of the personal data
of, or other information about, migrants suspected of irregular presence or work with
the immigration authorities for purposes of immigration control and enforcement’(ECRI General Policy Recommendation 16, 7).
77 General Comment 2 (n 51 above) 18, para 68, citing ILO  ‘Multilateral framework on
labour migration: Non-binding principles and guidelines for a rights-based approach tolabour migration’ (2006) 18, Guideline 9.9.
78 See CMW-CRC Joint General Comment on the Human Rights of Children in the
Context of International Migration: Concept Note, 4 http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download. aspx?symbolno=CRC% 2fCMW%20General
%20Comment&Lang=en (accessed 26 June 2016).
79 CMW-CRC Joint General Comment (n 78 above).  Working together to protect migrant workers     169
to work and protection from forced labour, all forms of exploitation, and
child labour.80 Considering its role under article 74 of the ICRMW, the
ILO, together with a number of other agencies,81 is also participating in the
advisory group, which will support the Working Group comprising 4-5
representatives of each of the two Committees responsible for coordinating
the process and overseeing the dr afting of the General Comment.82
4.3 Days of general discussion
The Committee has held a number of important days of general discussion
with the purpose of drawing attention to the protection of the rights of
migrant workers, including certain categories of migrant workers, invarious contexts.83
Two of these days of general discussion, on migrant domestic workers
in October 2009 and the rights of migrant workers in an irregular situation
and members of their families in September 2011, preceded thedeliberations and adoption of the two General Comments discussed
above.84 ILO officials participated in both  days and delivered presentations
or remarks.85 In a half day of general disc ussion on workplace exploitation
and workplace protection commemor ating the 10th anniversary of the
entry into force of the ICRMW, held in April 2014,86 an ILO official also
80 CMW-CRC Joint General Comment (n 78 above) 5-6.
81 CMW-CRC Joint General Comment (n 78 above) 6-7: OHCHR, United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Educational, Scientific and CulturalOrganisation (UNESCO), UNHCR, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA),
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN
Women) and IOM.
82 CMW-CRC Joint General Comment (n 78 above) 6.
83 For more information, including the agendas and presentations, see http://
www .ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CMW/Pages /DiscussionDays.aspx (accessed
26 June 2016).
84 Indeed, according to the former Secretary of the Committee, the day of general
discussion on migran t domestic workers was held in light of the 2010 International
Labour Conference discussion on the need for an instrument for the protection of
domestic workers, thus confirming the earlier rationale for the General Comment
subsequently adopted. See respectively C Edelenbos ‘Committee on Migrant Workers
and Implementation of the ICRMW’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 16 above) 113 &
Chetail (n 49 above) and accompanying text.
85 See respectively the presentation by K Landuyt on ‘Migrant domestic workers:
Coverage under existing international labour standards’ http://www .ohchr.org/EN/
HRBodies/CMW/Pages/D GD2009.aspx (accessed 26 June 2016) and the
complementary remarks by R Cholewinski. For the reports of both days of discussion,
see http://www .ohchr.org/EN/HRBodi es/CMW/Pages/DGD2009.aspx (accessed
26 June 2016) and http://www .ohchr.org /EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.
aspx?NewsID=11393&LangID=E.
86 See http://www .ohchr.org/EN/HRBodi es/CMW/Pages/DGD2014. aspx (accessed
26 June 2016). Earlier, in April 2013, the Co mmittee also held another half day of
general discussion on the role of migration statistics for treaty reporting and migration
policies. See http://www .ohchr.org /EN/HRBodies/CMW/Pages/DGD2013.aspx
(accessed 26 June 2016).170    Chapter 6
gave the keynote address,87 which was appropriate given that the issues
discussed were of particular relevanc e and interest to the ILO’s mandate.
This discussion also included an intervention by the UN SpecialRapporteur on the human rights of migrants,88 who had previously
presented a thematic report to the UN Human Rights Council on the
labour exploitation of migrants.89 This interaction between a UN Human
Rights Council special procedures mandate holder with the Committee
and the ILO demonstrates the importan ce of such days of discussion in
building crucial synergies amongst key stakeholders and facilitating
coherence in the objective of advancing protection of the rights of migrant
workers.
In December 2005, the Committee also held an important half day of
general discussion on ‘Protecting the rights of all migrant workers as a toolto enhance development’ to prepare for the first UN General Assembly
High-level Dialogue on Internat ional Migration and Development in
September 2006.90 On the basis of the info rmation and views expressed
during this discussion, including by an ILO representative,91 the
Committee adopted a written contri bution, discussed subsequently in
meetings in April 2006, to the High-lev el Dialogue, in which it emphasised
the positive linkages between ensuri ng the protection of the rights of
migrant workers and sustainable development in both countries of
destination and origin.
87 See presentation of Michelle Leighton, Ch ief, Labour Migration Branch, ILO, http://
www .ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/C MW/Discussions/2014/ MichelleLeighton
.pdf (accessed 26 June 2016).
88 See Presentation by François Crépeau, UN  Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants, http://www .ohchr.org/Doc uments/HRBodies/CMW/Discussions/2014/
FrancoisCrepeau.pdf (accessed 26 June 2016).
89 ‘Labour exploitation of migrants’, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human
rights of migrants, Fran çois Crépeau, HRC (3 April 2014) UN doc A/HRC/26/35
(2014), http://www .ohchr.org/Documents /Issues/SRMigrants/A.HRC.26.35.pdf
(accessed 26 June 2016).
90 See the summary records of the 25th and 26th meetings of the Committee: CMW/C/
SR.25 and CMW/C/SR.26.
91 In offering a summary of the day of discussion during the 26th meeting of the
Committee (n 90 above) 7, pa ra 30, the ILO representative, Mr Patrick Taran said that
four main principles had emerged: ‘Firstly, given that migrant workers were recognized
as agents of development, both in their host countries and in their countries of origin,
and as human beings and not commodities, the question of migration should beapproached from a human rights perspective. Secondly, the contribution of migrants to
the economic and social development of their host countries could be evaluated
according to the standard of living, working conditions and level of integration ofmigrant workers … Thirdly, the way in which migrant workers were treated had a
considerable impact on the level and nature of their contribution to the creation of
human capital and to the development of their countries of origin. Hence, not properlyremunerating a migrant worker deprived not only the migrant worker of the means of
subsistence but also his or her country of origin of a source of income. Fourthly,
protecting the human rights of all migrants was a legal, political and ethicalimperative, and promoting equality of treatment and integration was essential if
migration was to contribute in a substantial and positive manner to economic and
social development’.  Working together to protect migrant workers     171
The Committee believes that respect for the rights of all migrant workers and
members of their families will strengthen  the beneficial effects that migration
has on development, both in countr ies of origin and in countries of
employment. Protection of human rights  and prevention of discrimination in
the country of employment are essential factors to enhance the integration of
migrant workers and members of their fa milies, thus enabling them to better
contribute to the socio-economic welfare of the country of employment.Adequately upholding economic and social  rights in countries of origin will
prevent migration from being a forc ed decision and will enhance the
beneficial effects of migration on the development of the country of origin.92
The Committee drew attention to  a number of observations and
recommendations concerning the need to ensure that migrant workershave access to reliable information on the migration process; adequate
regulation of the activities of recr uitment and placemen t agencies; equality
in remuneration and conditions of employment; special attention to the
protection of the rights of migrant workers, including those in irregular
status, and their integration; adequa te remedies and access to justice,
particularly with a view to being able to claim unpaid wages and socialsecurity benefits after they have departed from the destination country; and
facilitating migrants’ contacts wi th their countries of origin and
reintegration on their return, so as to  maximise the contributions they can
make to those countries.
93
While many of these questions have  since been discussed during the
principal outcome of that first High-level Dialogue, namely the Global
Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD),94 the tenth edition of
which was held in Berlin in June  2017, it was not until the General
Assembly Declaration of the Second Hi gh-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development, adop ted in October 2013, that the
international community explicitly re cognised the clear linkages between
migration, human rights and development.95 In the Declaration,
representatives of states and govern ments also reaffirmed ‘the need to
promote and protect effectively th e human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration status’.96 With
92 Protecting the rights of all migrant workers as a tool to enhance development, Note by
the Secretary-General, GA (3 July 2006) UN doc A/61/120 (2006) 3, para 4.
93 Protecting the rights of all migrant work ers as a tool to enhance development (n 92
above) 3-7, paras 6-23.
94 See http://www .gfmd.org / (accessed 26 June 2016).
95 Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development,
UN General Assembly Resolution 68/4 of 3 October 2013, GA (21 January 2014),UN Doc A/RES/68/4 (2014). In para 1 of th e Declaration, the re presentative states
and governments: ‘Recognize that international migration is a multidimensional
reality of major relevance for the development of countries of origin, transit anddestination, and in this regard recognize that international migration is a cross-cutting
phenomenon that should be addressed in a coherent, comprehensive and balanced
manner, integrating development with due regard for social, economic andenvironmental dimensions and respecting human rights’.
96 Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development
(n 95 above) para 10.172    Chapter 6
regard to the protection of migrant workers, they emphasised ‘the need to
respect and promote international labo ur standards as appropriate, and
respect the rights of migrants in their workplaces’ and ‘the need to establishappropriate measures for the protection of women migrant workers in all
sectors, including those in volved in domestic work’.97
4.4 Other events
The ILO has been a key participant in other events organised by the
Committee, not least those commemorating the 20th and 25th
anniversaries of the adoption of the Convention. The 25th anniversary
event was held on 8 September 2015 du ring the Committee’s 23rd Session
at a time when the highest political attention was being given to migrants
and refugees in the context of the so -called ‘refugee and migration crisis’
affecting various parts of the worl d and particularly the Mediterranean
region.98 It attracted a large number of participants representing
governments, including those that have not ratified the ICRMW, intra-
regional bodies such as the European Union (EU), internationalorganisations, trade unions and civil society. The UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights observed that the migration crises highlighted the
fundamental importance of the ICRMW ‘as a robust and agreedinternational legal framework for the rights of all migrant workers and
their families in countries of origin, transit and destination’ and that ‘after
a quarter-century, the Convention was now more relevant than ever’
despite the relatively low number of ratifications. He added that: 
[T]he juxtaposition of this landmark twenty-fifth anniversary with today’s
dramatic and accelerating migration crises underscored the urgent need tobegin a more honest discussion about the obstacles to ratification of the
Convention.99 
In summing up the discussion, the ILO speaker underlined that: 
[T]he way forward was a comprehensive approach to governance, based onthree pillars: creating decent work at home; multilateral responses needed to
be grounded on international standards and common values; and fair, safe
97 Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development
(n 95 above) paras 14 & 12 respectively.
98 The event was entitled ‘Current challenges in protecting the human rights of migrant
workers, irregular migration flows in the Me diterranean, migrant workers in the Gulf,
and undocumented children in the Americas’, and comprised two panel discussions:(i) ‘Current trends in violations of migrant workers’ human rights’ and (ii) ‘Challenges
for states and promising developments in responding to these trends’.  For a summary
of the discussion, see http://www .ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsI D=16398&LangID=E (accessed 15 June 2017 (accessed 26
June 2016).
99 Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, UN High Comm issioner for Human Rights (n 98 above).  Working together to protect migrant workers     173
and regular channels of migration that met real labour market needs at all
skill levels.100
In September 2014, the ILO and the OHCHR also co-organised a side
event on ‘Decent Work for Migran t Domestic Workers’ during the
Committee’s 21st Session, in the framework of the EU-funded project‘Global Action Programme on Migrant Domestic Workers’.101 The focus
of the panel discussion was the exchange of good practices and to promote
migrant domestic workers’ empowerment through improvement of theirlegal protection, access to justice an d enhancement of their organisation
and voice. Specific attention was also given to the relationship between
relevant international standard s, namely the ICRMW and ILO
Conventions Nos 97, 143 and 189.
5 Conclusion
The fundamental connection betwee n international human rights and
labour standards is clearly evident when it comes to the protection ofmigrant workers and the governance of  labour migration, both in the
interplay between the ICRMW and IL O international labour standards,
including the specific ILO instrume nts on migrant workers, and between
the ILO supervisory system, in partic ular the ILO Committee of Experts,
and the UN Committee of Migrant Workers, which is facilitated by ILO
officials who participate in a consultative capacity in the work of theCommittee.
Contrary to the concerns expres sed by certain governments and ILO
officials at the time of the drafting of the ICRMW,
102 the interaction
between ILO representatives and members of the Committee is resultingin a heightened understanding of the role of both systems in protecting
migrant workers and improving the governance of labour migration,
including in the identification of g ood practices that can be shared across
regions and globally. It is also le ading to improved synergies and more
consistent approaches to interpretation  of key rights’ areas, such as the
rights to freedom of association and equality of treatment, and theirapplication to all migrant workers, including those in irregular status.
Importantly, the Committee, through its deliberations on state party
reports and General Comments, and particularly through its days of
100 Manuela Tomei, Director, Conditions of Work and Equality Department
(WORKQUALITY), ILO (n 98 above).
101 For the press release, see http:// www .ilo.org/global/docs/WCMS_310260/lang--en/
index.htm (accessed 26 June 2016). For more information about the project, see http:/
/www .ilo.org/global/topi cs/labour-migration/proj ects/WCMS_222567/lang--en/
index.htm (accessed 26 June 2016).
102 See V Chetail (n 49 above) 18, who observes that ‘despite the concerns initially raised,
the collaboration [between ILO representa tives and members of the Committee] has
proved to be particularly fruitful si nce the establishment of the [Committee]’.174    Chapter 6
general discussion and other releva nt events, which are open to and
inclusive of all interested stakeholde rs – such as governments, national
human rights institutions, trade uni ons, the private sector, NGOs and
migrant associations – presents an increasingly important forum allowing
for a transparent and focused exchange on the interdependence of
migration, human rights and developmen t. This should be  contrasted with
the more rhetorical, less technical an d often politicised discussions taking
place within the GFMD and other largely intergovernmental spaces,
where the relationship between migration, human rights and developmentand the role international standard s can play in strengthening this
relationship is often understated or subsumed by economic considerations.
With the explicit integration of human  rights and migration into the new
global development agenda and the re cognition of the protection of the
labour rights of all workers, includin g migrant workers, as a target in SDG
8 on economic growth and decent work, undertaking efforts toreinvigorate the rights-based approach to migration and development
would be most timely. The ICRM W and ILO international labour
standards, together with their resp ective supervisory systems, have an
important role to play in this endeavour.PART III: APPLICATION OF         
THE ICRMW IN SELECTED  
STATE PARTIES176Daniela Salazar 
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
Ecuador has been a party to the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of TheirFamilies (ICRMW; the Convention)  since 2002 and more recently an
enthusiastic advocate of migrant rights, as manifested by its legal
innovations; it therefore constitutes a good case study for examination ofthe Convention’s implementation
 over 25 years since its adoption by the
UN General Assembly on 18 December 1990. 
Ecuador’s ratification of the Conv ention in 2002 coincided with a time
period in which the rights of migrant workers started to gain an important
place in domestic public debate, mainly due to the large number of
Ecuadorians leaving the country. In 1999 an economic crisis created an
Ecuadorian diaspora and the ratification of treaties1 to protect migrant
1 This chapter was completed prior to the enactment of the Organic Act on Human
Mobility ( Ley Orgánica de Movilidad Humana ) in February 2017. While the chapter will
focus exclusively on the ICRMW , Ecuador is a state party to several other humanrights instruments that protect migrants’ human rights, including general human rights
instruments such as the International Cove nant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)
and the International Covenant on Economic and Social Rights (ICESR); theAmerican Convention on Human Rights (ACHR) and its Additional Protocol on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; and specific treaties on labour rights, such as
the ones approved by the ILO (No 97 and No  143 focus on migrant workers, however,
ILO’s treaties often lack a human rights perspective and focus mostly on documented
workers). Ecuador is also a party to ILO Convention No 182 concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of ChildLabour, but has yet to accede ILO Convention No 143. Ecuador is also a state party to
other treaties relevant for migrant workers’ rights such as the optional protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution andchild pornography, and on the involvement of children in armed conflict; the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, and the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants By Land, Sea and Air,among others. Finally, at a regional level, Ecuador and other countries participating in
the Andean integration process have reache d agreements that recognize the rights of
migrant workers.7CHAPTERUNIVERSAL  CITIZENS
GLOBALLY , FOREIGN
MIGRANTS  DOMESTICALLY :
DISPARITIES  IN THE
PROTECTION  OF THE RIGHTS  OF
MIGRANT  WORKERS  BY ECUADOR  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     177
workers was a necessary, coherent, an d popular step. According to Javier
Arcentales:
Ecuador ratified the ICRMW bearing in  mind those who had migrated, but at
that moment it did not take into ac count this also im plied committing to
protecting the rights of immigrants wi thin its jurisdiction … In fact, Ecuador
is known for signing and ratifying most  international human rights treaties,
without fully adopting the internal measur es to give effect to and comply with
the obligations it acquires internationa lly, as is the case with the ICRMW .2
The vast effects of the Ecuadorian diaspora, added to the radical and
overarching measures adopted by Ecuador  to protect its migrants abroad,
have led academic literature to focu s mostly on emigration from Ecuador,
paying little attention to the situatio n of immigrants in Ecuador (with the
exception of the situation of asylum seekers). However, by ratifying the
Convention, Ecuador undertook to comp ly with its provisions and to take
all the necessary measures to prot ect migrant workers’ rights. As a
consequence, the Convention’s standa rds are to guide the laws and the
judicial and administrative procedures and decisions within Ecuador.When Ecuador’s laws and policies are analysed in light of the standards of
the Convention, rather than the acad emic enthusiasm for its state-led
transnationalism, the findings are not as encouraging.
I will start this analysis with an overview of the migration context in
Ecuador, divided into sections descri bing Ecuador’s laws and policies with
regards to migrant workers leaving the country, living in the country,
passing through the country and retu rning to the country. Next, I will
make some general comments on Ecua dor’s laws and policies addressed to
migrant workers. I will then look into the relationship between Ecuador
and the Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW), the treaty body createdto supervise compliance with the Convention, as well as into the role
played by civil society using the Convention to advance the rights of
migrant workers. To conclude, I will summarise my findings regarding theparadoxes in the implementation of the ICRMW by Ecuador.
2 Migration context in Ecuador
Ecuador was not a country with a significant amount of migratory
movement until the tw entieth century. Since 2000, large numbers of
Ecuadorians have migrated to Spain, Italy, the United States and other
countries looking for work opportuni ties. At the same time, migrant
workers from the region, mostly neighbouring countries, started to cross
the border into Ecuador. Econom ic migration from Peru, added to
thousands of persons fleeing from generalised violence in Colombia,
2 Interview with Javier Arcentales, member of the national coalition for migration and
refugee issues (20 November 2015).178    Chapter 7
resulted in a tripling of Ecuador’s  foreign population between 2000 and
2001. Nowadays, Ecuador is a country of orig in, transit, destination and
return of migrant workers.  As Jokisch describes it: 
Ecuador’s geographical variety is nearly matched by its diverse migration
patterns. Although it is a small Andean  country of approximately 15.7 million
people, Ecuador accounts for the largest Latin American nationality in Spain,the second largest in Italy, and one of  the largest immigrant groups in metro
New York. Ecuador also is an import ant migrant destination. The long-
standing conflict in Colombia has driven  tens of thousands of its citizens into
Ecuador, making it the  country in Latin America with the largest refugee
population.3
These drastic changes in Ecuador’s migration context gave rise to concern
and public debate about the rights of  migrant workers. Most of the public
debate focused on the need to protect the rights of Ecuadorian migrants
abroad as well as the families they left behind. 
In 2008, Ecuador adopted its 20th Constitution. As the government
noted in its second report to the CMW:
Seven of the nine titles in the Constituti on include a total of 58 articles dealing
with the movement of persons … It goes on to state that no one shall beregarded as illegal on the basis of th eir migratory status … It advocates the
principle of universal citizenship, the free movement of all of the planet’s
inhabitants and the grad ual elimination of the differentiation between
nationals and aliens …4 
As a result of the universal citizenship principle espoused by Ecuador,
which implied the elimination of all visas to enter the country, migration
into Ecuador increased and diversifie d. While the majority of immigrants
still arrive from neighbouring count ries like Colombia and Peru, many
arrive from Cuba and Haiti.5 Additionally, waves of migrants from Asia
and Africa are also arriving, although mostly in transit looking to reach the
United States or countries like Brazil.6 Political pressure caused by the
increase in immigration led to a revers al of the decision to eliminate visas
and other entry requirements.7 Currently, thousands of migrant workers
and persons in need of internationa l protection live in Ecuador under
3 BD Jokisch ‘Ecuador: From mass emig ration to return migration?’ (2014). 
4 Ecuador’s Second Periodic Report to the CMW , CMW (26 January 2010), UN Doc
CMW/C/ECU/2 (2010) paras 32-36.
5 Instituto Nacional de Estadi?stica y Censos (INEC). Anuario de Entradas y Salidas
Internacionales (2013) and Anuario de En tradas y Salidas Internacionales (2014). 
6 See, L Feline Freier ‘Migracio?n contempora ?nea de A?frica, Asia y el Caribe hacia
Ecuador’ in OIM Cuadernos Migratorios No 5: Migrantes extracontinentales en Ame?rica del
Sur: Estudio de casos  (2013).
7 See, for example, a memorandum sent by several Congressmen demanding reforms to
the migration law and citing Correa’s order to end visa requirements as the source of
the increase in crime and insecurity in Ecuador. National Assembly. Memorando
PAN-FC-2010-165 (30 June 2010).   Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     179
irregular migratory conditions that make them vulnerable to rights
violations.8
The following sections will describe some of Ecuador’s innovative
constitutional precepts in more deta il. While appreciating the importance
of recognising rights and articulating aspirations in the Constitution, I will
address the tension between the ICRM W, the norms included in the 2008
Constitution and the laws still govern ing the rights of migrant workers in
Ecuador ‒ some of which date from the 1970s ‒ as well as the contrast
between the constitutional text and reality. 
2.1 Migrant workers leaving Ecuador
Ecuador is mainly a country of origin  of migrant workers, with a number
of waves of emigration occurring since the 1980s. Official estimates
calculated around 2 500 000 Ecuadoria ns living outside the country in
2008, both regularly and irregularly, re presenting about 18 per cent of the
national population and 38 per cent of the economically active
population.9 
The first wave of migration wa s caused by an economic crisis
following the collapse in the price of oil in the 1980s. The second wave
resulted from a major ec onomic crisis that hit Ecuador around 1999 caused
by a combination of low oil prices, flood s, political instability, inflation
and high unemployment and poverty ra tes. Data from the Department of
Homeland Security in the United States show a steady increase of
‘unauthorized immigrants’ from Ecuador in the US from 110 000 in 2000
to 210 000 in 2010.10 Thousands of Ecuadorians who migrated to Spain
benefited from a 2005 Span ish regularisation law11 that granted legal
status to nearly 200 000 Ecuadorians.12 
Although emigration rates have slowed down in recent years as a
result of the global financial econom ic crisis, the establishment of the
Schengen visa to enter Europe, and harsher measures to stop immigration
to Europe and the United States, a th ird wave of migration is imminent in
light of the current financial crisis  in the country. Budgetary dependency
8 Ecuadorinmediato. Ecuador reforzará controles a permanencia de extranjeros, miles
están en situación irregular (29 Augu st 2010) http://ecuadorinmediato.com/
index.php?module=Noticias&func=new s_user_view&id=180370&umt=ecuador_refo
rzara_controles_a_permanencia_extranjeros_miles_estan_en_situacion_irregular(accessed 31 October 2017).
9 Ecuador’s Second Periodic Report to the CMW (n 4 above) para 20.
10 B Baker & N Rytina  ‘Estimates of the unauthorized immigrant population residing in
the United States: January 2012’ (2013). 
11 Spain: Real Decreto (Royal Decree) 2393/2004 (30 December 2004). 
12 Jokisch details how from 2006 to 2013 more Ecuadorians acquired Spanish nationality
(232 645) than any other immigrant grou p, and between 2008 and 2013 Spain’s family
unification policy allowed nearly 157 000 Ecua dorians to join family members in the
country. See Jokisch (n 3 above).180    Chapter 7
on remittances may explain both the lack of public policies to discourage
emigration and the state’s emphasis on the right to migrate. According to
state figures, as of 2005, remittances amounted to approximatelyUS$ 2 billion and were thus the second-l argest item in the national balance
of payments.13 By 2007, remittances reached 3140.9 million dollars, and
by 2012 the number had fallen to a sti ll considerable figure of 2 446.4
million dollars.14 
Before the beginning of the millenn ium, migration policies adopted by
Ecuador were scarce and isolated. This started to change around the year
2000. A National Plan on Ecuadorian Migrants in Foreign Countries ( Plan
Nacional de Migrantes Ecuatorianos en el Exterior ) appeared in 2001, but the
achievement of its goals was undermine d by the allocation of insufficient
financial and human resources. In 20 02, a ‘Migrant Workers Unit’ began
to work within the Ministry of Fore ign Affairs in light of an agreement
reached with Spain to select and assist  workers in order to allow for their
legal and safe migration to Spain, base d on labour market necessities (over
5000 persons migrated temporarily to Spain under this programme
between 2002 and 2009).15
Between 1998 and 2004 there were seve ral unsuccessful proposals for
a new migration law, all of them focu sing on the protection of Ecuadorian
emigrants. At the same time, however, civil society organisations
advocating for migrant rights started to strengthen and were able to
influence the development of public poli cies in the area of migrant rights.
The signature and entry into force of the ICRMW around this time
evidenced the development of a new approach to the protection of the
rights of migrant workers. 
In 2006, Ecuadorians living abroad pa rticipated in national elections
for the first time and their situatio n was an important issue during the
campaign. Rafael Correa, as a presiden tial candidate, promised to be ‘the
government of migrants’.16 Two months after as suming power in 2007
President Correa created the National Secretariat of Migrants ( Secretaría
Nacional del Migrante  or SENAMI, its acronym in Spanish).17 The creation
of this governmental body was a supposed breakthrough in Ecuador’sapproach towards the rights of migrant workers. To highlight its
importance, this governmental depa rtment, mandated to develop and
implement Ecuador’s migration policies , was put on a ministerial level and
its authorities answered directly  to the President of Ecuador. 
13 CMW/C/ECU/2 (n 4 above) para 22.
14 Banco Central del Ecuador Evolucio?n de las remesas: Evolucio?n Anual  (2012). 
15 Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Movilidad Humana. Unidad de Trabajadores
Migratorios. Convenio para la Regulación de Flujos Migratorios entre Ecuador y
España. Información estadística. 
16 President Correa’s speeches, including his inaugural address can be found at http://
www .presidencia.gob.ec/discurs os/ (accessed 31 October 2017).
17 Executive Decree No 150, Official  Registry No 39 (12 March 2007).  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     181
The creation of SENAMI was presented by the government as one of
its major achievements, and praised by  some national and international
actors. The elevation of SENAMI to ministerial level was welcomed by the
CMW.18 At the same time, however, SENAMI has drawn criticism from
a variety of sources since its very in ception. Concern was expressed about
the weakness of this institution, its NGO-like functioning, the overlapping
of its functions with other govern mental offices and its inability to
coordinate with other institutions working on migrant rights. The CMW
recommended that Ecuador: 
[C]larify the mandates of the public admi nistration institutions that deal with
the various aspects of migration and to strengthen the National Secretariat for
Migrants as the coordina tion mechanism with a view to improving the
services provided to migrant workers and members of their families.19 
Nevertheless, this governmental de partment focused its work on the
protection of Ecuadorian migrants abroad as well as returning migrants,
neglecting migrant workers in Ecuador. Without expressly recognising anyof its failures, in June 2013 SENAMI was shut down and the Vice Ministry
of Foreign Affairs ab sorbed its mandate. 
The creation of an institution charged with the protection of migrants
was not the only step taken by the government. For example, in December2007 the government abolished the exit  permit requirement for nationals
and foreigners wishing to leave Ecuador – a measure that could also be
read as a result of the recommendation of the CMW in light of article 8 ofthe Convention.
20 Another measure adopted early on by the government
of Rafael Correa was the issuance, in December 2007, of a National
Development Plan for Migration (2007-2010). The Plan was followed bythe National Development Plans of 2009-2013 and 2013-2017 (named in
Ecuador National Plan for Good Living or Plan Nacional del Buen Vivir ), as
well as by the National Agenda for Human Mobility 2013-2017. 
Ecuador’s development plans uphold the right to migrate and include
policies aimed at fostering recogn ition and respect for sociocultural
diversity; eliminating all forms of di scrimination, including discrimination
due to a person’s status as a migran t; and protecting and promoting the
rights of Ecuadorians living abroad. The adoption of the plans and agendas
is an important step in the effort to reduce the gap between human rightson paper and in practice. Neverthele ss, the plans are weak in mechanisms
for the monitoring  of progress and for evaluation  of their achievement. As
18 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, CMW (5 December 2007), UN Doc
CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (2007) para 6.
19 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families CMW (15 December 2010), UN
Doc CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (2010) para 44. 
20 CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (n 18 above) para 22.182    Chapter 7
a result, the objectives of the plans and agenda wither because of lack of
follow-through. Lack of participatory mechanisms for the planning as well
as the monitoring and eval uation has also contributed to the limited impact
of the plans. Moreover, a common characteristic of all of these action plans
is their emphasis on the emigrant over other types of migrants in the design
of the policies.
Beyond the plans, a milestone in Ecuador’s policy towards migrants’
rights was the adoption of the 2008 Constitution. Unlike the ICRMW,
which refers to migrant workers who are documented or in a regular
situation and differentiates them from those who are non-documented orin an irregular situation, the Cons titution makes use of a different
terminology: it refers to migration as ‘human mobility’, migrants as
‘persons in situation of human mobi lity’ and emigrants as ‘Ecuadorians
abroad’. Article 40 of the Constitu tion expressly mentions: ‘no human
being shall be identified or considered illegal in light of his or her migratory
condition’. This recognition is a po sitive departure from the ICRMW and
from traditional ways of concep tualising migration. Ecuador’s
Constitution further recognises the right to migrate as well as the
progressive end of the ‘foreigner’ condition as a transforming element ofunequal relations between nations, especially North-South relations
(article 416). According to  the Constitution, the state is entrusted with
safeguarding the labour rights of Ecuadorian workers living abroad and
with establishing arrangements with other countries for the regularisation
of such workers (article 329).
While the ICRMW recognises that migrant workers shall be free to
leave any state, including their state of  origin, it also recognises possible
restrictions to this right (article 8). Ec uador’s Constitution is the first in the
world to recognise the right to migrate, apparently without any limits.
Authors like Ramirez view these cons titutional changes as a theoretical,
political and ethical proposal.
21 Indeed, nearly ten years have passed since
the adoption of the Constitution and so far these changes appear to be
merely rhetorical and, in some cases, detrimental. 
In fact, the effects of the diaspora and the emphasis on the right to
migrate are starting to appear. For ex ample, according to figures from the
Deputy Minister of Human Mobili ty, in 2014 alone some 600 Ecuadorian
unaccompanied children left the countr y to reunite with their families in
the United States, a figure three time s higher than that recorded in 2013.
In 2015, Ecuador negotiated an agreement with Mexico in order toeliminate the visa requirement for Ecuadorians to enter Mexico. Such
agreements deserve a careful analysis. Recent reports have documented
that the United States government has provided political and financial
21 JP Ramírez Gallegos La política migratoria en Ecuador. Rupturas, tensiones, continuidades y
desafíos (2013) 33-35.  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     183
support to the Mexican government for migration enforcement, especially
following the 2014 ‘surge’ of migran ts, mostly unaccompanied children
and families from Central America that arrived at the US southwest
border.22 On this account, the Sout hern Border Programme has
significantly increased migration en forcement operations, apprehensions
and deportations of migrants, lead ing to human rights violations,
kidnappings, extortion, robberies and abuses throughout Mexico. The
possibility that the elimination of  the visa requirement to Mexico
e n co u r a ge s  mo r e Ec u ad o r i an s  t o  tr a ve l  t o M e x i c o i n  or d e r  t o t h e n  r i s ktheir lives in an attempt to enter th e United States through irregular ways
is something which cannot be easily dismissed. 
As described above, some of Ecuador’s actions as a country of origin
have exceeded its consular or diplomatic protection and assistanceobligations established by the ICRMW.
23 However, in its development of
law and policy concerning Ecuadori ans who go abroad for work, Ecuador
hardly makes any referenc e to its obligations under the ICRMW. When it
comes to protecting migrant workers, Ecuador seems more excited to
appear innovative than to hono ur its international commitments.
Given that other countries do not recognise all persons as universal
citizens, instead of focusing on the right to migrate and launchingcampaigns to remind its citizens that ‘we are all migrants’, Ecuador should
comply with its duty as a country of  origin to inform migrant workers of
their rights arising out of the ICRMW,24 of the conditions of their
admission, their rights and obligation s under the law and practice of the
state concerned,25 and of the real conditions applicable to their admission,
stay and remunerated activities in the state of employment.26 
The ICRMW was adopted in the knowledge that the human problems
involved in migration are even more  serious in the case of irregular
migration. State parties have undertaken to take appropriate action in
order to prevent and eliminate clan destine movements and trafficking in
migrant workers. Under article 68 of the Convention, states must work to
prevent illegal or clandestine movements and employment of migrant
workers in an irregular situation. Ho wever, some of the measures adopted
by Ecuador seem to enco urage Ecuadorians to leave the country, even if
this could end in illegal or clandest ine movements of migrant workers, as
well as of members of their families seeking to join them. 
22 J Knippen et al An uncertain path: Justice for crimes  and human rights violations against
migrants and refugees in Mexico  (2015). 
23 ICRMW arts 16(7), 23 & 27(1)24 ICRMW art 33(1)(a).
25 ICRMW art 33(1)(b).
26 ICRMW art 37.184    Chapter 7
2.2 Migrant workers living in Ecuador 
While immigration of certain groups and nationalities can be traced back
decades – even centuries – increasing numbers of migrants started to arrive
and stay in Ecuador towards the end of the last century. Inflows arrived
mostly from Ecuador’s neighbouri ng countries Peru and Colombia.
Migrant workers are attracted by the dollarised economy. In the case of
Colombian citizens, although it is ofte n difficult to identify or distinguish
the reasons that motivate persons to migrate, most of them are forced to
leave their country due to persecutio n and generalised violence, although
not all seek or receive internationa l protection. As the CMW itself has
noted, there is in Ecuador: 
[A] high number of persons in need of international protection, notably
Colombians, who do not apply for asylum for a number of reasons (including
the fear of being deported and stri ngent documentation requirements) and
remain in a very vulnerable  and marginalized situation.27 
According to the National Director ate of Migration, around 600 000
Colombians, 320 000 Peruvians, 25 000 US citizens and 279 000
individuals from other countries resided in Ecuador in the first decade of
this century. However, these estimates are based mostly on the differencebetween those foreigners entering and those leaving the country through
authorised means, and could be an  underrepresentation of the actual
figures. In fact, available studies seem  to agree that most migrant workers
from the Caribbean, Asia and Africa are merely in transit to other
countries like the United States and Brazil.28
According to IOM, by 2011 immigrants  represented about 1,6 per cent
of the economically active population of the country.29 The majority of
migrant workers work in the informal sector, irrespective of whether they
entered or stayed in the country legally or illegally. Migrant workers
commonly act as street sellers, domestic workers, or in the construction,mining and farming industries. They are vulnerable to labour rights
violations, and lack stability and benefits such as social security. The
increase in inflows of nationalities such as Haitians,30 Cubans31 and
migrants from some African and Asia n countries occurred mostly after the
elimination of the visa requirement to enter Ecuador and the approval of
the 2008 Constitution defending the princi ples of universal citizenship, free
27 CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (n 18 above) para 28.
28 The transit-zone phenomen on known as the ‘Ecuador-Mexico-US corridor’ has been
researched by authors like S Álvarez  Velasco Confronting violence and border control along
the Ecuador-Mexico-US zone of transit  (2015). 
29 OIM Perfil Migratorio del Ecuador 2011  (2012) 65.
30 El País ‘La pequeña Haiti de Ecuador. 
31 Dirección Nacional de Promoción de la Defensoría del Pueblo de Ecuador Informe
temático: Migración cubana: Re tos para un Ecuador incluyente  (2010).  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     185
movement of all of the world’s inhabitants and the progressive end of the
condition of foreig nness (article 416).
Based on the concept of universal citizenship and the need for a human
rights approach to human mobility, several measures were adopted toregulate the stay of migrants living  in Ecuador. For example, between 2006
and 2010 Ecuador issued over 6 000 vi sas to Cuban citi zens. Ecuador also
issued a general amnesty for Haitians32 after the 2010 earthquake. A
comprehensive programme to register Colombians in Ecuadorian territory
in need of international protecti on was implemented in 2009. From 2009
to 2010 the so-called enhanced registry ( registro ampliado ) allowed for the
documentation and protection of around 30 000 persons who had fled
Colombia and were living irregularl y in Ecuador. Furthermore, in 2008 the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a resolution according to which: 
[B]y express order of the President of the Republic, starting on 20 June 2008,
citizens of any nation will be able to  enter Ecuador, without the need for a
visa, as well as to stay in Ecuador fo r 90 days, in recognition of the principle
of free movement of persons and with  the aim of strengthening relations
between Ecuador and all countries of the world, as well as to promote
tourism.33 
On the same day, a resolution was issued to eliminate the requirement of
visas for citizens of China34 and in 2009 a regularisation programme was
introduced aimed at Chinese citizens  who were in irregular status in
Ecuador.35 As Ackerman points out, the decision was not only coherent
with the principle of free movement of persons, but also with the country’seconomic goals.36 While such measures could be read as compliance with
the ICRMW obligation to eliminate situations where migrant workers are
in an irregular situation within their territory,37 the ICRMW was not
mentioned as a basis for these decisions. 
The ICRMW specifically acknowledges the importance and
usefulness of bilateral and multilateral agreements in the protection of
migrants’ rights.38 Bilateral agreements were entered with Peru and
Venezuela to regulate labour migr ation between these countries and
Ecuador. There are also several region al integration initiatives in place,
32 Executive Decree 248, Official Registry No  136 (24 February 2010); amendment to the
Migration Law, Official Registry (S) 175 (20 April 2010). About 400 Haitians
benefitted from this measure.
33 Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Comercio e Integración, ‘Eliminación de visas de
turismo para ingresar al Ecuador’ Press Release No 398 issued on 11 June 2008.
34 Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Comercio e Integración ‘Eliminación de visas
para ciudadanos chinos’ Press Re lease No 396 issued on 11 June 2008.
35 Consejo Consultivo de Política Migratoria,  Resolution No 001-20 09, Official Registry
38 (1 October 2009).
36 AS Ackerman La ley, el orden y el caos: Construcción social del Estado y el inmigrante en
Ecuador  (2014) 102.
37 ICRMW art 69(2).
38 ICRMW Preamble.186    Chapter 7
such as the Andean Passport39 and the Andean Labour Migration
Instrument.40 The attempts to facilitate migratory movements between
Andean countries, however, privilege the movement of businessmen andentrepreneurs. Additionally, one of the goals of Unasur, of which Ecuador
has been a member since 2011, is cooper ation in migration matters in order
to achieve Latin-American integrat ion. More recently, the Residence
Agreement for Mercosur associated countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Paraguay, Uruguay, Bolivia, Colombia and Peru) allows citizens of these
countries to apply for temporary or permanent residence visas, known asMercosur visas.
41 While recognising the important labour mobility
processes and the regulated migration programmes arranged by the
Ecuadorian state, there is still a lack of comprehensive migrationregularisation policy that is accessib le to all migrant workers and members
of their families in an irregular situ ation and satisfies the principle of non-
discrimination, as the CMW has noted.42 Furthermore, despite all these
efforts, Ecuador has been unable to  eliminate employment of migrant
workers in an irregular situatio n, as provided for by the ICRMW.43 The
estimates of irregular migrants working in the country are still high.
Although official figures are inconsistent, difficult to gather, and do
not take into account those who en ter or leave the country through
irregular channels, it is safe to say that migration into Ecuador increased
as a result of these measures. However, the elimination of visarequirements in 2008 was immediately associated with an increase in
insecurity in Ecuador. Political pressure led to revision of this measure,
which remained in force for only two years. Furthermore, events such as
the Angostura bombing by Colombian forces in Ecuadorian territory in
March 2008 impacted Ecuador’s polici es towards migrants. The need to
control borders and provide for security in the state began to prevail overthe call for universal citizenship. 
After determining the existence of a migratory influx coming from the
Middle East and Africa, migration authorities re-established visa
requirements for certain national ities. In December 2009, Ecuador
imposed a visa requirement on citi zens of China. In September 2010,
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Nepal, Nigeria,
Pakistan and Somalia joined the list,
44 with more countries continuing to
be added. The presentation of an invitation letter started to be required of
Cuban and Haitian citizens, and the requirement of proof of a clean
39 Andean Council of Foreign Ministers, Decision 504, Crea tion of the Andean Passport
(22 June 2001).
40 Andean Council of Foreign Ministers, Decision 545, Crea tion of the Andean Passport
(25 June 2003).
41 See Official Registry No 209 (21 Marc h 2014) and Ministerial Agreement No 000031
(2 April 2014).
42 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) paras 33 and 34.
43 ICRMW art 68(2)
44 Ministerial Agreement 105 (3 September 2010).  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     187
criminal record (which had been ab olished in the past) was reinstituted45
for Colombian citizens despite the CMW’s view that the practice of asking
a criminal record exclusively to Co lombian migrants, may contribute to
their stigmatisation and stereotyping.46 As a result, despite initial measures
adopted in furtherance of the princi ples of universal citizenship and
unrestricted human mobility, important numbers of migrants – themajority of them Cubans, Haitians and Colombians ‒ currently live in an
irregular situation in Ecuador, facing exploitation and human rights
violations. A similar regression from the same constitutional principles
affected the situation of refugees.
The ambiguities of the universal ci tizenship concept can be found in
the Constitution itself. Immediately after upholding the right to migrate
and determining that no human being shall be considered illegal in light ofhis or her migration status, article 40 reveals that the emphasis of this
declaration was always on Ecuadorian s abroad: it establishes a series of
measures that the state ought to undertake to support the rights of migrantsliving abroad regardless of the person ’s regular or irregular migrant status
but remains silent with regard to measures to be adopted by the state aimed
at protecting migrants in Ecuador, regardless of their migration status.Similarly, addressing migrant worker s specifically, article 329.5 of the
Constitution establishes that the state will ensure respect for labour rights
of Ecuadorian migrant workers abroad and will promote agreements andcovenants with other countries to ac hieve their regularisation. However,
there is no equivalent provision for the protection of migrant workers in
Ecuador. 
Perhaps a more significant although somewhat disregarded measure
was the recognition by the 2008 Constitu tion of political participation of
Ecuadorian migrants, in compliance with articles 41 and 42 ICRMW.
While they had already participated in the 2006 elections, the Constitution
acknowledged them as important political actors beyond their right to
vote. As a result, migrants currently  have six seats representing them
47 in
the National Assembly through whic h they could, in theory, advance
legislation for the protection of migrants’ rights.
Despite the adoption of the ICRMW and the ambitious changes
included in the Constitution, legi slation focusing on security and
sovereignty is still in fo rce. Ecuadorian legislation on migration issues can
be traced back to the end of the nine teenth century. Historically, laws in
Ecuador established who could enter or stay in the country based on theactivities they perform as well as their physical characteristics. The
45 Executive Decree 667, Official Registry 397 (3 March 2011). 
46 CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (n 18 above) para 19.47 Ecuadorians living abroad can elect representatives for the following regions:
(i) United States and Canada; (ii) Europe, Asia and Oceania; (iii) Latin America, the
Caribbean and Africa.188    Chapter 7
legislation in force at time of writing – Ley de Extranjería  and Ley de
Migración –  dates from 1971. These laws  still focus on controlling
immigration to ensure that only those who can contribute to the economic,social and cultural development of the country are allowed in. As
Ackerman points out, the legal categories in force still allow the state to
exclude ‘the undesirable’ from residing in the country.48 The current law
expressly recognises that there is a national interest in regulating a selective
immigration of foreigners. 
In 200749 and 2010,50 the CMW noted with concern that a number of
provisions in the national legislation were at variance with the provisions
of the Convention. However, selectivit y, control, security and sovereignty,
rather than human rights, are still gu iding migration init iatives and policies
in Ecuador. The case of Manuela Picq, a French-Brazilian academic whohad been working as a professor fo r a private university in Ecuador
illustrates how despite the ratification  of the Convention and the adoption
of a new Constitution, obsolete legi slation is still applied by migration
authorities and lawyers when deci ding cases. Professor Picq was
peacefully participating in anti-gov ernment protests in August 2015 when
the police detained her. While in po lice custody, migration authorities
cancelled her working visa,51 following which she was sent to a detention
centre for irregular migrants until a judge could order her deportation.
Four days later, the judge refused to deport her, in light of theinconsistencies between the police reports and the videos of her
detention.52 However, her visa remained  cancelled. She presented a
constitutional claim to question the cancellation of her visa. Despite thefact that there was no evidence of a crime committed by Manuela Picq, the
judge in charge of revising the canc ellation of the visa was persuaded by
the state’s argument that the laws do not provide for a specific procedurefor the cancellation of her visa and that this matter is an exercise of the
state’s discretion and sovereignt y where human rights (including
provisions of the Constitution, the ICRMW and others cited by herdefence) were not relevant for such a decision.
53 Professor Picq had no
option but to leave the country of universal citizenship after the state left
her as an irregular migrant because of her participation in an anti-government protest. Manue la Picq has applied for other visas to return to
Ecuador after this incident, but a fina l negative decision has been made by
the Ecuador.54 
48 AS Ackerman (n 36 above) 23.
49 CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (n 18 above) paras 8 & 9.50 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) para 15.
51 Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Movilidad Humana, Viceministerio de
Movilidad Humana, Coordinación Zonal 9 de la Unidad de Migración, Oficio No 23UM-C29-MREMH (14 August 2015).
52 Unidad Judicial Primera de Contravencio nes del Cantón Quito (17 August 2015) Case
No 17151-2015-00685.
53 Juicio Especial No 17203201512020 (25 August 2015).
54 Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Movilidad Humana, Oficio No 3-8-08-CECU-
RJ-2015 (18 September 2015).  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     189
Ramírez explains that the human rights focus of the Constitution does
not immediately change the security an d control focus that  historically has
guided the Ecuadorian state on migration matters.55 While acknowledging
that migration law, procedures and policies cannot be modified
immediately to reflect the human rights focus of a new Constitution or to
implement international obligations acquired under a treaty, over sevenyears had passed since the adoption of  the Constitution and over 13 since
ratification of the ICRMW before new legislation was finally proposed in
July 2015.56 
Despite the CMW’s recommendation to ‘adopt as soon as possible the
Human Mobility Act’ in order to en sure in practice the rights and
principles recognised by the Constitution and by the Convention,57 the
Organic Act on Human Mobility ( Ley Orgánica de Movilidad Humana ) is still
a draft subject to modifications at time  of writing. Some of its provisions
are worth mentioning as illustrative  of a broader tendency in Ecuador’s
approach to migration. 
The proposed law draws upon the principles of universal citizenship,
free human mobility and progressive en d of the foreigner condition (article
4), and at the same time seeks to re gulate the entry, transit and exit of
individuals from the national terri tory and control their permanent or
temporary stay in the country (article  3). In open contradiction with the
universal citizenship ideal, the law li sts those foreigners who shall not be
permitted to enter or stay in Ecuador ian territory (article 28). Permanent
residence is offered in a short list of  cases that evidences the continuation
of selective migration crit eria (article 57). The law further identifies certain
conduct as immigration offences and de termines that such offences shall
be brought before a judge of minor criminal offences ( juez de
contravenciones ) and decided in light of a procedure established in the
Criminal Code (articles 17 and 18). The prohibition of detention only
protects victims of crimes against migrants, such as trafficking in persons
(article 148). 
With regards to migrant workers, the proposed Act does not mention
migrants arriving in Ecuador as a motivation for issuing the law. Its
language fails to recognise migrant workers and their families in its
territory, establishing only that labour  authorities shall ensure that public
and private institutions guarantee the ri ghts of ‘foreign personnel’ working
in Ecuador (article 40). Meanwhile, those who have the ‘migrant worker
condition as defined by in ternational instruments ratified by Ecuador’ are
recognised as emigrants (article 44) . Throughout the law, measures to
55 Ramírez Gallegos (n 21 above) 49.
56 Draft Organic Act on Human Mobility ( Proyecto de Ley Orgánica de Movilidad Humana ),
National Assembly, presented on 16 July 2015. 
57 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) para 16.190    Chapter 7
protect the rights of migrant workers are focused on Ecuadorians working
abroad. 
According to the ICRMW, there are some minimum standards that
state parties must observe in respec t of migrant workers and members of
their families, irrespective of their mi gration status. Furthermore, in light
of article 7 of the ICRMW, state part ies undertake to secure human rights
to all migrant workers ‘without di stinction of any kind’. Similarly,
according to Ecuador’s Constitution, all individuals have access to all
rights irrespective of their migration status. Article 28 of the Constitution
provides that migrant workers and members of their families have the right
to receive any medical care that is urgently required for the preservation of
their life.  Some important measures have been adopted by the state to
ensure that foreigners can access health, education and other rights
provided for in the Constitution. To  mention an example, Ministerial
Decision No 337/2008, guarantees access to pre-school, primary and
secondary education for children, in cluding adolescents, of migrant
workers, regardless of their migration status. 
However, such measures  have only been partially successful due to
rampant discriminatory practices affecting migrants in Ecuador. Although
new laws –including criminal legislation ‒ have been issued to penalise
discriminatory practices, de facto  discrimination is still the prevalent reality.
As a result, undocumented migrant work ers still face enormous barriers in
accessing education, health, employment and housing. It is not infrequent
to find cases like the one of José Benalcázar and Johana Leyton, a family
of Afro-descendant asylum seekers from Colombia whose new-born died
because hospital authorities claime d there were no more beds for
Colombians and insisted that they re turn to Colombia (a country where
they feared persecution).58 As mentioned by Ackerman:
[A]lthough after 2008 ther e is an emphasis in the official discourse on non-
discrimination of foreigners and their fa ir treatment – a discourse that implies
the non-existence of desirable and non-de sirable foreigners – the state’s goals
in regional integration do not allow for the elimination of the concept of
desirable and non-de sirable foreigners.59 
While in comparison with other count ries in Latin America the so-called
‘burden’ of foreigners over the total population is low (around 1 per cent),
the sudden increase of hundreds of th ousands of foreigners in the country,
which peaked in the first decade of the century, clashed with Ecuadorians’
perceptions of their society. Despite the repeated recommendations of the
58 Defensoría del Pueblo, Trámite Defensorial Nro 271-2015-VC.
59 Ackerman (n 36 above) 98 (Not  an official translation).  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     191
CMW,60 a generally negative image of fo reigners working in Ecuador is
still prevalent amongst the majority of the population, the media and even
the authorities, mainly in relation to Colombians, Peruvians, Cubans and
Chinese whereby they are associated with lack of safety, violence,
prostitution or access to employment  to the detriment of Ecuadorians.61
The state has done little to preven t xenophobic practices and reactions,
discriminatory attitudes and social st igmatisation. In fa ct, the state has
itself adopted measures that contribute to stigma and stereotyping.62
Particularly alarming is the recu rrent use of racial profiling in
immigration and law enforcement activities. Immigration and policeauthorities still have broad stop an d search powers and use racial and
socio-economic profiling to target  Colombian, Cuban, Haitian and
African persons who have entered or  stayed irregularly. Women sex
workers are particularly vulnerable to  raids, deprivation of liberty and
deportation measures.63
The CMW has reiterated its reco mmendation to Ecuador to ensure
that migration procedures, includin g deportation and expulsion, are in
accordance with article 22 of the Convention and that they are exceptional
procedures of an administrative natu re and are not handled by the criminal
justice system.64 The new criminal code, issued in 2014, reformed articles
24 and 31 of the Migration Law to provide for detention of those awaiting
deportation, thus criminalising migration. Deportation is only
theoretically a non-criminal procedure;  in practice, however, persons to be
deported are criminalised , face long periods of detention, and are not
guaranteed enough procedural safeguards , contrary to the provisions of the
Convention and the recommendations of the CMW.
60 The CMW has reiterated its concern about the discriminatory attitudes and social
stigmatisation from which migrant w orkers may suffer. CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (n 18
above) para 19 and CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) para 23. On lack of measures
to combat any tendency to stereotype or stigmatise migrant workers, and the linkbetween migrants and crime, see: Concluding Observatio ns on the combined 20th to
22nd periodic reports of Ecuador, CERD (22 October 2012), UN Doc CERD/C/
ECU/CO/20-22 (2012) paras 15 and 23. On intersectional di scriminati on, see:
Concluding Observations on the combined eighth and ninth periodic reports of
Ecuador, CEDA W (10 March 2015), UN Doc CEDA W/C/ECU/CO/8-9 (2015) para
10.
61 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) paras 23-26.
62 Such as the reinstitution of the requirement of a criminal record exclusively to
Colombian migrants or the resolutions issued by the Civil Registry impose obstaclesfor the registration of children born in Ecuador when their parents are irregular
migrants (Civil Registry Reso lution No-DIGERCIC-DAJ-2010-000213 and
Resolution No-DIGERCIC-DAJ-2010-000214 (16 July 2010). 
63 Comisión Interinstitucional de Verificación Informe de Verificación sobre las Condiciones
de Detención de Personas Privadas de la Libertad en el Marco de Operativos de Identificación de
Irregulares en la Ciudad De Quito  (2010). Cited in: IACHR Hearing on the Situation of
asylum seekers and refugees in Ecuador,  Information presented by the petitioners, 146
Period of Sessions (2012).
64 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) paras 29 and 30.192    Chapter 7
In spite of the constitutional prov ision providing that no human being
is illegal, legal provisions in force gi ve the police the power to prevent and
punish clandestine migration.65 In 2009, the Migration Act was
amended66 in order to regulate arrest , detention and prosecution of
foreigners accused of committing crim es in Ecuador. Amendments to this
law introduced in 201167 request foreigners to obtain state-issued
documentation ( censo ), which allows the state to monitor foreigners living
in Ecuador and to sanction those who do not comply with this
requirement. Article 37 of the Migration Law punished those who try tore-enter the country after being depo rted and those who forge migration
documentation with six months to three years of prison.68 The new
criminal code adopted in 2014 eliminat ed the provision of article 37 but
provided for the expulsion and prohibition of return to the territory (for ten
years) for all foreigners punished wi th sanctions of over five years of
imprisonment (article 61). The contra st between constitutional principles
designed to protect migrants’ rights and the restrictive and criminalising
measures adopted by the state have been characterised by authors like
Arcentales as schizophrenic.69 
The aim of the new constitutional regime, according to authors like
Ramírez, was to impede expulsion fr om Ecuadorian territory based on
migrant status, as well as to prevent deprivation of liberty based on the lack
of compliance with administrative requirements.70 In reality, as a result of
laws and practices that conflict with constitutional aspiration, thousands of
exclusions, deportations and detention of migrants are still occurring in
Ecuador, the country of universal citizenship.71 
With regards to detention conditio ns, in 2011 the government started
to host some migrants facing deport ation at detention centres different
from prisons for ordinary criminal offences. In Quito, they are detained at
‘Hotel Carrión’, which was adapted for th is purpose. In this regard, article
17 of the ICRMW provides that any migrant worker who is detained for
violation of provisions relating to migration shall be held, in so far as
practicable, separately from convicted persons or persons detainedpending trial. While the separation of migrants from persons who are being
criminally prosecuted is desirable an d in accordance with the Convention,
65 Ley de Migración Prevenir y reprimir la migración clandestina  (art 4 num III).
66 Law 0, Official Registry (S) 544 (9 March 2009).
67 Executive Decree 799, Oficial Registry 485 (6 July 2011).
68 Codificación de la Ley de Migración,  Official Registry No 563 (12 April 2005).
69 J Arcentales ‘Derechos de las Personas en Movilidad Humana en el año 2011’ (2011)
115. 
70 Ramírez Gallegos (n 21 above) 35.71 See CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) para 29; IACHR ‘Hearing on the Situation of
asylum seekers and refugees in Ecuador’ Information presented by the petitioners, 146
Period of Sessions (2 November 2012) para  27; Coalicio?n por las Migraciones y el
Refugio, Defensori?a del Pueblo, Casa de Movilidad Humana, INREDH & SJRM
Informe de verificacio?n sobre las condiciones de detencio?n de personas privadas de la libertad en
el marco de operativos de identificacio?n de irregulares, en la ciudad de Quito  (2010).  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     193
the mere existence of this detention centre is a step back from the free
human mobility policy allegedly in fo rce in the Ecuador. Furthermore, the
detention conditions in this centre  are extremely poor, prison-like and
unsafe.72 
The lack of coherence between constitutional norms providing for
universal citizenship and free human mobility, international treaties
protecting migrant workers, and le gislation permitting detention and
deportation of individuals in irregu lar status is abundantly evident and
troubling. 
2.3 Migrant workers passing through Ecuador
Migration figures show si gnificant numbers of migrants in transit through
Ecuador. For example, in 2011 alon e 2 545 Haitians entered Ecuador and
2 520 left the country. Most of them stayed in Ecuador awaiting visas to
work in Brazil. Coyotes have also take n advantage of the flexible migration
laws in Ecuador during the last year s. As a result, thousands of migrants
have used a new route that starts in  Ecuador and uses Colombia to reach
Central America, cross the Mexican border and end up in the United
States. According to re cent investigations,73 migrants from all continents
use this route, although a majority  come from Cuba, Bangladesh, Nepal,
India and China. 
Ecuador is also a country of transit of human-trafficking victims.74 A
series of norms have been issued to combat this practice and protect its
victims. Article 66, paragraph 29(b) of the Constitution prohibits slavery,
exploitation, servitude, human traffick ing and people smuggling in all their
forms. Article 213 of the Criminal Co de in force since 2014 punishes the
illicit transit of migrants with seven to ten years of deprivation of liberty.
In 2006, a National Plan against Human Trafficking75 was issued.
Awareness campaigns have been implemented and authorities have
reported increased numbers of traffi cking prosecutions and convictions
and reported identifying a large numbe r of trafficking victims. However,
insufficient human, economic, and techni cal resources have been allocated
to eradicate and punish this practice and to reduce demand for forced
labour. Furthermore, the state’s deportation practices addressed to sex
workers fail to consider their po ssible status as victims of human
trafficking. Trafficking victims are o ften criminalised and the state still
72 Professor Manuela Picq, who was detained in this ‘hotel’, denounced the prison
conditions of migrants detained with her awaiting deportation. Her criticisms included
indefinite detention, restrictions on visitations, limited yard time, and poor healthconditions.
73 Discovery en Español Documentary ‘Colombia: La nueva frontera’  (2015).
74 US Department of State  Trafficking in persons report 2014: Ecuador  (2014)  161-162. 
75 The full name of the Plan in Spanish is Plan Nacional para Combatir la Trata de Personas,
Tráfico Ilegal de Migrantes, Explotación Sexual Laboral y otros modos de Explotación de
Mujeres, Niños, Niñas y Adolescentes, Porn ografía Infantil y Corrupción de Menores .194    Chapter 7
takes a punitive approach rather th an a human rights-based approach to
address their situation.76 
With regards to Ecuador’s efforts to combat trafficking in persons, the
CMW has expressed its concern about the lack of institutional
coordination was well as shortcomings in the provision of protection and
care for victims of trafficking. Addi tionally, it has expressed its concern
about cases of deportation involving foreign victims of trafficking and
recommended Ecuador to take further measures to combat trafficking in
persons, including formulating a pl an focusing exclusively on human
trafficking; adopting laws and regu lations to ensure implementation of
legislation to combat human traffickin g; developing trai ning to strengthen
the capacities of the police; collect ing data in order to better combat
trafficking in persons; ensuring that  those responsible for trafficking in
persons are tried and appropriately punished; and intensifying campaigns
for the prevention of irregular migration.77
Beyond human trafficking, under the ICRMW Ecuador as a state of
transit, is required to work towards the prevention and elimination ofillegal or clandestine movements, adopting measures such as detecting and
eradicating illegal or clandestine movements of migrant workers and
imposing sanctions on persons, groups  or entities which organise, operate
o r  a s s i s t  i n  o r g a n i s i n g  o r  o p e r a t i n g  s u c h  m o v e m e n t s .  H o w e v e r ,  d e s p i t e
reports documenting that Ecuador is a part of a clandestine route to the
United States, the number of migrants  passing through Ecuador with the
aim of entering irregularly into the United States keeps growing. For
example, since Ecuador is one of the only countries where Cubans are
allowed to travel (provided they have  an invitation letter), thousands of
Cubans travel to Ecuador seeking to  reach the United States. Thousands
of them are currently stranded in Panama, Costa Rica and other Central
American countries.78 
One cannot help but wonder: were th e consequences of the open door
policy sufficiently considered? Is Ec uador complying with its Convention
obligations to consult and co-operate with other countries with a view to
promoting sound, equitable and human e conditions in connection with
international migration?79 I s  E c u a d o r  p a y i n g  d u e  r e g a r d  t o  t h e  s o c i a l ,
economic, cultural and other needs of migrant workers, as well as to the
consequences of such migratio n for the communities concerned?80 
76 On human trafficking in Ecuador, see: E Buitrón Estudio sobre el Estado de la Trata de
Personas en Ecuador  (2011).
77 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 4 above) paras 49-51.
78 See: Panampost ‘Tránsito de inmigrantes cubanos por Panamá aumentó 294% en 5
años’ (17 September 2015); BBC ‘Por qué ha y 1.600 cubanos varados en Costa Rica?’
(14 November 2015).
79 ICRMW art 64(1).
80 ICRMW art 64(1).  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     195
2.4 Migrant workers returning to Ecuador
The ICRMW requires state parties to co-operate as appropriate in the
adoption of measures regarding the orderly return of migrant workers to
the state of origin: (a) when they decide  to return or (b) their authorisation
of residence or employment expires or  (c) when they are in the state of
employment in an irregular situation.81 According to the Convention,
state parties shall cooperate with other st ates with a view to facilitating the
durable social and cultural reintegrat ion in the state of origin only with
regards to migrant workers in a regular situation.82 The Convention also
confers on migrant workers the right to  transfer their earnings, savings and
personal effects and belongings. In keeping with these obligations, and
even going beyond them, Ecuador’s 2008 Constitution establishes the state
duty to offer guarantees for voluntar y return of migrants, irrespective of
their situation as documented or undocumented workers, and regardless of
the reasons for their return. Furtherm ore, according to the constitutional
provisions, incentives are to be provid ed in order to encourage migrants to
repatriate their savings and assets so that savings may be directed towards
quality investments in production (article 338). 
Ecuador’s development plan, discusse d above in section 2.1, upholds
the right to a sustainable, voluntary return with dignity and seeks to create
conditions that facilitate migrants’ reintegration within the workforce and
production sector upon their return to Ecuador. Specific programmes havebeen implemented to realise the plan’s goals. The ‘ Bienvenid@s a Casa ’
(Welcome Home) Plan, for example, is  an assistance programme aimed at
encouraging the voluntary return of Ecuadorian migrants. The plan
includes measures to facilitate the return to Ecuador of migrants, their
belongings and work equipment. The plan is paired with productivity
incentives, loans and non-refundable funds for entrepreneurs such as the
‘Fondo Cucayo’. Through its return plans, the state recognised migrants as
agents of development and sought to facilitate their trip back as well as
their search for jobs and entreprene urial activities to guarantee the
sustainability of their return.
According to the 2010 census, one in every four Ecuadorians who
migrated between 2001 and 2010 had re turned. SENAMI reported that,
since the beginning of 2008 to August 2011, 14 623 Ecuadorians returned
home with the assistance of the Welc ome Home Plan. More recent reports
by the governmental news agency affirmed that more than 37 000
Ecuadorian migrants had returned  home through the Welcome Home
Plan. Other plans have also been implemented by the government to
encourage the return of Ecuadorian migrant workers. For example, over athousand Ecuadorian doctors have retu rned to the country as part of a
81 ICRMW art 67(1).
82 ICRMW art 67(2).196    Chapter 7
programme entitled ‘Healthy Ecuador Plan’ ( Plan Ecuador Saludable ).83 In
the paragraphs justifying the introdu ction of a new human mobility law,
Assembly members mention approximately 70 000 returnedEcuadorians.84 
It is difficult to say whether the re turn of migrant workers has been a
result of Ecuador’s policies such as the ‘ Bienvenid@s a Casa ’ plan, or of the
global crisis combined with harsher migration control policies indestination countries. Ramírez believes  that there have been more forced
than voluntary returnees.85 In fact, the National Directorate of Migration
reported that between 2005 and 2011,  19 424 Ecuadorians were deported,
with the United States, Mexico and Spain being the three main expelling
states.
Clearly, different factors push migrants to return to Ecuador. Some
return voluntarily or for family re asons while others are deported. The
global financial crisis affecting countri es like Spain also triggered the return
of migrant workers. Harsher migratio n controls and policies have also
resulted in the return of migran ts. In any case, as pointed out by
Margheritis with regards to Ecuador’s  initiatives aimed at promoting the
return of migrants, although: 
It is unclear if these efforts have enticed Ecuadorians who were not already
planning to return … the initiative  marks a significant departure from
previous administrations in focusing on the diaspora.86 
The voluntary repatriation programm es for migrant workers and members
of their families implemented by Ecuador received the attention of the
international community. However, espe cially after the elimination of the
SENAMI and the budgetary cuts for such programmes, migrant workers
who returned have repo rted complete abandonment by the government
and are experiencing harsh living conditions in Ecuador.87 The draft law
on human mobility establishes the state’s obligation to give priority
attention to Ecuadorians who are forced to return as opposed to those who
return voluntarily (article 68).88
83 El Telégrafo ‘El Plan Ecuador Saludable ha repatriado a 1.087 médicos ecuatorianos’
(12 July 2015). 
84 Draft Organic Act on Human Mobility ( Proyecto de Ley Orgánica de Movilidad Humana ),
National Assembly, presented on 16 July 2015, Exposición de motivos. 
85 Ramírez Gallegos (n 21 above) fn 3
86 A Margheritis ‘Todos somos migrantes (We are all migrants): The paradoxes of
innovative state-led transnationalism in Ecuador’ (2011) 5 International Political
Sociology  198.
87 See public television interv iew with Rafael Barba, representative of the association of
returned migrants in Ecuador aired on 18 June 2015 http://linkis.com/N7xii
(accessed 1 November 2017). See also El Diar io ‘Migrantes retornados aseguran que
ofrecimientos del Plan Retorno no se ha n cumplido’ (18 August 2015) http://www .
eldiario.ec/noticias-manabi-ecuador/ 365128-migrantes-retornados-aseguran-que-
ofrecimientos-del-plan-retorno-no-se-h an-cumplido/ (accessed 1 November 2017).
88 Draft Organic Act on Human Mobility (n 84 above).   Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     197
Furthermore, as pointed out by Joki sch: ‘The Correa administration’s
state-led transnationalism may have been designed more  to continue the
flow of remittances  than to actually encourage permanent return
migration’.89 Along the same lines, Margheri tis explains that the reliance
of the Ecuadorian economy on remittances as a second source of foreign
exchange, and the limited capacity to offer jobs and good wages topotential returnees, cast doubt on the viability and desirability of voluntary
repatriation programmes.90 When evaluating Ecuador, the CMW noted
with interest the voluntary repatria tion programmes for migrant workers
and members of their families develo ped by Ecuador, but regretted the lack
of involvement of those persons in drawing up such programmes.91
3 Ecuador before the Committee on Migrant 
Workers
The ICRMW was ratified by Ecuador in 2002. The Convention entered
into force in 2003, after it was ratified by 20 states, since which timeEcuador should have effectively impl emented the obligations established
by the Convention, as well as the recommendations issued by the CMW.
Since its establishment in 2004, th e CMW has examined Ecuador twice.
The third set of concluding observations will be issued following the
submission of Ecuador’s third report in May 2017.
In its concluding observations  of 2007 and 2010, the Committee
recognised the progress made by Ecuador in protecting the rights of itsnationals abroad. At the same time, the Committee identified major
challenges faced by Ecuador. The Co mmittee’s concluding observations
also reiterated most of the recommendations included in its firstconcluding observations, evidencing Ecuador’s lack of compliance with
the Committees’ initial evaluation of  Ecuador. Similar recommendations
have been issued by other UN human rights bodies, including
conventional
92 and extra conventional mechanisms.93 
89 Jokisch (n 3 above).
90 A Margheritis (n 86 above).
91 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) para 45.92 See Concluding Observations of the Committee against Torture: Ecuador, CAT
(7 December 2010), UN Doc CAT/C/ECU/CO/4-6 (2010), Recommendation 14;
and Concluding Observations of the Committee on the third periodic report ofEcuador as approved by the Committee at its forty-ninth session (14-30 November
2012), CESCR (13 December 2012), UN Doc E/C.12/ECU/CO/3 (2012).
93 See Report to the Human Rights Commis sion in pursuance of resolution 2001/52:
Addendum Mission to Ecuador UN Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants Gabriela Rodri?guez Pizarro (18 February 2002), UN Doc E/CN.4/2002/
94/Add.1 (2002). Also, Honduras and Iraq made recommendations to Ecuador during
its last universal periodic review, which were accepted by the state during its
examination: Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review:
Ecuador, HRC (5 July 2012), UN Doc A/HRC/21/4 (2012) para 135.198    Chapter 7
While in its first evaluation the CMW welcomed the information that
civil society organisations were involved in the preparation of the state’s
initial report,94 in 2010 the CMW expressed its concern about the limited
participation of civil society and no n-governmental organisations in the
implementation of the Convention, including in the drafting of reports.
The Committee encouraged Ecuador to  c o n s i d e r  m o r e  a c t i v e  w a y s  o f
systematically involving civil societ y and non-governmental organisations
in the implementation of the Convention and the preparation of the
reports.95 
Ecuadorian civil society’s advocacy  efforts during the Constituent
Assembly96 translated into drastic constitutional changes adopted by the
state. But the collaboration between civil society and the government did
not last long. For example, after se veral initiatives by civil society to
collaborate with the state in the drafti ng of legislation coherent with the
constitutional mandates as well as th e international obligations under the
ICRMW the proposed Organic Act on Human Mobility, now officiallybefore the National Assembly, stemmed from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and had very limited pa rticipation from civil society.97 
Civil society has played a fundam ental role in documenting and
highlighting the variety of issues affecting migrant workers in Ecuador.Their efforts to document the challenges faced by migrant workers and
advocate for their rights are much  more pronounced than in other
humanrights areas in Ecuador. This is an enormous advantage that thestate has not fully understood. Despite the fact that the Constitution
mandates the state to coordinate its actions with civil society working on
human mobility issues nationally an d internationally (article 392) the
government continues to neglect th e views of civil society working on
migration issues and has not recognised the role that civil society could
play in promoting the effective implementation of the ICRMW. 
Another matter that has hampered th e work of the Committee is the
lack of official figures and estimates on migration issues, according to
Javier Arcentales, a member of the Coalition for Migration and Refugee
Issues in Ecuador.
98 The CMW has systematically encouraged states to
better understand the situation of migrants in their country through the
collection and analysis of statistical data, noting that the absence of data
means that public policies will fail  to meet the needs of the intended
94 CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (n 18 above) para 6(d).
95 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) paras 21 and 22.
96 The Constituent Assembly convened on 29 November 2007 to draft a new
constitution, which was approv ed by the Assembly in July 2008 and by popular vote in
September 2008.
97 Greater detail on the relationship between civil society and the government, described
in this paragraph, is available here: Coalición por las Migraciones y el Refugio Análisis
del Proyecto de Ley de Movilidad Humana  (2015). 
98 An initiative composed of civil society organisations and individual professionals who
joined together in 2006 to prom ote and defend the rights of  persons in hu man mobility.  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     199
beneficiaries.99 With regards to Ecuador, the CMW has regretted the lack
of information on the different crit eria for evaluating the effective
implementation of the Convention, part icularly in relation to migrants in
transit, migrant women, unaccompanied migrant children and cross-
border and seasonal migrant workers.100 
The last census, carried out in 2010,  is an important yet out-dated
source. The information produced by SENAMI (when it still existed), and
the Ministries of Labour, Foreign Affairs and Interior is scarce,
inconsistent and incomplete. The Ministry of Interior produces the most
up-to-date information; however, it  only registers migration movements
but its system is not able to provide information on whether some of those
movements originate from the same person. Official figures do not show
the complexity of reasons for migrat ion, immigration, and transit and
return. Furthermore, there are insufficient efforts to document and
estimate irregular migration moveme nts. Without these studies, any
evaluation of the success of Ecua dor’s laws and policies addressing
migrant workers is incomplete. 
A point also needs to be made with  regards to Ecuador’s participation
in the Committee. State parties to the ICRMW have consistently elected
Ecuadorian citizens as members of the CMW. While the appointment ofsome diplomatic officers like Fran cisco Carrión-Mena, given his academic
record, was not questioned, the most recent appointment has raised serious
concerns. In June 2015, state parties to the ICRMW elected MaríaLandázuri as a member of the Committee. Ms Landázuri acted as the
highest national authority on migration matters within the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs at the same time as she acted as a member of theCommittee, which cast doubt on th e independence of the Committee
when reviewing the compliance of Ecuador under the ICRMW. 
According to the Convention, members of the Committee shall both
be elected and serve in their personal capacity.
101 Is it possible for someone
like Ms Landázuri to avoid conflict between her former official role as
Ecuador’s highest migration authority and a member of the Committee? In
such a situation, when one of its members is responsible for Ecuador’s
policies and actions with regards to migrant workers, is the Committee in
a position to objectively and fairly ev aluate Ecuador’s compliance with the
Convention? Ms Landázuri signed, for example, memorandums102
denying Professor Manuela Picq a visa  that would allow her to return to
Ecuador. The grounds cited by Ms La ndázuri to reject her application
99 In April 2013, the CMW discusse d the role of migration stat istics for treaty reporting
and migration policies. Details on the discussion are available at: http://www .ohchr.
org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayN ews.aspx?NewsID=13544&LangID=E#sthas
h.rQqkSNSU.dpuf (accessed 1 November 2017).
100  CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) paras 17-18.
101 ICRMW art 72(2)(b).
102 Memorandum No MREMH-VMH-2015-2299-M (17 September 2015).200    Chapter 7
were, at least, questionable. Will the CMW have the independence to issue
recommendations to Ecuador in light of  cases in which one of its members
was personally involved? Despite internal criticism,103 her election was
considered by the Departme nt of Foreign Affairs: 
[A] recognition by the inte rnational community of the efforts carried out by
the National Government in favour of Ecuadorian migrants abroad andforeign migrants in Ecuador, as well as Ecuador’s leadership in the UN for the
promotion and protection of all migran ts in the world un der the principle of
universal citizenship.104 
The views of the Committee would have more impact if its members could
be perceived to be independent expert s. In Ecuador, this perception has
been brought into question. 
Despite the fact that an Ecuadoria n has always served on the CMW,
Ecuador has yet to make the declarat ions under articles 76 and 77 of the
Convention recognising the competence of the Committee to receive and
consider inter-state complaints and communications from or on behalf of
individuals within that state’s jurisdiction who claim that their rights under
the Convention have been violated. If Ecuador is to be a world leader when
it comes to migration policy, as it ma intains, it is difficult to understand
why it has not accepted the competence of the Committee to receive
communications alleging violations of the ICRMW. 
4C o n c l u s i o n
The previous sections illustrate that the focus and priority of the state’s
actions have been the protection of  Ecuadorian migrant workers abroad.
In the design and implementation of its policies, Ecuador has emphasised
the condition of emigrant over othe r types of migrant. The state has
invested greater effort and more money in complying with self-imposed
extraterritorial obligations than impl ementing its international obligations
domestically. When it comes to protec ting migrant workers, Ecuador is far
from being a leading example on the implementation of the ICRMW. As
noted by the CMW: 
Ecuador, as a country of origin of mi grant workers, has made progress in
protecting the rights of its nationals abroad. However, as a country of transit
103 See Plataforma Interamericana de Derechos Humanos, Democracia y Desarrollo
‘Órganos que supervisan tratados de derechos humanos deben constituirse con
expertos de alto nivel’ Public Stat ement, Communication No 772-CR-15 (15 May
2015) http://mesadearticulac ion.org/declaraciones/pidh dd-organos-que-supervisan-
tratados-de-derechos-humanos-deben-constituirse-con-expertos-de-alto-nivel/
(accessed 1 November 2017).
104 Foreign Affairs Ministry ‘Viceministra ecuatoriana María Landázuri formará parte del
Comité para la Protección de los Derechos de todos los trabajadores migratorios y sus
familias’.   Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     201
and destination, it faces major challenges  in regard to protection of the rights
of migrant workers.105
Some have pointed out that Ecuador ha s approved a Constitution that goes
beyond the international obligations it assumed when it ratified the
ICRMW in 2002, qualifying Ecuador’s migration policy as a ‘rupture’ withthe past as well as a ‘rupture’ in  comparison with other countries.106 It is
arguable that the state’s enthusiasm for innovation and creation of new
migration paradigms has meant that the Convention has not beensufficiently taken into account in th e formulation and implementation of
laws and policies concerning the rights of migrant workers. Despite the
privileged position of international human rights instruments in Ecuador’s
legal regime, as well as the possibil ity to directly apply its norms, the
ICRMW is rarely cited at the time of formulating legislatio n or policies for
migrants. Even rarer is the possibili ty of a judge taking the ICRMW into
consideration when determining if the Ecuadorian authorities have
complied with their duty to protec t migrants’ rights within. Lack of
reference suggests a lack of awareness of the ICRMW in Ecuador, maybeas a consequence of the proliferation of human rights treaties ratified by
Ecuador and the lack of disseminati on of such treaties. Despite the
CMW’s recommendations,
107 no specific permanent programmes have
been developed and carried out to prov ide training on the content of the
Convention. 
While many of Ecuador’s Constituti onal provisions might seem more
favourable than those of the ICRMW, it might be more effective to honourthe Convention’s minimum standards first, before trying to innovate
beyond such obligations. When it comes to the protection of rights, a more
modest but pragmatic approach might be more effective than loftyrhetorical provisions. 
Moreover, the state has failed to harmonise its migration legislation
with its Convention obligations and constitutional principles. The human
rights focus of the Constitution is in constant tension with the securityfocus of the legislation in force. Secondary legislation in Ecuador is out of
date, security-focused and contradicts the provisions of both the ICRMW
and the Constitution. Nevertheless, migration officers as well as judges
and prosecutors make little use of the Convention or the Constitution and
rely on the obsolete migration legislation instead, as the CMW hasnoted.
108 The new bill on human mobility proposed in 2015 still evidences
the paradox between strong protection of migrants abroad and the limited
protections available for migrants domestically. Far from honouring
105 CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above) para 3.
106 JP Ramírez Gallegos (n 21 above) 7. 107 CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (n 18 above) para 18 and CMW/C/ECU/CO/2 (n 19 above)
paras 19-20.
108 CMW/C/ECU/CO/1 (n 18 above) paras 8-9.202    Chapter 7
Ecuador’s international obligations towards migrant workers, the
proposed law still criminalises  certain forms of migration.
Disparities between the recognition of migration as a constitutional
right and procedures criminalising offences related to migration aredifficult to explain. Not only has the government not revised secondary
legislation that is not in conformity with the Constitution and international
commitments, it has approved and pr oposed new legislation incompatible
with the right to migrate protected by the Constitution and the rights of
migrant workers guaranteed by the ICRMW. Domestic laws and policies
towards migrant workers in Ecuador are evidently a reaction tocircumstances (including political circum stances) more than the result of a
long-term policy on migratory fluxes. When it came to approving a new
Constitution, the idea of more rights  for migrants prevailed. When the
promotion of universal citizenship caus ed an increase in immigration, the
government shifted back to a security  focus and started to apply selective
and discriminatory practices to determine who could enter and stay inEcuador. The state continues to ado pt measures to control immigration
that are incompatible with the ICRMW and with a Constitution that
purports to enshrine universal citi zenship and free movement for all. 
Differences between constitutional provisions and reality are also
manifest. Universal citizenship, ope nness and non-discrimination are still
a discourse not honoured in practice. The approach of the Convention
might be more limited than the concept of universal citizenship, but alsomore realistic. When it comes to  migration laws and policies, more
cautious provisions could have more im pact on the protection of the rights
of migrant workers than innovative ones. 
Before Ecuador can be viewed as a model when it comes to migration
policies, we should evaluate how much  its radical policies promoting the
right to migrate, universal citizenship and the protection of migrants
abroad have contributed to trafficking in persons and smuggling ofmigrants, thus contraveni ng Ecuador’s obligations under article 68 of the
ICRMW. Moreover, Ecuador’s laws and policies have been adopted
without sufficient study of its realit y as a country of origin, destination,
transit and return of migrants. Im provement and transparency in data
collection is indispensabl e not only to assess the implementation of the
Convention in Ecuador, but also to improve the situation of migrant
workers in and from Ecuador. 
Finally, a universal citizenshi p concept cannot be implemented
unilaterally. The state has unsuccessfu lly dedicated efforts and funds to
disseminate this ideal and to influence migration policies at different
international forums including the Andean Community, MERCOSUR,  Disparities in the protection of the rights of migrant workers by Ecuador     203
UNASUR, the World Social Forum on Migrations, and the South
American Conference on Migrations.109 Such efforts and funds might be
better allocated to protect migrant workers domestically. If the rights of
migrant workers were a reality in Ecuador, the state would have more
authority in international fora when trying to convince other countries to
respect their obligations to protect th e rights of migrant workers and their
families.
109 Margheritis (n 86 above).204Cathleen Caron, Kathleen Griesbach, Ursula Roldan
& Roxana Sandoval*
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
Guatemala signed the UN International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
(ICRMW, the Convention) in September 2000.1 Ratification followed in
March 2003, and the Convention entere d into force on 1 July 2003 after
Guatemala and El Salvador’s ratifica tion placed it beyond the required
minimum of 20 ratifying states.2 Additionally, on 11 September 2007
Guatemala accepted both the inte r-state complaint mechanism under
article 76 and the individual comm unications procedure established in
article 77 of the Convention.3 Civil society saw this as a significant step
toward a greater commitment to the ICRMW as well as a promise to begin
fulfilling its obligations under the Convention.4 
1 Additional research by Matthew Erle, Program Associate, Justice in Motion.
1 United Nations Treaty Collection ‘13. International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Memb ers of their Families ’ https://treaties.
un.org/pages/viewdetails.aspx?src=tre aty&mtdsg_no=iv-13&chapter=4&lang=en
(accessed 25 September 2015). 
2 P Marquez ‘Upholding the rights of migrant workers’ Catholic Bishops Conference of the
Phillipines (CBCP) News  http://www .cbcpnews.com/cbcpnews/?p=22269 (accessed
28 September 2015).
3 United Nations 'UN Treaty Collection'  https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.
aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-13&chapter=4&lang=en#EndDec (accessed
4 March 2016).
4 Grupo Articulador De La Sociedad Civil Para La Elaboración Del Informe
Alternativo ‘Informe alternativo de Guatemala sobre la aplicación de la Convención
Internacional sobre la Protección de los Derechos de todos los TrabajadoresMigratorios y de sus Familiares’ (Octob er 2010) para 45 http://www2.ohchr.org/
english/bodies/cmw/docs/ngos/MENAMIG_Guatemala_CMW14.pdf (accessed
23 September 2015). Grupo Articulador is a coalition group which includes themajority of organisations working on migrant worker rights issues in Guatemala. It
developed and presented an alternative repo rt to the Committee on Migrant Workers
(CMW) ahead of the CMW’s review of Guatemala in 2010.8CHAPTERGUATEMALA ’S
IMPLEMENTATION  OF THE
ICRMW:
EMERGING  EFFORTS
*  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     205
This chapter first provides an overview of the migration phenomenon
as it relates to Guatemala. Next, it  briefly explores some reasons why
Guatemala ratified the Convention.  Finally, the main body of the chapter
evaluates Guatemala’s response to it s obligations under the ICRMW since
ratifying it in 2003. We find th at while Guatemala has taken some
important steps toward compliance with the Convention, there is stillm u c h  t o  b e  a c c o m p l i s h e d  t o  i n s t i t utionalise and enforce the migrant
workers’ rights guaranteed under  this international human rights
instrument, both within and beyond its borders. 
2 Context of Guatemalan migration
Guatemala is a part of what is kn own as the ‘Northern Triangle’, one of
the three northern countries of Ce ntral America, which also includes
Honduras and El Salvador. Guatemala is a country of migration – a placeof origin, transit, destination and re turn. It forms part of the greatest
migration flow in the world, namely that from Central America and
Mexico to the United States. Guatemala’s place within this majormigration current makes particularly  urgent its compliance with the
ICRMW. Guatemala’s ratification of the Convention obligates the
country to address the problems faced by migrant workers within andbeyond its borders. In other words, th e country has a responsibility both to
Guatemalan migrants – those who migrate to the United States and other
destinations, who are in processes of return, who carry out temporary,circular and cross-border migration – and to migrants who come to
Guatemala from other countries.
2.1 As a country of origin
According to the International Organi sation for Migration (IOM), the rate
of Guatemalan emigration increased from 10,5 per cent in 2002 to 11,4 per
cent in 2012.5 Likewise, according to US Census data, the Guatemalan
population in the US increased from 17 376 people in the 1970s to 225 739in the 1990s,6 and further ascended to 372 487 by the 2000s.7 By 2010 the
numbers of Guatemalans in the US  had reached an estimated 1 044 209
people.8 Another estimate using US Census data from 2010 found a
population of 830 824 Guatemalan migrants in the US, which makes the
US the destination country of 87,54 pe r cent of all Guatemalan emigrants;
5 The data measures the rate of emigrants for every one hundred thousand inhabitants.
International Organisa tion for Migration (IOM) ‘Per fil Migratorio 2012, Guatemala’
http://costarica.iom.int/public/pdf/ Perfil_Migratorio_Guatemala_2012.pdf
(accessed 4 May 2016).
6 CELADE-IMILA 1990 http://www .cepal.org /celade/publica/bo l65/planilla.xls
(accessed 30 October 2015).
7 United States Census Bure au ‘The hispanic populati on: 2010’ (3 May 2011) http://
www .census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c 2010br-04.pdf (accessed 30 October 2015). 
8 US Census Bureau (n 7 above) 3.206    Chapter 8
other important destinatio ns include Mexico (3,69 per cent), Belize (2,11
per cent) and Canada (1,93 per cent).9 
Guatemalan migrant workers in the US include foreign temporary
workers – principally those who partic ipate in the H-2A visa temporary
agricultural programme and those wh o participate in the H-2B visa
temporary non-agricultural programme – along with irregular migrants.
Article 5 of the Convention defines ‘irregular migrants’ as anyone who is
not ‘authorized to enter, to stay and to engage in a remunerated activity in
the State of employment.’ Beth Lyon notes that it ‘describe[s] a worker
who lacks both employment authorization and presence authorization; nodistinction is made between the two categories’.10 In 2014, the US
Department of State co unted 1 453 H-2A visas issued to Guatemalan
workers for agricultural labour and 3 304 H-2B visas issued to Guatemalan
workers for non-agricultural labour.11 In addition to these workers
entering on temporary visas, the Department of Ho meland Security
estimates that around 560 000 Guatemalan s live in an irregular status in
the US. Given that the US Department of Labour estimates that more than
two-thirds of irregular migran ts are economically active,12 we can estimate
that around 373 000 of the irregular Guatemalan migrants in the US arelabour migrants.13
Statistics on Guatemalan  labour migration to Mexico are limited, but
what exists shows a significant flow  of Guatemalan workers across the
northern border for temporary work in  agriculture, construction, livestock
and services in the nearby Mexican states of Chiapas, Tabasco, Campeche
and Quintana Roo.14 In 2008, the Mexican gove rnment implemented the
Border Work Visa to replace the pr evious Temporary Agricultural Worker
Visa.15 Statistics from the 2009 EMIF-Sur survey16 showed that only nine
9 J A Cervantes González ‘El Perfil de la población de origen guatemalteco en Estados
Unidos’ (4 June 2014) http ://www .cemla-remesas.org/pr incipios/pdf/Principios
Remesas-Guatemala-2014.pdf (accessed 30 October 2015).
10 B Lyon ‘When more “security” equals less  workplace safety: Reconsidering laws that
disadvantage unauthorized workers’ (Spring 2004) 6 University of Pennsylvania Journal of
Business Law  578.
11 US Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs ‘Non-immigrant visa issuances
by visa class and by nati onality: FY 1997-2014 NIV De tail Table’ http://
travel.state.gov/content/visas/english/law-and-policy/statistics/non-immigrant-
visas.html (accessed July 2015). 
12 Lyon (n 10 above) 585. 13 B Baker & N Rytina ‘Estimates of the unauth orized immigrant population living in the
United States: January 2012’ US Departme nt of Homeland Security Population
Estimates (March 2013) http://www .dhs.g ov/sites/default/f iles/publications/
ois_ill_pe_2012_2.pdf (accessed June 2015). 
14 A Constanza Ancheita Pagaza & G Bonnici ‘Instituto de Estudios y Divulgación
Sobre Migración, AC ‘Quo Vadis? Reclutamiento y Contratación de TrabajadoresMigrantes y Su Acceso a La Seguridad Social’ (2013)  102 http://www .inedim.org/
documentosypub/publicaciones/reclutamie ntoconportada.pdf (accessed July 2015). 
15 Ancheita Pagaza & Bonnici  (n 14 above) 102, 105.
16 Encuestras sobre migración en las fronteras norte y sur de México (EMIF-Sur) is a set
of data produced by the Mexican university Colegio de la Frontera Norte. See http://
www .colef.mx/emif/ (accessed June 2015).   Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     207
per cent of migrant workers intervie wed in the southern border region
possessed a valid work visa. Of the ot her 91 per cent of workers surveyed,
70 per cent had the Local Visito r visa, which does not authorise
employment, while 21 per cent were irregular.17 Data collected by
Mexico’s government agency Instituto Nacional de Migración (INM) and
reported in its 2011 Annual Statistics  Bulletin shows that in 2011, 27 597
Guatemalans, along with  2 951 dependents, received the Border Worker
Visa in the Mexican state of Chiapa s. Meanwhile, the government issued
60 989 Local Visitor visas to Guatemalans in 2011.18 INM data shows that
in 2014, the Mexican government issued 14 313 work permits to
Guatemalan agricultural workers in Chiapas, a decrease from previous
years due to changes in the agricultural sector.19 While studies have
increased in recent years alongside the creation and evolution of visa
systems for the southern border, there is still very limited data on the
specific sectors of work and no  statistics on visa renewals.20 
Additionally, Guatemalan labour migration is becoming more
significant in Canada, particularly in  agriculture. Guatemalan workers are
beginning to replace Mexi can workers in the state of Quebec, which some
advocates attribute to efforts of resi stance to Mexican worker organising
efforts.21 In Canada, many low-wage Guatemalan workers are admitted
through the Temporary Foreig n Worker Programme (TFWP).22 The
Canadian government reports that in 201223 it hosted 5 415 workers from
Guatemala through Temporar y Foreign Worker visas.24 Meanwhile, the
Guatemalan government reports that in 2014 th e Canadian government
17 COLEF (n 16 above) 105.
18 COLEF (n 16 above) 106.
19 M Rojas Wiesner & H Ángeles ‘Trabajadores Agrícolas de Guatemala en Chiapas’  La
Jornada del Campo  (suplemento Informativo de La Jornada ) 18 July 2015 8. 
20 Rojas Wiesner & Ángeles (n 19 above) 106. 
21 ‘Migrant workers: Who they ar e, where they’re coming from’ CBC News 7 February
2012 http://www .cbc.ca/news/canada/migran t-workers-who-they-are-where-they-re-
coming-from-1.1137930 (acc essed June 2015). 
22 Government of Canada ‘1.5. Temporary Foreign Worker Program work permit
holders with a valid permit on December  31st by top 50 countr ies of citizenship,
Footnote 6 2004 to 2013’ http://www .cic .gc.ca/english/res ources/statistics/
facts2013/temporary/1-5.asp (accessed Ju ne 2015). The TFWP allows Canadian
employers to hire foreign nationals to fill temporary labour and skill shortages given a
shortage of qualified Canadian citizens or legal permanent residents. TFWP includes
‘agricultural stream’ workers who can be from any country. Government of Canada‘Hiring agricultural workers’ http:// www .esdc.gc.ca/eng/jobs/foreign_workers/
agriculture/index.shtml (a ccessed 9 October 2015) (accessed June 2015). Prior to
2002, agricultural workers came  from just 13 countries in cluding Mexico, Jamaica and
the eastern Caribbean, through the Seasonal Agricultural Worker Program. CBC News
(n 21 above).
23 This is the most recent year for which the Canadian government has publicly available
statistics.
24 Employment and Social Development Canada ‘Labour market opinions: Annual
statistics – Top countries of citizenship according to the number of temporary foreignworker positions on positive Labour Market Opinions, by province/territory’ http://
www .esdc.gc.ca/eng/jobs/foreign_workers/ lmo_statistics/annual-top-country.shtml
#tab1 (accessed June 2015).208    Chapter 8
hosted 5 309 Guatemalan workers.25 There are no official statistics on the
number of unauthorised migrants in Ca nada in general or from Guatemala
in particular. Some estimates sugges t there may be a combined total of
between 20 000 and 200 000 irregular migrants working in Canada.26
2.2 Causes of Guatemalan migration
It is clear that the principal causes of migration conti nue to be economic
ones: Guatemalans face challenges to improving their household incomefor such necessities as nutrition, hous ing, education and health; therefore,
some migrate. The goal is to find employment and i ncome in northern
countries, in order to satisfy family needs and improve living conditions at
home.27 Critics of neoliberal globalisation frame this economic migration
as non-voluntary and a consequence of  the ‘new capitalist architecture’;
t h e y  a r g u e  t h a t  i t  i s  p a r t  o f  a  process in which large multinational
corporations appropriate strategic an d profitable segments of peripheral
economies, including natural and human resources.28 
For large numbers of Guatemalans,  especially in the US, family
reunification is another significant ca use of migration. Along with other
factors, this goal of family reuni fication catalysed a highly visible
movement of unaccompanied minors in  June of 2014, when a reported 11
479 children arrived at the border between Mexico and the US.29 A 2014
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) report
confirms that there was a number of causes behind the massive migration
of unaccompanied minors, as Guatemala and the other Central American
countries of the Northern Triangle are blighted by widespread violence due
to high levels of crimin ality caused by the presence of gangs and organised
25 JA Rodriguez, Director of Migration Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Gobierno de
Guatemala Ministerio de Relaciones Exterior es ‘The role of the State of Guatemala in
regard to Temporary Migrant Workers’ h ttps://prezi.com/s5fmopdrxncv/desafios-
de-la-proteccion-ingles/?utm_campaig n=share&utm_medium=copy (accessed July
2015).
26 ‘Points-Based Immigration Systems: Canada.’ http://www .loc.gov/law/help/points-
based-immigration/canada.php  (accessed June 2015). This is a relatively small
percentage of the total population compared to the US estimate of 11.3 million
irregular immigrants. J S Passel & D’Vera Cohn ‘Unauthorized immigrant populationstable for half a decade’ Pew Research Center (July 2015) http://www .pew
research.org/fact-tank/2015/07/22/unauthori zed-immigrant-population-stable-for-
half-a-decade/ (accessed October 2015).
27 See points 1, 2, and 3 of The Human Mo bility Pastoral – Episcopal Conference of
Guatemala ‘El Fenomeno Migratorio En Guatemala, Desde El Corazon De La Iglesia
Catolica’ (1 September 2000) http:/ /www .iglesiacatoli ca.org.gt/20000901.pdf
(accessed 4 November 2015). The rates of general poverty of 53,7% and extreme
poverty of 13,3% (2011) and the GINI inde x of 0.59 (2006), a measure of inequality,
provide important context for Guatemalan migration.
28 H Márque Covarrubias & R Delgado Wise ‘Una perspectiva del sur sobre capital
global, migración forzada y desarrollo alternativo’ (2011) 9 Migración y Desarrollo  4.
29 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ‘IACHR Expresses Deep Concern on
the Situation of Children Migr ants Arriving to the United  States’ (20 June 2014) http:/
/www .oas.org/en/iachr/media_cent er/PReleases/2014/067.asp (accessed
30 October 2015).  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     209
crime.30 These conditions push part of the populations of these countries
to migrate to protect their lives and those of their families, while internal
power forces within Guatemala und ermine the country’s ability to
ameliorate widespread inequality and exclusion. 
Two decades after a civil war and an unsatisfactory peace process,
Guatemalan civil society has grown frustrated with the political system of
representative democracy in its current incarnation. The Guatemalanpolitical system has failed to achieve equilibrium of power in social
relations due to corrupt practices and a clientelist relationship with the
population during elections and in the public service.31 The presidency of
Otto Pérez Molina is a stark exampl e: elected on an anti-corruption
platform in 2012, he was forced to resign by mass protests when he was
outed as the ‘leader of a vast fraud ring’ in 2015.32 Along with the
imposition of structural adjustment policies and other international
treaties that reinforce the market economy, these conditions diminish and
limit the possibilities of states to pu rsue a more distributive and inclusive
model of democracy.33 Other international and national phenomena have
also affected the system, including the rise of organised crime and drug
trafficking. Such phenomena jeopardise the security of citizens as crimesyndicates take on a role in  state and terri torial control.34 
30 UNHCR Report ‘Children on the run: Unaccompanied children leaving Central
America and Mexico and the need for in ternational protection’ (2014) http://
www .unhcrwashington.org/sites/default /files/1_UAC_Children%20on%20the%20
Run_Full%20Report.pdf (accessed September 2015). 
31 According to data from the ‘Barómetro de las Américas de Latin American Public
Opinion’ (LAPOP) from 2012, the main problems for th e population in order of
priority are the following: crime, the econ omy, poverty, unemployment and violence.
According to the World Bank, Guatemala on average ranks 36 (on a scale from 0 to
100) on the selected indicators of governab ility (voice and accountability, government
effectiveness, regulatory quality), which is within the lowest average scores of half of
the countries. In State of th e Region, Statistics of Cent ral America (2014), Guatemala’s
corruption index is 32, with the co untry ranking 115 in 2015. Transparency
International ‘Corruption perception s index 2014: Result s’ http://www .
transparency.org/cpi2014/resu lts (accessed October 2015). 
32 Ministerio Público de Guatemala ‘Juzgado envía a prisión preventiva a Otto Pérez
Molina’ (8 September 2015) https://www .mp.gob.gt/2015/09/08/juzgado-envia-a-
prision-preventiva-a-otto-perez-molina/ (accessed 6 November 2015); ‘Otto Pérez
Molina of Guatemala is jailed hours after resigning Presidency’ New York Times
3 September 2015 http:// www .nytimes.com/2015/09/04/world/americas/otto-
perez-molina-guatemalan-president-resigns-amid-scandal.html?_r=0 (accessed
6 November 2015); ‘Renuncia el presidente Otto Pérez’ Prensa Libre 3 September 2015
http://www .prensalibre.com/guatemala/pol itica/renuncia-el-presidente-otto-perez
(accessed 6 November 2015).
33 Márque Covarrubias & Delgado Wise (n 28 above) 36.
34 International Centre for Migrant Human Rights (CIDEHUM) and the Agency of the
United Nations for Refugees (UNHCR/ACNUR) ‘Desplazamiento forzado y
necesidades de protección, generado por nuevas formas de violencia y criminalidad en
Centroamérica’  (May 2012). http://www .acnur.org /t3/fileadmin/Documentos/
BDL/2012/8932.pdf?view=1 (accessed Sept ember 2015). The country’s homicide
rate is 34 per 100 000 (2013) with 20,8 per ce nt of the population having been a victim
of delinquency in 2012 ‘Estado de la Regi ón, Estadísticas de Centroamérica 2014’. 210    Chapter 8
All of these factors have given rise to a forced migration from
Guatemala that has been underway for more than three decades.35 During
the Guatemalan Civil War in the 1980 s, close to 100 000 refugees fled to
Mexico.36 1990 saw the start of another ex odus, this time for economic
reasons. Since 2000, the migration ph enomenon from Guatemala has been
multi-causal, including the growing ex odus of unaccompanied children in
the past several years. 
2.3 As a destination country
Those who migrate to Guatemala are primarily, though by no meansexclusively, Central Americans. A study based on the 2006 Encuesta
Nacional de Condiciones de Vida (ENCOVI), a national survey of living
conditions, counted 41 568 people of Ce ntral American origin residing in
Guatemala, marking an increase from  25 137 such immigrants as reported
by the 2002 census.37 The latter statistic represented 49 per cent of all
foreigners in 2002, and included 12 484 Salvadorans, 5 604 Nicaraguans,
5 977 Hondurans, 761 Costa Ricans, 6 00 individuals from Belize and 197
from Panama. According to the 2010 Sha dow Report on the application of
the ICRMW by the Grupo Articulador in Guatemala (hereinafter Shadow
Report), many of these migrants are attempting to regularise their statusand remain in the country.38  
2.4 As a country of return migration
In recent years, Guatemala has beco me a country of return due to the
toughening of migration policies in the US and the increasing replication
of this trend in Mexico, a second co untry seeing a rise in deportation of
migrants from its territory. 
35 The IOM defines forced migration as: ‘A migratory movement in which an element of
coercion exists, including threats to life and livelihood, whether arising from natural or
man-made causes (eg movements of refugees and internally displaced persons as wellas people displaced by natural or environmental disasters, chemical or nuclear
disasters, famine, or development projec ts)’ https://www .iom.int/key-migration-
terms (accessed 30 October 2015). The Human Mobility Pastoral of the Episcopal
Conference of Guatemala sees this as f orced migration (n 27 above) 1-2. The
Migration Policy Institute notes that: ‘The levels of coercion (eg, entire communities
being forced to participate in the drug tr ade) and the extreme structural violence of
Guatemalan society have been documen ted in studies by Guatemalan, Central
American and US-based institutions, including the Migration Policy Institute's
Regional Migration Study Group. Some Central American analysts refer to thesefactors as causing “forced displacement from violence and crime” or “forced
migration.”’ http://www .migrationpolicy .org/article/guatemalan-migration-times-
civil-war-and-post-war-challenges (accessed 30 October 2015).
36 Americas Watch Committee Guatemalan Refugees in Mexico 1980-1984 (1984)  5 97-100.
37 Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales, San José de Costa Rica ‘Migraciones
y Derechos Laborales en Centroamérica: Características de las personas migrantes yde los mercados de trabajo’ 2012, Coord. 
38 Grupo Articulador De La Sociedad Civil Para La Elaboración Del Informe
Alternativo (n 4 above).  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     211
Below are the statistics on  deportations between 2002-2014:
Source: Department of Immigration, Gu atemala, Department of Statistics, 2015
These statistics illustrate Mexico’s emer ging role in the politics and policies
of detention and deportation. Toughe r policies provoke greater violations
of migrant rights, especially of thos e from Central America. This places
these migrants in more vulnerable situations by forcing them to take newroutes through Mexico, where they fall victim to organised crime gangs
and suffer abuses of authority, theft, extortion and mistreatment.39 In
2015, Mexico deported 70 493 Guatemalans40 while only 69 Guatemalans
submitted a complete application for refugee status and only 27 received
recognition.41 These lopsided statistics su ggest that Guatemalans are not
getting access to these legal protecti ons. The effect of an increase in
deportation of Guatemalans is of course a growing phenomenon of
repatriation to Guatemala, where re turned migrants are more vulnerable
than ever42 and in particular need of the protections afforded to them
under the Convention. 
The next section explores the context of Guatemala’s ratification of the
Convention, followed by an analysis of  Guatemala’s legal and institutional
obligations in light of its signature and ratification of the Convention. 
39 R Casillas ‘La Migración de Algunos y la Inseguridad de todos, Análisis y
recomendaciones para pasar de la Ficción al trato humanitario’ Documentos deTrabajo N.2 ITAM & Socios de la Red de documentación de las Organizaciones
defensoras de Migrantes (REDODEM) 2014.
40 Secretaría de Gobernación of Mexico ‘Est adisticas migratorias: Síntesis 2015’ 4 http:/
/www .politicamigratoria.gob.mx/work/ models/SEGOB/CEM/PDF/Estadisticas/
Sintesis_Graficas/S intesis_2015.pdf (accessed 4 May 2016).
41 Mexican Refugee Commission (COMAR ) ‘Estadisticas 2013-2017’ 14 http://www .
comar.gob.mx/work/models/CO MAR/Resource/267/6/images/
ESTADISTICAS_2013_A_1er_semestre_201 7.pdf (accessed 1 August 2017).
42 United Nations High Commission er for Refugees (n 34 above).
212    Chapter 8
3 Why did Guatemala ratify the Convention?
Interviews with several key actors – including Ubaldo Villatoro,43
governing board member of the National Board on Migration in
Guatemala (MENAMIG) in 2003 and now an advisor to the Executive
Secretary of the National Council for Assistance to Guatemalan Migrants
(CONAMIGUA), and Erick Maldonado, the former Executive Secretaryof CONAMIGUA, revealed no particul ar motive for signing or ratifying
the Convention. Rather, these resp ondents suggested that Guatemala
ultimately signed the ICRMW in respon se to internationa l pressure, rather
than as a considered policy decision to more effectively address migration
issues. 
Specifically, Maldonado indicated th at other state and civil society
actors had several major concerns about Guatemala and that these actors
viewed Guatemala’s signing of the Conv ention as a step toward addressing
migration issues in a systematic way. According to Maldonado, the
international community sees Guatemala as a country of origin, transitand destination for migrants. It observed  the high levels of organised crime
in Guatemala, including trafficking in drugs and other illicit substances,
but also migrant smuggling and human trafficking. High levels ofcorruption and human rights violatio ns aggravate the organised crime
phenomenon, infiltrating public in stitutions like the Department of
Migration and the National Civil Po lice rendering the situation for
migrants more precarious.
44 
Migration was already a significan t issue in 2000, and civil society
lobbied and publicly pressured the government to ratify the Convention.
Both MENAMIG (founded in 1999) and the Human Mobility Pastoralpressed for ratification45 and then became important advocates for
continuing advancements in related legislation and norms.46 The Catholic
Church, through the Human Mobility Pa storal, also urged ratification of
the Convention, as demonstrated in a statement in September 2000.47
43 U Villatoro, Asociación de Apoyo Integral; member of the board of directors of
MENAMIG in 2003; Executive Coordina tor of MENAMIG 2006-2010; currently
advisor to the Executive Secretary of CONAMIGUA, interviewed 23 September 2015.
44 Attorney Erick Maldonado, Advising Attorney of the Office of International Treaties
of the Ministry on Foreign Relations of the Republic of Guatemala 2004-2006;
Director of International Treaties of the Ministry on Foreign Relations of the Republic
of Guatemala 2006-2007; General Director of Consular and Mi gratory Matters 2007-
2010; Director of CONAMIGUA 2009-2011; Vice  Chancellor of th e Foreign Affairs
Ministry 2011-present. Interv iewed 5 August 2015. Presumably he refers to the
increase in migration, the situation of worsening violence in the migrant journey, and
the greatly expanded deportation regime in the US and Mexico; La Hora ‘Migración:Trece años con una interven ción fracasada’ (13 Novemb er 2014) http://lahora.gt/
migracion-trece-anos-con-una-intervenc ion-fracasada/ (accessed 27 June 2015).
45 Maldonado (n 44 above).46 Villatoro (n 43 above).
47 The Human Mobility Pastoral of the Episco pal Conference of Guatemala (n 35 above)
1.  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     213
4 Legal and institutional implementation of the 
Convention 
International conventions like the ICRMW can in the end become a dead
letter if signatories fail to tailor the country’s legislation to meet their
obligations, and if they lack the will to propose, pass and implement
favourable policies for its implem entation. Without these measures to
ensure internal compliance, th e ICRMW and other human rights
conventions become an empty promise. 
The sections below detail the degr ee to which Guatemala has moved
toward implementation of the Convention since ratifying it, analysing
compliance in a number of key area s. The Convention has important
implications for each of these domains, and Guatemala’s progress in
complying with it should thus be me asured in terms of its action (and
inaction) within these domains.
4.1 Migration law and institutions 
Guatemala has not yet reformed its migration laws or regulations to
comply with its commitments under the Convention.48 The state’s failure
to issue laws means that to date  there exists no legal framework
encompassing the majority of issues th at affect this group of the population
even when there has been broad consensus to do so.49
According to Maldonado, progress on compliance with the
Convention has floundered beca use there is no comprehensive,
multidisciplinary and permanent public policy that involves allstakeholders. He notes that in the face of attempts to develop such a
comprehensive public policy, the stat e itself was the main obstacle. The
state has made only a few isolated efforts and then failed to coordinateacross agencies. The objectives of the General Directorate of Migration
(DGM), for example, are to ‘guarant ee and maintain efficient migration
regulations’, ‘issue national identity documents’ and to ‘publicize theprovisions of law’ and ensure compliance.
50 CONAMIGUA, founded in
48 For example, existing regulations violate the Convention, such as Government
Decision 528 – 2003 Reglamento de Autorizaci ón del Trabajo de Personas Extranjeras
a Empleadores del Sector Privado; A R Morales Díaz ‘Aplicación De La Ley DeMigración En Guatemala En El Marco De La Convención Internacional Sobre La
Protección De Los Derechos De Los Trabajadores Migratorios Y De Sus Familiares’
unpublished PhD thesis, Unversidad de San Carlos Guatemala, 2007 43-50.
49 ‘Iglesia solicita reforma a Ley Migratoria’ Prensa Libre 28 August 2012 (accessed
6 November 2015); Grupo Articulador (see n 4 above) 13-14; Morales Díaz (n 48
above) 38-39.
50 The objectives of the DGM (Dirección General de Migración) focus on order and
regulation. See http://www .migracion.gob.gt/index.php/migracion/objetivos.html
(accessed 30 October 2015).214    Chapter 8
2007, describes itself as ‘the nation al body that brings together the
authorities of the State of Guatem ala responsible for the care and
protection of the human rights and individual rights of Guatemalans
abroad’.51 
While its formation was an important step toward coordinating the
efforts of various governmental institutions around migration,52
CONAMIGUA has not been able to respond to the demands and needs of
the migration situation in Guatemala. This failure has been exacerbated by
the corruption uncovered in institutions  with responsibility for migration.
Such corruption relates to issues of human trafficking, document fraud,
illegal fees charged to migrants and extortion and calls into question their
competency and commitment to assisting migrants.53 For instance, the
DGM was audited in 2001 because of th e existence of illegal processes and
corruption. However, after 13 years of  audits, in 2014, the then President
Otto Pérez Molina decided to lift this measure. Yet many of the problems
that gave rise to that intervention persist today.54 
Maldonado also asserts that the context in which the Convention was
approved differed greatly from present conditions; he implies that the state
of Guatemala did not predict the changes or the dimensions that the
migration phenomenon would today take on.55 Thus, Maldonado argues
that the country could not predict its failures to meet its responsibilities
under the Convention. As an example, Guatemala submitted its first report
to the Committee on Migrant Work ers (CMW) in 2010, six years late.56
51 In the original Spanish: Objectivo de CONAMIGUA: El Consejo Nacional de
Atención al Migrante de Guatemala, CONAMIGUA es la instancia nacional quereúne a las autoridades del Estado de Guatemala, responsables de la atención y
protección de los derechos humanos y garantías individuales del guatemalteco en el
extranjero, con el objetivo de propiciar y fortalecer los mecanismos de coordinación
interinstitucional y el cumplimiento de las funciones que se establecen en la ley y los
compromisos del Estado de Guatemala derivados de convenios, tratados y otrasobligaciones internacionales en el extranjero. CONAMIGUA ‘Folleto de Información
Institucional’ http://www .conamigua.gob.gt/download/FOLLETO%20DISTRIBUI
DO%20EN%20FERIA%20CHAPINA%202013.pdf (accessed 30 October 2015).
52 Act and regulations of CONAMIGUA , Decree No 46 – 2007 chap I, art 2 (2009).
CONIMAGUA is the government entity that defines, coordinates, supervises and
monitors the actions and activities of other governmental institutions and entitiesdesigned to protect, assist and provide assistance and aid to Guatemalan migrants and
their families in Guatemala, as well as the migrants found in the Guatemalan territory. 
53 Morales Díaz (see n 48 above) 26, 61; Grup o Articulador (n 4 above) para 12 & pp 47
& 50; CIDH (n 34 above) paras 341, 348, 349 & 350.
54 ‘Migración: Trece años con una intervención fracasada’ La Hora  13 November 2014
http://lahora.gt/migracion-trece-anos-con -una-intervencion-fracasada/ (accessed
27 June 2015).
55 Maldonado (n 44 above). Presumably he refers to the increase in migration, the
situation of worsening violence in the migrant journey, and the greatly expanded
deportation regime in the US and Mexico. 
56 The report was due on 1 July 2004 but wa s submitted six years later on 8 March 2010.
The next state party report for Guat emala was due on 1 September 2016. The
OHCHR website indicates a revised due date of 1 November 2018. See United
Nations Humans Rights ‘Reporting Status for Guatemala’  http://tbinternet.
ohchr.org/_layouts/TreatyB odyExternal/Countries.aspx  (accessed 1 August 2017).   Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     215
Guatemala addressed the issue of lega l compliance in its initial report
(hereinafter Initial Report) to the CMW, claiming to have made
institutional advances and progress and emphasising that the state hasendorsed, approved and ratified dive rse international treaties on this
subject.57 Yet despite the state’s indications, the Grupo Articulador
indicated in its Shadow Report that there are various shortcomings and
legal gaps in the Guatemalan legal syst em. The report also noted that there
are Guatemalan legal regulations that contravene the Convention. These
include an onerous fee that employers must pay in order to employmigrants and a high cost of regularisation for irregular migrants.58 The UN
Special Rapporteur on the human rights  of migrants noted that such legal
gaps violate the human rights of the migrant population and pointed to the
need to modify and tailor internal state norms.59
It is worth mentioning that some legal initiatives aimed at improving
the situation of migrants have been introduced in the Congress.60
However, few of these initiatives have been approved, and others are still
waiting to be submitted to review by the Plenary Session of Congress. This
calls into question the level of intere st and priority the issue of migration
has on the national agenda. 
4.2 Detention and expulsion of migrants from Guatemala 
The Convention contains provisions re garding detention in articles 16 and
17 which refer to the integrity and personal liberty of migrants, along with
the right to be free from physical or psychological harm. Article 22 of theConvention relates to the procedures for expulsion that states are to
observe with articles 20, 23 and 56 al so containing a number of procedural
safeguards in the context of expulsion.
The Initial Report submitted by Guatemala in 2010, in accordance
with article 73 of the Convention, signalled that the country would only
carry out the expulsion of a migrant in the following two situations: a)
when a migrant is found irregularly in the territory; and b) when he or she
commits a crime and is convicted thro ugh a penal process, in which the
state imposes deportation as a secondary penalty.61
57 ‘Initial Report - Guatemala’ CM W (4 August 2010), UN Doc CMW/C/GTM/1
(2010)  http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?
symbolno=CMW%2fC%2fGTM%2f1&Lang=en (accessed 7 March 2016). 
58 Grupo Articulador (n 4 above) paras 2, 3, 4, 23 & 24. 
59 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, Jorge Bustamante -
Addendum - Mission to Guatemala (24 to 28 March 2008), HRC (18 March 2009),
UN Doc A/HRC/11/7/Add.3 (2009)  paras 6, 7, 24-29 & 50 http://www .ohchr.org/
EN/Issues/Migration/SRMigrants/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx (accessed 30 October2015).
60 See legal initiatives nos 3759, 3765,  4126, 4388, 4560, 4572, 4734, 4851, 4861 & 4869.
61 Initial Report (n 57 above) paras 152, 187, 190-192.216    Chapter 8
Further, the Shadow Report found that there is no established
timeframe for the deportation of immigrants. The Shadow Report also
indicated that the state carried ou t collective expulsions in clear
contravention of inte rnational standards.62 The UN Special Rapporteur on
the human rights of migrants also expressed disquiet about this issue in a
March 2008 report on his mission to Guatemala. Here he observed with
concern the violation of migrants’ ri ghts to defence and due process in
administrative procedures.63 It is important to emphasise that these
deficiencies have persisted over ti me; a 2002 Annual Report to the Inter-
American Commission of Human Rights had pointed out the same
problems.64 
Thus, after more than 12 years of  the Convention being in force,
Guatemala has not corrected all the legal deficiencies that came to the forewhen it signed and ratified the ICRM W. Specifically, Guatemala is out of
compliance with its obligations under articles 16(1), 16(4), 16(5), 17(1) and
22 because it does not legally regulate the maximum period for expellingmigrants from the national territory. For instance, when the authorities
encounter a migrant who has entered the country without authorisation,
he or she is sent to a DGM shelter. These shelters are overcrowded andsubstandard.
65 The Special Rapporteur observes that Guatemalan law
does not define a limit to ho w long a migrant may be held.66 This practice
clearly violates migrants’ right to defence, due process, liberty and personalintegrity. This kind of indefini te detention can produce tremendous
psychological suffering and can be considered arbitrary detention –
especially considering that their detention is not for a crime but for anadministrative law violation. 
This situation is worse for migrants with scarce resources who cannot
pay to hire an attorney, since Guatem ala lacks free legal assistance for
migrants facing expulsion. The Inst itute of Public Criminal Defence of
Guatemala only assists those who are tr ied for a crime, an d their assistance
is limited to determining criminal re sponsibility. There is also a lack of
translators for migrants who do not speak Spanish.
67
4.3 Regularisation of the irregular migrant population 
The specific process for regularisation  of the irregular migrant population
is not addressed directly in the ICRMW, but it does develop parameters in
62 Grupo Articulador (n 4 above) paras 27, 80, 81 & 86.
63 Bustamante (n 59 above)  paras 30, 31, 49, 50 & 85.
64 IACHR  Informe Anual de la Comisión Interameri cana de Derechos Humanos 2002, Capítulo
VI: Estudios Especiales; Cuarto Informe de Progreso de la Relatoría sobre Trabajadores
Migratorios y Miembros de sus Familias en el Hemisferio (7 March 2003) paras 367, 368,
370, 371.
65 Morales Díaz (n 48 above) 48; Grupo Articulador (n 4 above) 29.
66 J Bustamante (n 59 above) para 50.
67 Bustamante (n 59 above) paras 30-31.  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     217
article 69(2) for the regularisation proc ess that states should consider. With
regard to irregular migrant workers, th e Preamble recognises that they are
frequently employed in less favourable  working conditions and that respect
for the human rights of all migrants would reduce their frequent abuse and
exploitation by employers. 
Guatemala indicated in its Initial Repo rt of 2010 that it had carried out
enforcement operations to detect establishments wherein irregularmigrants work. The Report indicated that the country would proceed in
two ways with respect to irregular migrants: (a) it would transfer these
workers to shelters until their expulsion or (b) it would ensure theirappearance before a competent judge in  the event that they had committed
a crime. The report also indicated that  migrants could initiate the process
to regularise their status within ten days, as allowed by the DGM.
68
However, the Grupo Articulador points out in its Shadow Report that the
process established in the Migration Act and its related regulations entail
complex, costly requirements with which the majority of irregularmigrants cannot comply. Articles 93, 100 and 111 of the Migration Act and
articles 33, 70, 71, 88, 96, 97 and 98 of the related regulation outline a
process full of ambiguity, burdensome requirements and fees.69 
Currently there is no procedure within Guatemala which allows
migrants a realistic opportunity to re gularise their status. For every day a
migrant is without legal status, they mu st pay a fine of $1.30, which means
that many irregular migrants ha ve accumulated enormous fines.70 To
achieve a temporary residency, one must pay $62 annually, a sum of
money that most migrants can rarely afford.71 The situation is aggravated
by the widespread abuse and corruption that has plagued the DGM andother institutions that regulate th e process; the Shadow Report notes
‘countless’ cases of abuse by personne l, including retaining and destroying
documents and charging illegal entry and exit fees.72
Draft Act 4851, currently before th e Guatemalan Congress, ostensibly
seeks to fill the gap regarding regularisation.73 Introduced in June 2014 by
Representative Paul Briere, it would ‘exempt migrants for fines based on
their stay in the country, discount payments for migration documents, and
eliminate the need for a guarantor’.74 However, the proposal lacks
68 Initial Report (n 57 above) paras 152, 190, 240-243. 
69 President of the Republic of Guatemal a, Government Decision 529 – 99 Reglamento
de la Ley de Migración  art 88.
70 Migration Act art 95.
71 Migration Act art 88.
72 Grupo Articulador (n 4 above) para 79.73 Congress of the Republic of Guatem ala, Draft Act 4851: Ley de apoyo a la
regularización migratoria de extranjero s en Guatemala (9 June 2014) http://
old.congreso.gob.gt/archiv os/iniciativas/reg istro4851.pdf (accessed 27 June 2015).
74 Congress of the Republic of Guatemala ‘Diputado Jean Paul Briere Propone Ley De
Apoyo A Extranjeros En Guatemala’ (9 June 2014) http://www .congreso.gob.gt/
noticias.php?id=5617 (accessed 9 November 2015).218    Chapter 8
solutions to all of the barriers to regu larisation currently faced by migrants.
They will continue to suffer the same problems that currently affect the
regularisation process: many demanding requirements and a complex andonerous process for migrants.75 Consequently, it will do little to help most
migrants regularise their status despit e a stated intention to regularise all
migrants who are currently in Guatemala. 
4.4 Human trafficking 
The only direct reference to traffi cking is in the preamble of the
Convention which notes that appropriate action should be encouraged in
order to prevent and eliminate clandestine movements and trafficking inmigrant workers, while at the same ti me assuring the protection of their
fundamental human rights. Addition ally, article 11 of the Convention
states that no migrant sh ould be subject to slavery or servitude or required
to perform forced or compulsory labour. 
The government’s Initial Report, the Shadow Report and the UN
Special Rapporteur all assessed Guat emala’s effort to address human
trafficking as a necessity to comply wi th the ICRMW. In its Initial Report,
Guatemala cites the fight against ‘Trafficking in human beings’ as part of
its compliance with article 11 of the Convention.76 I t  s t a t e s  t h a t  i t  h a s
adopted norms, created institutions and trained civil servants to combattrafficking and exploitation and comply with article 11.77 In its discussion
of article 11, the Shadow Report crit icises these institutional reforms as
shallow and weak.78 The UN Special Rapporteur recognised the country’s
efforts to tackle this problem in hi s report on his mission to Guatemala
while also expressing concerns that Guatemala has been unable to
eliminate the criminal organisations re sponsible. He also evinced disquiet
with how national authorities treat victims of these crimes.79 
Advances in this matter currently in clude the promulgation of the Act
against Sexual Violence, Exploitation and Human Trafficking, the
creation of the Inter-Institutional Commission to Combat HumanTrafficking, the creation of the Section against trafficking crimes of the
criminal investigation service of the fe deral police (Policia Nacional Civil),
the creation of an ombudsman’s positi on on the issue in the Human Rights
Ombudsman’s office and the delivery of workshops and trainings to civil
servants and public employees. Despite these advances, however, there areserious deficiencies in how authorities treat victims of human trafficking
when they find them during police operations. Typically, the victims are
detained and sent to the DGM shelters where they receive no medical or
75 IOM (n 5 above) 72.
76 Initial Report (n 57 above) para 30. 77 Initial Report (n 57 above) paras 158, 162 & 167-174.
78 Grupo Articulador (n 4 above).
79 Bustamante (n 59 above) ; paras 75-89.  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     219
psychological attention to help them overcome their experience.80
Another critical issue is the impunity that persists for this crime: out of fear
or threats, victims do not report the perpetrators of such crimes or their
accomplices. This frustrates the efforts for the authorities who try to
investigate and prosecute such cases.81 
Additionally, Guatemalan legisl ation does not provide a distinct
immigration status for human traffick ing survivors; rather, survivors must
qualify for refugee status. These victims can apply for the relief before the
start of the repatriation process, whic h would allow them to remain in the
country in accordance with articles 16 and 17 of the Act against SexualViolence, Exploitation and Human Trafficking82 and Government
Decision 328 – 2001 (which refers to the Regulation for the Protection and
Determination of the Status of the Refugee in the Territory of the State ofGuatemala).83 However, while Guatemala is a state party to the UN
Convention on the Status  of Refugees and has enacted Regulations for the
Protection and Determination of the Status of Refugees in the State ofGuatemala in compliance with its obligations under that Convention,84 in
practice those migrants seeking refu gee status face numerous obstacles.
Such obstacles include the lack of legal assistance for migrants, the lack ofinformation about their rights, and the lack of translators. We see these
obstacles reflected in the annual stat istics published by the Ministry on
Foreign Relations, which show that in 2014, for example, only 19 people
benefited from this protection.85 Guatemalan attorney Rosmery Yax of
the The Human Mobility Pastoral notes that the majority of these refugee
applicants are from outside of Central America. The numbers of personsgranted refugee status is low because most of these applicants abandon the
refugee process.86 
4.5 Labour rights 
4.5.1 Migrant worker rights in Guatemala
The Convention codifies the labour rights of migrant workers and in so
doing is guided by the principle of equality of treatment with citizens of thestate party. Guatemala indicated in its Initial Report that once migrants
80 Grupo Articulador (n 4 above) 29.
81 Morales Díaz (n 48 above) 25.
82 Congress of the Republic of Guatemala,  Decree 9 of 2009, Ley contra la Violencia
Sexual, Explotación y Trata de Personas arts 16 & 17.
83 President of the Republic of Guat emala, Government Decision 328 – 2001,
Reglamento para la protección y determinación del Estatuto de Refugiado en elTerritorio del Estado de Guatemala.
84 Government Decision 383 – 2001 (n 83 above).
85 Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores; Estadísticas de personas beneficiadas con el
Estatuto de Refugiado (2014) http:/ /www .minex.gob.gt/Uploads/ER2014.csv
(accessed 27 June 2015).
86 R Yax interview with Ursula Roldán 1 September 2015.220    Chapter 8
have obtained a work permit, they have the same labour rights as
Guatemalan nationals.87 
Without access to a procedure to re gularise their legal status, migrant
workers become more vulnerable to exploitation. Having an irregularstatus places migrant workers at grea ter risk of exploitation by employers
who know that irregular workers are unlikely to approach authorities with
a complaint about violations of their labour rights for fear of being detainedand processed for expulsion. For its part, the Shadow Report emphasises
the inequality and discrimination which characterise the Government’s
regulation of the granting of work permits to foreigners.
88
4.5.2 Rights of Guatemalan migrants working abroad 
Several articles of the Convention require each state party to ensure portable
justice for its migrant workers abroad along with ensuring justice for
migrant workers at home. Portable ju stice, a term coined by Justice in
Motion, includes the ‘right to tran snational access to justice and the
accompanying access to information’89 for migrant workers throughout
their labour migration experience. Several articles of the Convention
specifically oblige state parties to en sure portable justice for their migrant
workers prior to their departure to wo rk in another country, while working
abroad and upon their return to Guatemala. 
4.5.3 Rights and obligations during recruitment
In an August 2015 report, the Specia l Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants ‘paid particular attention to recruitment practise as one of the key
areas of work for his mandate’ as he was ‘concerned about the apparent
growing prevalence of severe exploitation and abuse suffered by migrantsat the hands of recruiters and subagents in countries of origin and
destination’. He recommended that states ‘develop country-level and
regional policies tackling exploitati ve and abusive recruitment practices’.90 
As part of its obligations concerning recruitment, Guatemala is
responsible under article 33 of the Convention for protecting its migrant
workers prior to their departure to states of employment.91 Additionally,
state parties are to take all appropri ate measures to ‘disseminate the said
information or to ensure that it is provided by employers, trade unions or
other appropriate bodies or institutions ’. This information is to be provided
87 Initial Report (n 57 above) para 241. 
88 Government Decision 528 – 2003. See Grupo Articulador (n 4 above) para 24.
89 C Caron ‘Global workers require global justice: The portability of justice challenge for
migrants in the USA’ (30 October 2005) ht tp://www .globalworkers .org/sites/default/
files/GWJA_Portability.pdf (accessed June 2017).
90 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, Mr François
Crépeau, GA (11 August 2015), UN Doc A/70/310 (2015).  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     221
for free and in a language workers understand. Thus, under the
Convention Guatemala is obliged to pr ovide its citizens who are migrating
to work in other countries with access to employment information prior totheir departure. Under article 37, Guat emala is obliged to inform workers
‘[b]efore their departure, or at the latest  at the time of their admission to the
State of employment’, of all conditio ns of their employment and their stay
in the host country. However, the govern ment has little to no pre-departure
education initiatives in place to provide this essential information.92 
The Guatemalan government has yet to take several important
measures to ensure its citizens migrat ing to work in other countries receive
access to portable justice, as required under both the Convention and its
own Labour Code. In addition to that stated above, article 34 of
Guatemala’s Labour Code, passed in 1961, ‘Labour Contracts and
Agreements’, establishes the responsibi lity of the country to protect the
rights of Guatemalan workers abroad. Article 34 charges the Guatemalan
Ministry of Labour and Social Secu rity (MINTRAB as it is known in
Spanish) with regulating the recrui tment and departure of international
migrant workers and prohibits contract ors from recruiting workers without
the state’s authorisation.93 Article 34 requires, amongst other things, that
recruiters maintain a permanent office in the capital for the duration of the
contract, that they cover the costs of worker transport from the country of
origin to place of foreign employment (and costs of transporting theworker’s family if applicable), and that they provide workers with a
contract which clearly states the cost s that the recruiter will cover (which
also must include any fees) and the work, housing and transportconditions. MINTRAB must also appr ove the contracts. Unfortunately,
the Guatemalan government has never passed regulations to implement
the law.
Furthermore, article 15 of the Convention states that, ‘[n]o migrant
worker or member of his or her family shall be arbitrarily deprived of
property, whether owned individually or in association with others’. This
mandate is defied by recruiters’ common  practice of confiscating workers’
property titles prior to processing their work visas, and by the lack of
systemic Guatemalan government intervention to prevent this illegal
practice. Recruiters commonly seek to take control of workers’ properties
and land through a simple withholding, through the transfer of property
91 Article 33 ICRMW provides: ‘Migrant work ers and members of their families shall
have the right to be informed by the State of origin, the State of employment or the
State of transit as the case may be concerning  (a) Their rights arising out of the present
Convention; (b) The conditions of their admission, their rights and obligations under
the law and practice of the State concerned and such other matters as will enable themto comply with administrative or other formalities in that State.’
92 Email from M  Ramirez to C Caron on 30 September 2015.
93 Justice in Motion ‘Reglas de Reclutamiento: Paises de Origen. Análisis Comparativo
de Leyes de Reclutamiento Para Trabajadores en El Exterior en México, Guatemala,
El Salvador, Honduras, y Guatemala’ ( 2015) 11-13 http://justiceinmotion.org/s/RR-
COO-28SP29_FINAL.pdf (accessed June 2017). 222    Chapter 8
title, or through mutual contracts for the mortgage warranty that favour
recruiters.94 Workers have tremendous diffic ulty recovering their property
titles upon their return to Guatemala following work in the United States.As a December 2013 Prensa Libre article explains, the Justice in Motion
Defender Network documented ten cases of recruiters confiscating
workers’ property titles in return for the promise of migration to the US.Three of the ten workers whose properties were confiscated never retrieved
their title upon returning to Guatemala. Advocates contend that recruiters
take workers’ property titles, in addition to withholding their passports, inorder to dissuade workers from seekin g legal remedies when their labour
rights are violated.
95 The Guatemalan government has not intervened to
eradicate this ongoing illegal practice that violates both article 34 of theGuatemalan Labour Code (which requires that the recruiter pay all costs
of employment) and the ICRMW (specifically article 15). To comply with
the Convention and with its own national laws, the Guatemalangovernment should take steps to address these illegal property title
seizures, inform workers they have no obligation to turn over their
property titles to recruiters, and take action against recruiters (inconjunction with the US government) to eliminate this practice in
Guatemala.
96
Additionally, several recent cases of  recruiter fraud also highlight the
rampant abuse of migrant workers,  which will continue unabated if
Guatemala fails to abide by its obligations under the Convention and
article 34 of its Labour Code. In April 2011, the Mexican newspaper El
Norte reported that 100 Guat emalan nationals were defrauded of around
700 000 pesos (around 44 482 USD) when a fraudulent recruiter promised
them visas for work first in Mexico and then in the United States, but failed
to provide the visas. Jorge Luis Hernandez promised the workers a legalvisa to work in the United States in exchange for a hefty fee, using
fraudulent paperwork to pose as a legitimate recruiter under the name of
‘Job Consultoría’. Fifteen of the workers eventually received a legitimatevisa to work in the US through the advocacy of the Mexican human rights
organisation Desarrollo Social sin Fr onteras, which also filed a lawsuit
against the fraudulent recruiter.
97 In another case, reported by a Defender
Network member and Guatemalan empl oyment attorney, a fake recruiter
94 ‘Confiscación de títulos de propiedad o posesión … ya sea que se haga como una
simple retención, enajenació n de bienes (traspaso o transferencia de dominio de los
bienes) y contratos de mutuo con garantía hipotecaria a favor de los reclutadores, por
medio de los cuales buscan apoderarse de los inmuebles …’, see Justice in Motion
‘Confiscación de Títulos de propiedad en  Guatemala por parte de Reclutadores en
Programas de Trabajadores Temporal es con Visas H-2B’ (2013) 16 http://
justiceinmotion.org/s/Confiscacion-de-Titulos_Informe_Final.pdf (accessed June
2017). 
95 ‘Estafas y abusos afectan a migrantes’ Prensa Libre  7 December 2013. 
96 Justice in Motion ‘Confiscación de Títulos de Propieded en Guatemala Por parte de
reclutadores en programas de trabajadores temporales con visas H-2B. ResumenEjecutivo’ (July 2013) 7 http://justi ceinmotion.org/s/R esumenEjecutivo_
ConfiscaciondeTitulos.pdf (accessed June 2017). 
97 A Rodriguez ‘Denuncian fraude contra inmigrantes’ El norte 12 April 2011 26, 431.   Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     223
opened an office called ‘Empleo Fácil de Guatemala’ in the city of
Quetzaltenango. He offered workers a visa and transportation to do
agricultural work in Florida. He took 350 000 quetzales (around 459 USD)from each of 1 500 workers and had them  sign a contract for six months of
work beginning on 1 June 2011, but would not provide them with a copy.
Shortly before they were planning to leave, workers went to the office toask about the trip. The office was closed and their money gone, without the
work they had been promised.
98 
As seen with the confiscation of property titles, legitimate recruiters
also frequently abuse the system and exploit vulnerable workers withillegal costs in violation of the Convention and the Guatemalan Labour
Code. A criminal complaint filed in Guatemalan District Court in
December 2010 accuses two recruiters in  the municipality of Guanagazapa
of fraud. The recruiters charged a larg e group of workers exorbitant fees to
work in pine tree harvesting in th e United States for a company called
Express Forestry, beginning in Octobe r 2008. The fees were supposedly for
the visa and transportation costs. One victim recounts that the recruiter
made him pay 25000 000 quetzales (around 3280 USD), and that he had
to take out a loan using his land as collateral to do so. Other workers werecharged a range of high amounts. As per the December 2010 complaint,
the workers had not received the job they were promised nor had they been
refunded the ‘down payment’ they had paid, 
despite the requirements we have personally carried out before the Escuintla
Mediation Center where they summoned … [one of the contractors] to try to
come to a conciliatory agreement, in  accordance with the subpoenas served
in the month of June of the year 2010. 
The criminal complaint requests that the prosecutor charge the two
recruiters with the crime of personal fraud under article 263 of the criminal
code.99
On a positive note, the country is on  the cusp of regulating recruiting
agencies and the recruitment process more generally. In 2014, MINTRAB
collaborated with recruitment agencies  and advocacy organisations – the
latter representing the interests of civil society – to produce a draft
regulation.100 Sponsored by the European Union’s International and
Ibero-American Foundation for Administration and Public Policies(FIAPP) and with participation from civil society stakeholders, the
Guatemalan Government (including th e Guatemalan Ministry of Foreign
Relations and the Guatemalan Ministry  of Labour and Social Security)
produced a Pilot Project including a dr aft action protocol and operational
98 Email from A Palacios to C Caron on 4 February 2015.
99 Criminal Complaint filed 14 December 2010 in Fiscalia Distrital del Ministerio
Publico del Departamento de Escu intla. MV Escuintla: 7720 2000. 
100 Justice in Motion (n 93 above) 11-13. 224    Chapter 8
design along with an IT system for regulating Guatemalan labour
migration.101 Until it actually implements the protocol and regulations,
however, the country is out of compliance with the Convention and itsmandate to protect its citizens who emigrate for work at every stage of the
migration process.
In order to address some of the rampant issues around fraudulent
recruitment practices, Ju stice in Motion held a training workshop in 2015.
The workshop included the Guatemalan Department of Justice, the
Department of Labour and the Ministry  of Foreign Affairs personnel, and
focused on providing them with tools to better respond to recruitmentfraud and protect workers’ rights.
102 The training was part of a larger effort
between Justice in Motion and United Food and Commercial Workers-
Canada and the Guatemalan Government  to respond to recruitment fraud.
Other civil society initiatives are al so beginning to bear fruit and are
resulting in an increased interest from the Guatemalan state to take
action.103 
4.5.4 Rights while working abroad
In addition to suffering abuses duri ng recruitment in Guatemala (without
the required government protections under the Convention), workers are
vulnerable to abuses while working abroad. Most of the obligations to
protect migrant workers in the country of employment are the
responsibility of the countries of  employment since they have the
jurisdiction to protect persons in their own territories. However, the
necessity and obligation of the countries of origin to protect their own
nationals abroad is established in the Convention and furthermore, wherethe state party is not expressly implicated it can at least be argued to have
co-responsibility. 
These obligations on the country of origin to protect their nationals
abroad include the right to be free from ‘forced or compulsory labour’, asdescribed in article 11 of the Convention, which states that ‘[n]o migrant
worker or member of his or her family shall be held in slavery or servitude’.
Additionally, article 25(3) clarifies that  state parties must take measures to
101 ‘Orderly and Safe Labour Migration in Guatemala’ FIIAPP 3 November 2014 http://
www .fiiapp.org/en/noticias/migracion-laboral-ordenada-y-segura-en-guatemala/
(accessed July 2015). UE-ALC / EU-LAC ‘Presentación del Proyecto Piloto
Fortalecimiento Interinstitucional para la Migración Laboral Ordenada y Segura’http://www .migracion-ue-alc.eu/index.p hp/es-ES/component/c ontent/article/106-
categorias-en-espanol/483-taller pp-guatemala (accessed July 2015). 
102 Justice in Motion training to Guatemala  government  agencies ‘US temporary work
visas system: process, legal framework; an d international recrui tment’ (2015) http://
www .globalworkers.org/guatemala-guatemal a-june-3-2015 (accessed 2 October 2015).
103 Organisations involved in such efforts include the The Human Mobility Pastoral,
Instituto Centroamericano de Estudios Sociales y Desarrollo (INCEDES), Instituto de
Estudios y Divulgación sobre Migración, AC (INEDIM), and regional initiatives such
as Iniciativa Regional sobre Movilidad Laboral (INILAB).  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     225
‘ensure that migrant workers are not deprived of any rights derived from
this principle by reason of any irregularity in their stay or employment’.
More clearly on point is ar ticle 23, which states that: 
Migrant workers and members of their families shall have the right to have
recourse to the protection and assist ance of the consular or diplomatic
authorities of their State of origin or of a State representing the interests of
that State whenever the rights recognized in the present Convention areimpaired. 
In the context of domestic migrant workers, the Special Rapporteur has
stated that countries of origin ‘shoul d play an active role’ in the countries
of employment to protect their nati onals. The report outlines specific
measures the Rapporteur encourages the country of origin to playincluding training embassy staff to ‘receive and address complaints,
including through the provision of le gal aid,’ and to ‘provide counselling
and facilitate appropriate shelter’ to workers ‘fleeing from abusiveemployment circumstances’.
104 This holds Guatemalan consulates in
states of employment at least pa rtially responsible for protecting
Guatemalan nationals’ rights  in states of employment.
In contradiction to its obliga tion under the Convention, the
Guatemalan government has yet to  establish strong mechanisms to
address abuses against its nationals while they are working abroad.
Guatemalan nationals in the US, Canada and Mexico, suffer rampantworkers’ rights abuses. As detailed in the Southern Poverty Law Center’s
2013 report entitled ‘Close to slaver y: Guestworker programs in the United
States’, Guatemalan workers on te mporary foreign worker visas face
abuses and labour violations at the recruitment stage, in pay and
transportation costs, through the threat of deportation, and even in
situations of captivity.105 Irregular Guatemalan wo rkers face many of the
same challenges as well as the heightened risk of deportation.106 Several
reports from United Food and Commer cial Workers Canada detail abuses
104 General Comment 1 on migrant domestic workers, CMW  (23 February 2011),  UN
Doc CMW/C/GC/1  (2011) http://www .refworl d.org/docid/4ed3553e2.html
(accessed 6 November 2015) 11-12.
105 Southern Poverty Law Center ‘Close to sl avery: Guest worker programs in the United
States’ (18  February 2013) 10, 15, 19, 27, 30 & 33 https://www .splcenter.org/
20130218/close-slavery-guestworker-programs -united-states (accessed September
2015). 
106 Southern Poverty Law Center ‘Injustice  on our plates’ (2010)  4, 7 https://www .
splcenter.org/20101108/injustice-our- plates (accessed September 2015).226    Chapter 8
of Guatemalan temporary workers in Canada.107 Guatemalan workers in
Mexico also can face extreme labour abuses.108 
The Guatemalan consulates in major cities in the United States and
Canada have taken some steps to reac h out to their nationals through the
‘consulado movil’ programme, where the consulate official s go to heavily
populated Guatemalan areas on th e weekends and offer services.109
However, clearly more is needed to protect the rights of vulnerable
workers. 
4.5.5 Portable justice for abuses suffered abroad
The ICRMW obligates Guatemala to pr otect its workers upon their return
to Guatemala. Article 22(6) of the Convention requires Guatemala to
protect the rights of Guatemalan migrant workers to wages rightfully
earned in the state of employment: 
In case of expulsion, the person concerned shall have a reasonable
opportunity before or after departure to  settle any claims for wages and other
entitlements due to him or he r and any pending liabilities. 
Article 22(9) emphasises migrant worker s’ right to portable justice after
departure from the state of employment, stating that: 
Expulsion from the State of employment  shall not in itself prejudice any
rights of a migrant worker or a member of his or her family acquired in
accordance with the law of that State, including the right to receive wages and
other entitlements due to him or her. 
As a state party to the Conventi on, then, Guatemala has a duty to
implement measures at home to grant its citizens who emigrate for work
access to portable justice for abuses su ffered abroad. In a recent report, the
Special Rapporteur stressed the need for portable justice when he urged
state parties to conclude bilateral agreements to facilitate the filing of
107 United Food and Commercial Workers Canada ‘The status of migrant farm workers in
Canada 2011’ (2011) 5, 9, 13 & 17 http ://www .ufcw .ca/templates/ufcwcanada/
images/awa/publications/UFCW-St atus_of_MF_Workers_2010-2011_EN.pdf
(accessed September 2015); United Food an d Commercial Workers Canada and the
Agriculture Workers Alliance  ‘Report on the status of migrant workers in Canada
2010-2011 ’ 15 & 23 http://www .ufcw .ca/templ ates/ufcwcanada/images/awa/
publica tions/UFCW-Status_of_M F_Workers_2010-2011_EN.pdf (accessed
September 2015). 
108 US Department of State ‘Traffickin g in Persons Report 2014’ 271 http://
www .state.gov/document s/organization/226847.pdf (accessed September 2015).
109 A listing of upcoming or recent ‘consulado móvil’ events is available on some city
consulate websites. For example, the New York consulate lists consulados móviles:
http://www .consuladoguatemalanuevayork.org/consulados-moacuteviles.html(accessed August 2015). See also the Guat emalan Embassy in  Canada. http://
www .canada.minex.gob.gt/Home/Visor_ Pagina.aspx?Pagi naID=148 (accessed
September 2015).  Guatemala’s implementation of the ICRMW     227
claims for unpaid wages and benefits in the country of employment for
migrants who return to the countries of origin.110
One civil society initiative that se eks portable justice for Guatemalan
migrant workers is the Justice in Motion Defender Network, launched byJustice in Motion (then known as the Global Workers Justice Alliance) in
April 2008. The Defender Network in cludes human rights organisations
and individual advocates across coun tries of origin including Mexico,
Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Honduras. Advocates in the
Defender Network work with advocates in countries of employment to
facilitate employment law cases for migrant workers who have returned to
their native countries.111 While this is a significant and much needed civil
society response to the lack of portable justice for workers who have
returned to Guatemala, the Defender Network cannot compensate forlong-overdue government action – required under the Convention and
article 34 of the Guatemalan Labour Code – to ensure portable justice for
Guatemalan migrant workers throughout their labour migration cycle.
5 Conclusion: The valu e of the Convention
This chapter has discussed the implic ations of the ICRMW for Guatemala
as a state party. It reviewed the context of migration to and from
Guatemala along with the conditions in which Guatemala signed andratified the Convention, and then evaluated Guatemala’s progress towards
implementation in various key domains.  What is revealed is that while
promising steps have been taken toward introducing changes to complywith the Convention’s obligations to protect specific rights of migrant
workers, overall the state has failed to adequately implement the ICRMW
and protect those rights. The progress made has been slow, and Guatemalahas yet to put in place a legal framework that would protect migrants’
rights as per the Convention, even though that framework seems to be
slowly emerging with pressure and as sistance from civil society and the
international community. 
In light of this rather grim re ality of weak compliance, one may
question the purpose of ratifying th e Convention. Carol Girón is director
of the Project on Childhood and Adol escence at Scalabrini Missionaries,
the Human Mobility Commission of the Episcopal Conference of Catholic
Bishops, which is one of the main or ganisations that advocates for migrant
rights in Guatemala. Girón sees valu e in the Convention in spite of its
appearance as almost a dead letter.
112 She argues that the Convention is an
110 General Comment 2 on the rights of migrant workers in an irregular situation and
members of their families, CMW (28 August 2013), UN Doc  CMW/C/GC/215
(2013).
111 Justice in Motion ‘The Defender Network’ http://justiceinmotion.org/the-work/
(accessed June 2017). 
112 C Girón, personal interview with Sc alabrini Missionaries 14 August 2015. 228    Chapter 8
important point of reference that contributes to the defence of migrant
rights and notes that it was Guat emala’s non-compliance with the
Convention which spurred civil society to develop an alternative report tothe government one presented ahead of the 2010 CMW meeting in
Geneva, so as to hold it  accountable for its failur e to meet its Convention
obligations. From this process, the Grupo Articulador coalition emerged,which includes the majority of orga nisations working on migrant worker
rights issues; the group uses social  media and other advocacy tools and
develops legal and public policy proposals. In 2011 it presented a
document called ‘Migrations: A commitment of the Guatemalan State
2012-2016’, with the goal of pressuring political parties and presidential
candidates running for election to incorporate migrant advocates’
demands into their political platform s. This organisation has continued
working to obtain a comprehensive immigration law and advance other
public policy proposals that protect migrant workers. By galvanising civilsociety to produce shadow reports, create coalitions and mobilise more
generally – apparent in the actions of the Grupo Articulador – the
Convention thus serves as an important point of reference, catalyst andtool to help Guatemalan civil societ y to press for change at both the
national and international levels.229Gabriela Díaz Prieto and Gretchen Kuhner
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
Mexico was the first country to sign the UN International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families (ICRMW) in 1991 and has been  one of its foremost promoters
since it was conceived in the late 1970s . While during the drafting of the
ICRMW, Mexico’s intention was to have an instrument to protect
Mexican migrants in the US, today Me xico must also guarantee the rights
of migrants who live and work in Mexico, as well as those who are in
transit.1 Part of this population is comprised of women who are impacted
at each part of the migration process in different ways than men. 
This chapter analyses the changes in legislation and policies that
Mexico has undertaken to comply with the ICRMW, especially to address
the specific situation of women migr ant workers. While Mexico has made
legislative and policy advances, it still falls short of compliance withICRMW standards in practice. The corruption and impunity endemic in
Mexico as a result of the weak rule of law mean that the country lacks an
effective infrastructure for implementing policy and legislation. This,coupled with Mexico's geographical position as a route between Central
America and the US, limits the robust application of the legislative
framework. While the dearth of publicly available information prevents anaccurate, detailed assessment of migrants' access to their rights and
services in Mexico, the humanitarian crisis represented by the transit of
Central American irregular migrants  and asylum seekers through the
country, and the dangerous and exploi tative conditions that migrant
workers, especially women, face on a daily basis, are evidence of the lack
of compliance with the ICRMW. While fulfilment of recommendations
1 G Díaz Prieto & G Kuhner ‘Mexico’s role in promoting and implementing the
ICRMW’in P de Guchteneire et al (eds) Migration and human rights: The United Nations
Convention on Migrant Workers  Rights (2009) 219.9CHAPTERMEXICO  AND  THE ICRMW:
PROTECTING  WOMEN
MIGRANT  WORKERS230    Chapter 9
made by the Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW) would help
strengthen the protection of women migrant workers’ rights in Mexico,2
the CMW should make a greater number of recommendations concerning
women migrant workers, the implementation of which would help to
eliminate the rights violations that they face. 
This chapter first describes the mi gration context and the particular
problems that migrant women face  in Mexico. Second, it analyses
Mexico’s compliance with the ICRMW in three areas: legislation, policy
and practice. Third, it addresses the ac tivity of the state and civil society in
relation to the ICRMW and their in teraction with the CMW. Finally, it
concludes by identifying three cond itions that the Committee could
address to improve implementation of the ICRMW in Mexico with a view
to strengthening protection for women migrant workers.
2 Background
Although Mexico was the first country to sign the ICRMW, eight years
went by before it was ratified. The reas on for this delay largely relates to a
shift in government priorities due to the negotiations of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with the US and Canada. At
the time, there was a concern that signing the Convention could potentially
jeopardise the success of  these negotiations.3
In order to encourage ratificati on of the ICRMW, Mexican civil
society organisations carried out a national campaign that portrayed
migrants as dignified workers. In addition, they developed a favourable
relationship with the Mexican Senate , which proved important in ensuring
that the ICRMW was ratified in 1999 with fewer reservations than
proposed by the executive branch.4 As a result, the Convention was
ratified with only one reservation which concerned article 22(4) of the
ICRMW. Article 22(4) provides for the right of migrants to submit the
reason they should not be expelled and to have their case reviewed, as well
as the right to request suspension of the expulsion decision until suchreview is undertaken. This right was in conflict with article 33 of the
2 Mexico presented periodic reports to  the CMW in 2005, 2010 and 2016, and has
received recommendations in 2006 and 2011. Th ose specifically concerning barriers or
rights violations faced by women migrant workers are: Concluding Observations of
the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families: Mexico, CMW (2 0 December 2006), UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/
CO/1 (2006) paras 6, 26, 30, 32, 34, 36 & 38; and Draft Concludi ng Observations of
the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families: Mexico, CMW (6 April 2011), UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/CO/2(2011) paras 24, 26, 32, 34, 38, 40, 46, 48, 50 & 53. The CMW is currently preparing
its Concluding Observat ions in response to Mexico’s 2016 report.
3 Díaz Prieto & Kuhner (n 1 above) 222.4 F Venet ‘La Convención para la protección de todos los trabajadores migrantes y sus
familiares: posibilidades y límites en su aplicación’ in Primer curso de capacitación para
organizaciones de la sociedad civil sobre protección de poblaciones migrantes  (1999) 270.  Mexico and the ICRMW     231
Mexican Constitution5 which at the time took legal precedence over
international instruments.6 Indeed, in May 1999, the Supreme Court
clarified that all international instru ments should be co nsidered secondary
or immediately below the Constitution, but above federal law.7 
Although the CMW requested Mexico to withdraw this reservation a
number of times since 2006, it wa s not until 2011 that the Mexican
Constitution was revised; integr ating international human rights
instruments into the national legal framework.8 This marked the beginning
of a legal journey to comply with UN conventions ratified by Mexico and
the recommendations made by the Comm ittees assigned to monitor each
instrument.9 Three years later, on 11 July 2014, Mexico finally withdrew
the reservation to article 22(4), thereby allowing migrants to submit the
reason they should not be expelled and to have their case reviewed by thecompetent authority.10 Other significant law reforms to comply with the
ICRMW are analysed in se ction 5 of this chapter.
3 Migration context in Mexico
Mexico forms part of one of the most dynamic and complex migratory
systems in the world, that of North Am erica, which is one of the principal
regions of destination for migrants.11 Its proximity to the US poses a
number of important challenges for Mexico. 
On the one hand, 12 million Mexican-born people live in the US
(equivalent to 10 per cent of the population in Mexico), and 51 per cent of
them are undocumented. Both the economic crises as well as the
increasingly restrictive US immigration policy have resulted in significant
5 Article 33 of the Mexican Constitution and art 125 of the General Population Act
stipulated that the Executive had exclus ive authority to expel from the National
territory, immediately and without a judicial hearing, any foreigner whose residence inMexico it deemed undesirable. Therefore, art 33 was contravened by the requirements
of ICRMW art 22(4). 
6 At that time, art 133 of the Mexican Constitution establis hed legal precedence of the
Constitution over international instrument s. Díaz Prieto & Kuhner (n 1 above) 222.
7 Suprema Corte de Justicia de la Nación ‘Tesis P . LXXVII/99’ Semanario Judicial de la
Federación y su Gaceta  (1999) 46 http://www .equidad.s cjn.gob.mx/biblioteca_virtual/
jurisprudencia/n acional/jurisprudencia/27.pdf (accessed 15 March 2015)
8 Suprema Corte de Justicia de la Nación SCJN determina que las normas sobre derechos
humanos contenidas en Tratados Internacionale s tienen rango constitucional. Contradicción de
Tesis 293/2011 (2013) http://www2.scjn.gob.mx/as untosrelevantes/pagina/seguimie
ntoasuntosrelevantespub.aspx?id=129659& seguimientoid=556 (accessed 22 February
2015). 
9 For example, art 33 of the Mexican Consti tution was modified  in 2011 in order to
guarantee the right of migrants to explain their reasons for objecting to their expulsion
and to submit their case to the competent authority, as recommended by CMW .
10 While Mexico has recognised the compet ence of the CMW under art 77 to receive
complaints from individuals, it has not recognised the competence of the CMW under
art 76 to receive inter-state complaints, although the Committee has recommendedMexico to do so. 
11 R Smith ‘Dilemas y perspectivas del sist ema migratorio de América del Norte’ (2000)
50 Comercio internacional  289. 232    Chapter 9
return migration to Mexico, consisti ng of both voluntary return (1.4
million people between 2005 and 2010) and ‘repatriation’ (2.8 million
deportations from the US to Mexico between 2008 and 2013).12 
On the other hand, Mexican territory is one of the main migratory
corridors in the world. Each year approximately 400 000 undocumented
migrants transit through Mexico on their way to the US, more than 90 per
cent of whom are from Central America.13 The principal entry point to
M e x i c o  i s  t h e  s o u t h e r n  b o r d e r  w i t h  G u a t e m a l a ,  w h i c h  l a c k s  t h e
infrastructure to ensure that intern ational migration takes place through
regular routes. According to the Minist ry of the Interior, there are eleven
official entry points and 370 informal transit points along the 1 149 km
border. The latter facilitates 95 per cent of the irregular migration which
takes place across Mexico's southern border.14
Twenty per cent of the 400 000 pers ons that annually cross Mexico in
an irregular fashion are women.15 Although the total flow and women’s
participation in it diminished betw een 2006 and 2011, it started to grow in
2012 and reached a peak in 2014, with the migration of thousands ofCentral American families fleeing violence16 and lack of opportunities.17 
This transnational movement of fami lies has increased the presence of
women and girl migrants in the migr ation flows and detention centres both
in the US and Mexico.18 While the number of apprehensions of male
migrants by the Southwest Sector Border Patrol in the US increased by
15 per cent between 2013 and 2014, the number of apprehensions of female
migrants increased by 74 per cent between 2013 and 2014.19 In Mexico,
there was a twofold increase in the number of women in detention (from
12 Secretaría de Gobernación Programa Especial de Migración 2014-2018  (2014) 10. Multiple
deportations of the same individual in a given year are counted as separate deportation
‘events’ for the purposes of these figures.
13 G Díaz Prieto & G Kuhner Un viaje sin rastros.  Mujeres migrantes que transitan por México
en situación irregular (2014) 16 & 47.
14 Secretaría de Gobernación (n 12 above) 21.15 Díaz Prieto & Kuhner (n 13 above) 16.
16 UNHCR published in 2014 and 2015 two re ports that thoroughly document the
escalation of violence in Central America, the devastating effect it has on children and
women, and their international protection needs. UNHCR Children on the Run  (2014)
http://www .unhcr.org/56fc266f4.html  (accessed 19 April 2016) and UNHCR Women
on the Run (2015) http://www .unhcrwashington.o rg/sites/default /files/Women%20
on%20the%20Run%20Report_Full%20R eport%20for%20Web%20Nov%202015.pdf
(accesed 19 April 2016).
17 More than 68 000 families arrived to the US during FY 2014 and 40 000 during 2015.
R Dominguez Villegas & V Rietig Migrants deported from the United States and México to
the Northern Triangle: A statistical and socioeconomic profile  (2015) Migration Policy
Institute http://www .migrationpolicy.org/research/migrants-deported-united-states-and-México-northern-triangle-statistical -and-socioeconomic (accessed 22 February
2016). 
18 Dominguez Villegas & Rietig (n 17 above) 6.19 United States Border Patrol ‘US Border Patrol fiscal year 2013 sector profile’  (2013)
http://www .cbp.gov/sites/default/fil es/documents/U.S.%20Border%20Patrol%20
Fiscal%20Year%202013%20Profile.pdf (acces sed 22 February 2016); United States  Mexico and the ICRMW     233
13 975 in 2013 to 28 639 in 2014), whereas the number of men in detention
increased by 36 per cent.20 The apprehension of children in Mexico and
the US grew by 150 per cent in this period (from 28 934 to 72 491), and thedeportation of girls fr om Mexico tripled (from 1 800 in 2013 to 5 500 in
2014).21
In 2010, the discovery of the bodies of 72 migrants in San Fernando,
Tamaulipas, led the internatio nal community to denounce the
humanitarian crisis experienced by migrants who transit through Mexico.
While such migrants run the risk of  forced disappearance, homicide,
abduction, physical and sexual violen ce and extortion, the vulnerability of
migrants in transit, especially wome n and children, is heightened by the
wider national context of corrupt ion and lack of accountability.22
In addition, in the southern states  that border Guatemala and Belize,
high levels of intra-regional migr ation occur based on historical and
geographical ties, especially in Chia pas, where the border was established
just a century ago. This state has a large number of migrants from those
countries, mainly Guatemala, who live  and work on different sides of the
border, either as temporary workers or permanent residents.
I t  i s  i m p o r t a n t  t o  n o t e  t h a t  M e x i c o  d o e s  n o t  h a v e  a  h i g h  l e v e l  o f
immigration. The number of foreign-born  people living in Mexico is less
than 1 per cent of the total population23 while in 2012 immigrants in the
US and Canada constituted 13 per ce nt and 19,8 per ce nt respectively.24
However, the number of people bo rn in Guatemala, Honduras, El
Salvador and Nicaragua and residing  in Mexico increased by 60,77 per
cent between 2000 and 2010.25 In particular, the Mexican censuses of 2000
and 2010 show that the majority of Central American migrants in Mexico
are women.26 This figure reflects the trend of intraregional migration in
Central America, where women constitute 57 per cent of migrants.27
19 Border Patrol ‘US Border Patrol fiscal year 2014 sector profile’  (2014) http://www .
cbp.gov/sites/default/files/docume nts/USBP%20Stats% 20FY2014%20sector%20
profile.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016).
20 Centro de Estudios Migratorios de la Secretaría de Gobernación ‘Extranjeros
presentados y devueltos’ 2013; 2014 & 2015 h ttp://www .politicam igratoria.gob.mx/
es_mx/SEGOB/Extranjeros_p resentados_y_devueltos (accessed 6 July 2015).
21 Dominguez Villegas & Riet ig (n 17 above) 14 & 23.
22 Díaz Prieto & Kuhner (n 13 above).
23 INEGI ‘Población nacida en otro país residente en  México, 2000 y 2010’ Censos de
población y vivienda http://www .inegi.gob.mx/prod_serv/contenidos/espanol/bvin
egi/productos/censos/poblac ion/2010/princi_result/cpv 2010_principales_resultados
IV .pdf (accessed 22 February 2016).
24 OECD International mi gration outlook  2014 (2014) 362-363.
25 INEGI (n 23 above).
26 UN Women & Instituto para las Mujeres en la Migración Las trabajadoras migrantes
centroamericanas en Chiapas. Recomendaciones de política pública para garantizar el ejercicio de
sus derechos  (2015) 11. 
27 J Mazza & E Sohnen ‘On the other side of the fence: Changing dynamics of migration
in the Americas’ (2010) Migration Information Source  Migration Policy Institute http://
www .migrationinformation.org/feature /display.cfm?ID=784 (accessed 22 February
2016).234    Chapter 9
While women migrants from Centra l America who work in Chiapas
share some of the risks women in tran sit experience, they also face other
kinds of rights’ violations. They te nd to be young women, in their
productive and reproductive age, with high levels of illiteracy and little
formal education. The majority are employed in low-wage jobs in the
informal economy, in gendered employment sectors including street sales,domestic work, sex work and the entertainment industries.28 Most of them
do not have a work permit, which mean s that abuse and lack of access to
rights is constant. The conditions  of exploitation endured by women
migrants who work in the agricultural fincas,  as domestic workers and in
the sex industry in Chiapas ha ve recently been documented.29
While it might be complex to differentiate between Central American
transit migrants and immigrants living in Chiapas, there are elements thatallow a distinction. The decision of Central American women who
migrate to the US, and their chances of reaching their destination, are
strongly influenced by a number of factors, including their economic
situation; their labour experience in their country of origin; and
importantly their access to a migration network (having family in the US)
which allows them to pay for a long and perilous journey and to secureemployment and housing in the dest ination country. On the other hand,
Central American women who migrate to Chiapas value the perceived
proximity to their families and the regular visits home that this facilitates.
30
4 Implementation of the Convention in Mexico
4.1 Impact on legislation 
As mentioned above in section 2, in 2011 the Mexican Constitution was
revised, integrating international human rights instruments into the
national legal framework.31 In order to comply with UN conventions and
the recommendations made by the Committees assigned to monitor each
instrument, Mexico has initiated important efforts to align its legalframework with international human rights instruments, producing some
positive changes for migrant worker protections. First, in 2011, the Law on
Migration which sought to ensure compliance with ICRMW obligations
28 CEDAW’s General Recommendation 26 acknow ledges there is a male-centred culture
of entertainment that has created a demand for woman as entertainers (para 8). The
entertainment industry is the occupational sector that relates to sex, but does notinclude direct sexual activity with the paying client. In Tapachula, Chiapas, many
Central American women work as table dancers as well as in ‘centros botaneros’,
where their work consists of drinking and dancing with clients. 
29 UN Women & Instituto para las Muje res en la Migración (n 26 above) 9.
30 UN Women & Instituto para las Muje res en la Migración (n 26 above) 11.
31 Suprema Corte de Justicia de la Nación (n 8 above).  Mexico and the ICRMW     235
was passed.32 In recent years, Mexico has approved new legislation related
to the protection of refugees and asyl um seekers; to prevent, punish and
eradicate trafficking in persons; to pr omote assistance for victims of crime
and human rights violations; and to guarantee access for women to a life
free from violence. In addition, in 2012, the Federal Labour Law (LFT)
was reformed, incorporating a gend er perspective and strengthening
workplace inspection. 
These new laws, and reforms to exis ting laws, provide Mexico with an
important regulatory framework to promote and guarantee the rights of
migrant workers as recommended by the CMW. Some examples include:
(a) The Migration Law (articles 11 and 12) complies with the
recommendation of the CMW to guaran tee access to ju stice for migrant
workers and their families, regardless of their migration situation.33
Article 52(v) of this law stipulates that migrant victims or witnesses of
felony crimes shall receive immigration status for humanitarian reasons,
issued by the National Migration Institute (INM). This migration
document allows victims to reside  and work in Mexico while they
participate in legal procedures related to the crime.
(b) The Migration Law (articles 9 and 12) complies with the CMW
recommendation to ensure that the birth of children of migrant workers
may be registered, regardless of th e migration status of the parents.34
(c) The reforms of 2012 to the Federal Labour Law (article 994) and of 2014
to the Workplace Inspection Regulations (articles 18, 28 and 46)
increased the penalties for employ ers and strengthened workplace
inspections, in compliance with CMW recommendations,35 to improve
oversight of workplace conditions. 
 (d) Article 8 of the Migration Law recognises the right to emergency health
care for all migrants and the Heal th Regulation 04 6SSA2-2005 (2009)
includes criteria for prevention and assistance in cases of domestic and
s e x u a l  v i o l e n c e  t h a t  i n c l u d e  m i g r a n t  w o m e n ,  i r r e s p e c t i v e  o f  t h e i r
migration status. In an attempt to ensure access to basic health services
for migrants in transit, the Fede ral Health Ministry announced in
January 2015 that all migrants can register for a federal health
programme for a period of 90 days, an initiative that would help migrants
moving throughout the country receive free health services at any localclinic. 
32 F Alba & MA Castillo New approaches to migration mana gement in Mexico and Central
America  (2012) http://www .migrationpoli cy.org/pubs/RMSG-MexCentAm-Migra
tion.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016).
33 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to Mexico, CMW (20 December
2006), UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/CO/1 (2006) para 6.
34 Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Memebers of Their Families to Mexico, CMW (3 May 2011),
UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/CO/2 (2011) para 40. Some of the state-level civil registry
codes have not been reformed to comply with the federal Migration Law and stillcontain articles that impede the birth registration of migrant workers’ children
www .imumi.com (accessed 22 February 2016).
35 CMW (n 33 above) para 38; CMW (n 34 above) para 48.236    Chapter 9
(e) In December 2014, Mexico passed a federal law on the protection of
children that includes a specific chapter on migrant children. The law
provides that no child should be detained in any detention centre.
Children who are brought into INM cu stody should be transferred to a
shelter run by the Department of Fa mily Protection for a ‘Best Interest
Determination’.
However, Mexican legislation still has areas that need to be reformed in
order to improve legal protection for migrant workers. First, the Mexican
labour legislation still needs to incr ease its protection of women workers'
rights. For example, it does not guar antee decent working conditions for
domestic workers, be they Mexican or migrants. An example of this is the
provision in the Federal Labour Law for a 12 hour day without overtime
(article 133). In addition, the Soci al Security Law does not require
employers of domestic workers to regi ster them with the social security
system (article 12(I) and 13). Furthe rmore, the Federal Labour Law and
the Social Security Law do not incl ude occupational safety and health
benefits for women working in the sex industry.
Other shortcomings in the Mexican legislation reflect the historical
position of Mexico vis-à-vis foreig ners, characterised as simultaneously
desirable and inconvenient, espe cially for Mexican businessman.36 For
example, the Federal Labour Law (a rticles 354 and 357) permits foreign
workers to participate in unions, but no t within the leadership (article 372).
Furthermore, the reality of the labo ur market in which the majority of
immigrants in Mexico participate, part icularly in the southern part of the
country, is not addressed by the Migration Law37 which: 
(a) Leads to indirect discrimination for migrant workers who apply for work
authorisation as the requirements are linked to the formal economy
(official employer offer, tax requirem ents, formal contracts and costs that
are unrealistic for many workers from Central America). 
(b) Limits the possibility for migran t workers in an exploitative work
environment to terminate an em ployment relationship as work
authorisation is linked to an individual employer. 
(c) Limits the possibility for women in situations of domestic violence to
obtain a residence permit independen t of the spouse or to otherwise
continue legal residence.38
Finally, the US also has interests at stake. While the Migration Law allows
federal migration agents to conduc t migration enforcement activities
throughout the country (in addition to the standard immigration controls
36 P Yankelevich Deseables o inconvenientes? Las fronteras de la extranjería en el México
posrevolucionario  (2011) 12.
37 Migration Law, arts 52-57 & 132-134; Regula tions of the Migration Law, art 115; and
Federal Labour Law, arts 8 & 16.
38 UN Women et al Legislación mexicana y derechos de las trabajadoras migrantes.  Un análisis
del cumplimiento de la Convención sobre la El iminación de todas las formas de Discriminación
Contra la Mujer (CEDAW) y su Recomend ación General no 26 en la legislación (2014)  40.   Mexico and the ICRMW     237
for people entering by air, land and se a) including mobile checkpoints, the
US has granted support to these acti vities through the Merida Initiative
(2008-ongoing), an agreement between the US and Mexico with USinvestment.39 Hence, migration agents are authorised to board buses and
arbitrarily detain migrants based on discriminatory criteria such as skin
colour, ethnicity, accents and smell. These practices have been denounced
as unconstitutional because they viol ate non-discrimination clauses, the
right to free transit and the right to privacy.40 
One of the objectives of the Mexican migration policy for the current
federal administration (2013-2018) is to  accomplish a total harmonisation
with the international-legal framework, but regional economic and
political interests make this more difficult. Nevertheless, in spite of the
legislative gaps, Mexico has a stro ng legislation which, if properly
implemented, could effectively guarantee the rights of migrant workers.41 
4.2 Impact on policy
The Mexican government has establ ished a number of mechanisms to
protect and guarantee the rights of workers, including migrant workers.
Most of the mechanisms to which migrant women have access are
designed for the general population, su ch as the labour conciliation and
arbitration courts. However, there ar e some initiatives that have been
designed specifically for migrants, such  as the Special Prosecutor’s Offices
for Crimes Committed against Migran ts. These Offices, which have been
opened in the states of Chiapas, Veracruz and Oaxaca, are in charge ofpreventing crime, increasing access to  justice for migrants and intensifying
investigations and prosecutions ag ainst perpetrators who target the
migrant population. 
Moreover, the government has demo nstrated interest in complying
with its international obligations to improve protection for migrant
39 CR Seelke & K Finklea US Mexican security cooperation: The Mérida initia tive and beyond
(2015) 7 & 16 https://www .fas.org/sgp /crs/row/R41349.pdf (accessed 22 February
2016).
40 CNDH Recomendación General número 13/2006 sobre la  práctica de verificaciones migratorias
ilegales (2006) http://www .cndh.org.mx/sites/ all/doc/Recomendaciones/generales/
RecGral_013.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016); Grupo de Trabajo sobre PolíticaMigratoria ‘Aportes al debate sobre la Ley de Migración: Posicionamiento del Grupo
de Trabajo’  2011 http://www .estudiosdemigracion .org/ (accessed 22 February 2016);
CONAPRED Proteger los derechos humanos de las pe rsonas migrantes: reto múltiple del
Estado mexicano,  (2012) http://www .conapre d.org.mx/documentos_cedoc/
Dossier_Migr_2012_INACC.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016); i(dh)eas Víctimas entre
fronteras. La ausencia del Estado en la defensa de los derechos de las personas migrantes enMéxico (2013) 104; ‘Detectan a migrante s por su olor a hierbita’ Reforma  26 November
2013 3; Díaz Prieto & Kuhner (n 13 above) 24.
41 UN Women & Instituto para las Mujeres en la Migración (n 26 above)  19.238    Chapter 9
workers through national public poli cies elaborated for the period 2013-
2018.42 The National Development Plan  recognises the important economic
and social contributions that migrants make and takes into considerationthe gendered differences in these cont ributions. It also underscores that
women migrants are more vulnerable to certain types of abuses in the
migration process and that programmes designed to address these abusesmust include a gender perspective.
43 
As part of the national  policy planning for the period 2013-2018, the
government created the Special Programme on Migration  in 2014. It
constitutes the first ever national migration policy that includes objectivesand specific strategies that require inter-institutional cooperation. While
the national policy programming ac knowledges the responsibility of
Mexico as a country of origin and transit for Central American migrantsand refugees, acceptance by Mexico that  it is a country of destination and
return is not reflected in its policies. This position is also evident in
Mexico’s reports to the CMW. Fo r example, in 2011, the Mexican
government stated that the lack of  policies and programmes for women
migrant workers was due to the fact that ‘Mexico, unlike other regions like
Europe and North America, is not a relevant receptor of feminine
migration’.
44
On the other hand, the objectives and strategies of the Special
Programme on Migration 2014-2018  are extremely ambitious. For example,
they provide for an alliance betwee n the US, Mexico and Central America
to promote regional development, cu ltural exchange and enhanced legal
mechanisms for migration.45 Although this objective implies the
opportunity to address transit migration from a regional perspective,including solutions to guarantee human security for migrants and access to
basic rights, in practice policies ha ve focused on detention rather than
regularisation of migrant flows. 
Currently, this alliance is limited to the Merida Initiative, discussed
above in section 4.1. The fourth pillar of the Initiative seeks to strengthen
42 This policy framework includes a National Development Plan , transversal programmes
(gender, migration), as well as sectoral programmes for each Ministry. In these
documents, the Executive Power establishes the objectives, priorities and strategies that
outline the actions the government should follow throughout the period in question.For further information on the main action lines regarding women migrant workers in
Mexico, see: UN Women & Instituto para las Mujeres en la Migración (n 26
above)  22-35. Action lines for women in transit are analysed in Díaz Prieto & Kuhner
(n 13 above) 98-101.
43 Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 2013-2018 (2013)
96.
44 Respuestas presentadas por escrito por el gobierno de la República de México a la lista
de cuestiones (CMW/C/MEX/Q/2) recibidas por el Comité para la protección de los
derechos de todos los trabajadores migratorios y de sus familiares en relación con elexamen del segundo informe periódico de México, Gobierno de México (15 March
2011), UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/Q/2/Add.1 (2011) para 243.
45 Action Line 2.3.7. Secretaría  de Gobernación (n 12 above) 37.  Mexico and the ICRMW     239
Mexico’s southern border.46 Additionally, Mexico has adopted a Southern
Border Programme (2014-2015) to reduce  irregular migration to the US.47
The results of this collaboration ar e dramatic and disquieting: while
irregular migration on the US border decreased by half in 2015,48
detention of Central Americans in Me xico during 2015 increased by 70 per
cent.49 Due to the limited capacity of the INM and the Commission for
Refugee Assistance (COMAR) to screen for cases that require
international protection, the policy has led to violation of protection
standards for migrant families and children during detention anddeportation procedures, and human ri ghts violations against migrants
have increased.50 Civil society organisations and the media have
documented the violence caused by the intensified migration enforcementpractices.51 The planned national policies to improve protection of
migrant workers have in fact been neglected in favour of enforcement
activities. 
4.3 Implementation of the migration policy 
Although Mexico has a solid legal fram ework, the lack of implementation
of national policies related to migrants’ rights is exposed by the
humanitarian crisis of Central American  irregular migrants and refugees in
transit through Mexico, as well as the dangerous and abusive conditions
t h a t  m i g r a n t  w o r k e r s ,  e s p e c i a l l y  w o m e n ,  f a c e  o n  a  d a i l y  b a s i s .  A n
evaluation of migrant workers’ access to basic rights and services, and ofthe impact of government programm es on migrants’ living, work and
transit conditions, is hampered by a lack of publicly available
information.52 For example, in 2010 the CMW requested information
46 In 2015, the US Congress provided $79 milli on above the Administ ration’s request of
$115 million for the Mérida Init iative to be used for helping Mexico secure its southern
border and implement justice sector reforms. Seelke & Finklea (n 39 above) 7 & 16.
47 On 7 July 2014, President Peña Nieto an nounced a new Southern Border Plan. The
plan increased security at 12 ports of entry with Guatemala and Belize and along
known migration routes. Under this plan, migration agents have worked with the
military and the police to increase im migration enforcement efforts. CR Seelke
Mexico’s recent immigration enforcement efforts  Report IF10215 (2015) http://
pennyhill.com/jmsfileseller/docs//I F10215.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016).
48 The number of apprehensions of Salvadorans, Guatemalans and Hondurans by the US
reduced from 239 000 in 2014 to 110 000 in 2015. Domínguez Villega s & Rietig (n 17
above) 22.
49 Dominguez Villegas & Ri etig (n 17 above) 1.
50 UNHCR Arrancados de Raíz  (2014) http://www .acnur.o rg/t3/fileadmin/scripts/
doc.php?file=t3/fileadmin/Document os/Publicaciones/2014/9828 (accessed 22
February 2016); Georgetown Law Human Righ ts Institute Fact-Finding Project The
cost of stemming the tide: How immigration enforcement practices in Southern Mexico limit
migrant Children’s access to international protection (2015)  http://www .
law .georgetown.edu/academics/centers-institutes/human-rights-institute/fact-finding/upload/HRI-Fact-Finding-Report-S temming-the-Tide-Web-PDF_English.pdf
(accessed 22 February 2016).
51 Animal Político & CIDE Programa Frontera Sur: Una cacería de migrantes  (2015) April 28
http://www .animalpolitico.com/caceriademigrantes/index.html (accessed 22 Feb-
ruary 2016).
52 UN Women & Instituto para las Mujeres en la Migración (n 26 above)  24.240    Chapter 9
regarding the number of disputes be fore conciliation and arbitration
boards and the courts concerning unfair dismissal, employment-related
complaints and compensation for inju ry suffered by foreign workers in an
irregular situation.53 The Mexican government was unable to provide this
type of information because the labour court system does not record the
nationality (or the migrat ion status) of claimants.54 Information
disaggregated by sex regarding clai mants in labour cases is also
unavailable. As a result, in 2011, the CMW recommended that Mexico
establish a national migration system that takes into account the differentaspects of the Convention in order to improve the characterisation of the
migration flows and stocks and the design of public policies.55 
While the national migration inform ation system is included in the
national policy for 2013-2018, the gove rnment has not complied with the
recommendation in practice. Without a migration information system, the
government will be unable to design  and evaluate policies aimed at
improving migrants’ access to rights an d services. Lack of information also
undermines efforts to im prove accountability, reduce corruption and
impunity and strengthen the rule of law. As a result, the third report,
presented in 2016, ten years following Mexico’s first report to the CMW,
showed few substantive advances in the implementation of the
Convention. 
The majority of the observations made by the CMW in 2006 and 2011
still remain relevant, particular ly recommendations to guarantee:
(a) Access to regular, safe and dignified migration for women migrant
workers in transit,56 as  w e ll  a s thos e wh o li v e an d w ork  in M e xico , in
order to protect their rights.57
(b) Conditions for decent work for agri cultural migrant workers and migrant
domestic workers by increasing workplace inspections,58 the right to
unionise and the right to part icipate in union management.59 
(c) Access to justice and reparation for women migrant workers who are
victims of labour exploitation, crimes  or human rights violations, as well
as sanctions for those responsible,60 including state actors.61
53 List of issues to be taken up in connection with the consideration of the second
periodic report of Mexico (CMW/C/MEX/2), CMW (28 December 2010), UN Doc
CMW/C/MEX/Q/2 (2010) para 22
54 Written replies by the Government of Mexico to the List of Issues (CMW/C/MEX/
Q/1) raised by the Committee on the Protecti on of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families in connecti on with the consideration of the Initial
Report of Mexico (CMW/C/MEX/1), Government of Mexico (5 October 2006), UN
Doc CMW/C/MEX/Q/1/Add.1 (2006) para 242.
55 CMW (n 34 above) para 18.56 CMW (n 34 above) para 50. 
57 CMW (n 33 above) para 34; CMW (n 34 above) para 53.
58 CMW (n 33 above) paras 34 & 38; CMW (n 34 above) paras 38 & 48.59 CMW (n 33 above) para 36; CMW (n 34 above) para 46.
60 CMW (n 33 above) paras 6,  26, 30 & 34; CMW (n 34 abov e) paras 26, 34, 38, 48 & 50.
61 CMW (n 33 above) para 32; CMW (n 34 above) paras 30 & 32.  Mexico and the ICRMW     241
(d) The right to non-discriminatory treatment, especially based on ethnic
origin and gender.62
In order to comply with the ICRMW, the Mexican government needs to
mainstream gender policy and design evidence-based policies,
programmes and actions. Policy should recognise women migrants asagents of development, instead of stigmatising, criminalising or solely
identifying them as victims. Affirmative actions should also be
implemented. For example, the migration documentation process
currently discriminates against wo men agricultural migrant workers.
While men are contracted by their finca employers and documented with a
work permit, women are no t recognised as equal workers by their spouses
and employers. They are excluded from contract agreements by their
husbands and it suits employers not to  include them on the employee list
they hand to the migration authorities for registration, as this allows them
to contract women informally, there by reducing expenses. The outcome is
that many women are registered by mi gration authorities as ‘partners’ (or
not registered at all), and contracted  informally, without access to a work
permit and its benefits. A measure designed to document agricultural
migrant workers with a work permit would help to guarantee their labour
rights.63 
There are other ways in which Mexico could improve opportunities to
migrate with a work permit while complying with the ICRMW. One way
would be to address contradictions between the migration legal framework
and other laws.  For example, the requirements contained in the Migration
Law for a domestic worker to obtain migration status with work
authorisation contradict the regulation s of the Federal Labour Law as well
as the reality on the ground.64 As a result, even though a third of Central
American women who reside in the southern state of Chiapas are domestic
workers and 70 per cent of Guatem alan cross-border workers are
employed in domestic work, between January 2011 and July 2014 theINM in Chiapas only issued 153 empl oyer permits to contract foreign
domestic workers.65 The domestic work market in Tapachula, which sits
on the border with Guatemala and is the largest city in the state of Chiapas,consists mainly of indigenous Gu atemalan women because they are
62 CMW (n 34 above) paras 24, 40 & 53.
63 UN Women et al Guía breve para desarrollar legislación migratoria con perspectiva de género
(2015) 26.
64 While the Federal Labour Law allows an informal contract with a domestic worker,
the migration legislation requires the employ er to present a work offer to the INM in
order to request a work permit for a foreigner. Moreover, under the migration law theINM can pay visits to the employer’s hous e to verify working conditions, while the
Federal Labour Law does not consider this type of inspection.
65 UN Women et al (n 63 above) 18. 242    Chapter 9
stereotyped as women who are ‘good with children’ and who ‘withstand
hard labour’, although they ar e also judged as ‘thieves’.66 These prejudices
and stereotypes exacerbate the discri mination and exploitation that they
experience. At the same, they constitu te barriers of access to other rights
such as justice. 
Efforts to reduce impunity for human rights violations against
migrants are central to complian ce with the ICRMW. Although many
human rights violations are committ ed by civilians, authorities are
indifferent or lack traini ng to address the issue.67 In addition, the lack of
repercussions promotes impunity fo r human rights violations against
migrants. In order to reduce impunity , various factors should be addressed:
Mexican authorities should be held ac countable, institutions strengthened,
and existing laws and policies implemented. 
Weak public institutions and the sc arcity of resources to strengthen
capacity contribute to migrants’ rights violations.  A clear example of the
state’s inability to guarantee workers’  rights includes the security and
hygiene regulations in the agricultural camps in Chiapas, and the reducedhuman and financial resour ces allocated to labour inspection, arbitration
and conciliation.68 Chiapas, a state with more than 5 million inhabitants
has only two workplace inspectors.69 There are three offices of Workers’
Conciliation and Arbitration, and th e one in Tapachula has 16 employees.
In order to file an employment complaint, migrant workers from all over
the state must present their complaint in this office, which is often more
than 500 km from their worksite.70 
Mexico also fails to comply with its obligation to protect child
migrants due to a lack of human and financial resources. Child migrants
should not be detained in detentio n centres, yet the Office on Family
Protection (DIF), charged with housing migrant children, lacks the basic
infrastructure and budget needed to pr otect them, with the result that the
majority does not have access to its services.71 With three offices and 15
officials throughout the country, th e COMAR lacks capacity to screen
66 T Cruz Salazar ‘Racismo cultural y representaciones de inmigrantes centroamericanas
en Chiapas’ (2011) 6 Migraciones Internacionales 133; Centro de Derechos Humanos
Fray Matías de Córdova AC Por el reconocimiento a la cont ribución significativa de las
trabajadoras del hogar en la economía global. Si tuación de las y los trabajadores del hogar en la
ciudad de Tapachula,  Chiapas  (2012) 3. 
67 I(dh)eas (n 40 above) 108.
68 UN Women & Instituto para las Mu jeres en la Migración (n 26 above)  34.
69 A Romero Gudiño ‘Inspección federa l del trabajo en México’ (2008) 6 Revista
Latinoamericana de Derecho Social  113.
70 Interview with a public officer of the Ta pachula Labour Conciliation and Arbitration
2nd Special Court on 21 October 2014. 
71 D Lorente & G Morales ‘Introducción a los capítulos sobre niños en el contexto de la
migración en México – dos fronteras: una sola niñez’ in K Musalo & P Ceriani (eds)Niñez y migración en Centro y Norteamérica : causas, políticas, práctica y desafíos  (2015);
MD París y R Zenteno Detención y devolución de niño s, niñas y adolescentes (NNA)
migrantes no acompañados (2015).  Mexico and the ICRMW     243
child migrants for international protection needs.72 During 2014, it only
granted refugee status to 12 of th e more than 23 000 children who were
detained and deported from Mexico. This is of particular concernconsidering that the Office of th e High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) presented evidence that more than 50 per cent of the children
fleeing from Central America have international protection needs.73 
Therefore, it is important that the Mexican government takes
measures to guarantee the effective im plementation of the existing legal
framework. There is a need to properly train government officials and to
provide specific procedures so as to reduce the level of discretion which
officials enjoy when making de cisions relating to migrants.74 In the case of
access to justice, the Migration Law establishes that migrant victims of
crime should receive migration status  for humanitarian reasons in order to
continue with their criminal case. However, there is no mechanism to
identify victims and no information is  available to concerning the criteria
the INM uses to issue these documents, how many people apply and whatthe rate of successful and rejected applications is. In order to avoid granting
humanitarian protection, the INM often issues voluntary departure letters
that require migrants to leave the country within 15 days rather thangranting a year to follow up with their criminal cases as victims.
75 In 2014,
for example, Mexico issued ju st 332 documents for humanitarian
reasons.76
Other barriers to migrants’ rights co uld be addressed by better training
of government officials. For exampl e, Central American women migrant
workers’ access to rights  and services (particularly health, legalisation,
identity, education and programmes fo r their children) are not explicitly
excluded by the law. Rather, acce ss is impeded through confusing
interactions with civil servants, including those who are in charge of
implementing government programmes.77 
5 Mexican civil society and the ICRMW 
Civil society organisations in Mexico have been committed to the
ICRMW since the international campaigns for its signature and
72 Even though asylum applic ations grew 17% in 2014, CO MAR’s budget increased only
4% in 2015. Seelke  (n 47 above) 7; ‘México recibe 67% más solicitudes de refugio, pero
sólo tiene 15 oficiales para atender 2 mil casos’ Animal Político  México 19 June 2015
http://www .animalpolitico.com/2015/06/me xico-recibe-67-mas- de-solicitudes-de-
refugio-pero-solo-tiene-15-oficiales-de-com ar-para-atender-2-mil-casos/ (accessed
22 February 2016).
73 UNHCR (n 50 above) 32.74 UN Women & Instituto para las Mujeres en la Migración (n 26 above)  22-35.
75 Insyde Diagnóstico del Instituto Nacional de Migr ación. Hacia un sistema de rendición de
cuentas en pro de los derechos de las personas migrantes en México (2013) 252-256.
76 Georgetown Law Human Rights Institute Fact-Finding Project (n 50 above) 51.
77 L Carte ‘Everyday restriction: Central Am erican Women and the state in the Mexico-
Guatemala Border City of Tapachula’ (2014) 48 International Migration Review  113.244    Chapter 9
ratification. It is therefore not surpri sing that they have elaborated and
presented alternative reports in 2005 and 2011 which were drawn on by the
CMW in its concluding observations to Mexico. Civil societyorganisations have worked for effective implementation of the
Convention, not only through long-t erm advocacy work for migration
legislation,78 but by active participation in the design of the national policy
programming exercise during 2013 that le d to strategies and action lines to
guarantee migrant workers’ rights.79 They have also contributed through
their participation in the INM’s Citi zen Council and their assessments of
the main institutions involved.80 Finally, they have produced guides and
protocols to inform and improve public service, especially to identify
international protection needs and se cure access to justice for migrants,81
and to guarantee women migrants’ rights in compliance with CEDAW
and the ICRMW.82
6 Opportunities to enhanc e the protection of 
women migrants in Me xico through the CMW
Three conditions need to be met in order to more effectively implement the
ICRMW in Mexico:
6.1 Strengthen migrant worker protection through enhancing 
the relationship between the ICRMW and other international instruments 
The ICRMW extends human rights to migrants without distinction as to
sex. However, it does not address the specific gendered needs of women inthe migration process.83 For example, the Convention does not adequately
respond to the change in the nature of international migration whereby
growing numbers of women migrate for economic reasons such as the
78 Grupo de Trabajo sobre Política Migratoria (n 40 above) ‘http://
www .estudiosdemigr acion.org/ (accessed 22 February 2016).
79 Colectivo Plan Nacional de Desarrollo-Migración Las propuestas del Colectivo-PND
migración y su relación con el Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 2013-2018 y lineamientos de laSecretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público (2013) http://www .imu mi.org/pnd/recursos/
propuestas_colectivo_pnd_migraci on.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016).
80 Insyde (n 75 above).81 Sin Fronteras Protocolo de actuación para quienes impa rten justicia en casos que afectan a
personas migrantes y sujetas de protección internacional  (2013) http://www .amij.org.mx/
protocolos/Protocolo%20Migrantes.pdf (a ccessed 22 February 2016); Sin Fronteras
Guía práctica para identificar a personas  con necesidades de protección especial (2014) http://
www .sinfronteras.org.mx/attachments/Cartilla_SolicitantesPI_WEB.pdf (accessed 22
February 2016).
82 The Institute for Women in Migration (Instituto para las Mujeres en la Migración) &
UN Women developed a series of documents with guidelines and recommendations to
promote women migrant workers’ rights through legislation and policy. Most of thedocuments are cited throughout the chapter an d are listed in the References section. 
83 S Jolly & H Reeves Gender and migration: Overview report (2005) http://
www .bridge.ids.ac.uk/reports/cep-mig-or.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016).  Mexico and the ICRMW     245
demand for caregivers in destinatio n countries, and make an increasing
contribution in their countries of origin and destination.84 It does not
suitably address the human rights vi olations that women migrants face
during different migration processes,  including the costs of undocumented
migration, that are higher for wome n than for men, or situations of
trafficking, sexual exploitation , physical violence and sexual
harassment.85 Finally, the ICRMW does not take into account access to
sexual and reproductive health services. Therefore, CEDAW and its
General Recommendation 26 on Wo men Migrant Workers (CEDAW GR
26) can usefully guide the CMW’s interpretation of the ICRMW to
strengthen women migrant workers’ protection.86 
The approach of CEDAW GR 26 of addressing the particular human
rights concerns of women migrant workers throughout the migration cycle wastaken by the CMW 
in its General Comment 1 on Migrant Domestic
Workers (2011).87 Subsequently, this Comment and gender perspective
guided the CMW’s 2011 observations to Mexico to end discriminationagainst migrant workers and members of their families based on ethnic
origin and gender (para 24), and by en forcing access to justice for women
migrant workers, especially domestic workers (para 38). Theseobservations would be enhanced by a closer adherence to the spirit and
substance of CEDAW GR 26. For exam ple, under GR 26, states should
ensure that contracts for women migrant workers are legally valid, whenthis is not always true for agricultural women migrant workers in the fincas
of Chiapas. In addition, states shou ld enforce access to redress for human
rights violations at all stages of the migration cycle and, for example,
provide shelters for abused women migrant workers who wish to leave
exploitative employers. 
84 UN Women et al (n 38 above) 23.
85 Conceptual Note  Promoción y protección de los derechos de las mujeres trabajadoras migrantes
en el mundo. Alianzas para la migración y el  desarrollo humano: Pr osperidad compartida –
responsabilidad compartida  High level conference previous to GFMD IV
Meeting,  organised by UNIFEM (part of UN Women) and the Mexican
Government,  Mexico, 7 & 8 September 2010.
86 A Petrozziello Género en marcha. Trabajando el nexo migración-desarrollo desde una
perspectiva de género  (2013) 193. UN Women has sy stematised women migrant
protections in Mexico under several instruments (ICRMW , General Comment 1 on
Migrant Domestic Workers, CEDA W and its General Recommendation 26 onMigrant Workers. UN Women et al Compromisos de México con los derechos humanos de
las trabajadoras migrantes  (2016) 18.
87 The CMW included a section on gender perspective in its General Comment 1 on
Migrant Domestic Workers , based on CEDA W’s General Recommendation 26 on
Women Migrant Workers. Both instruments, in alliance with ILO Convention No 189
on Domestic Workers, strengthen protection of women migrants’ rights. GeneralComment 1 on migrant domestic work ers, CMW (23 February 2011), UN Doc
CMW/C/GC/1 (2011) http://www2.ohch r.org/english/bodies/cmw/cmw_
migrant_domestic_workers.htm (accessed 9 March 2016).246    Chapter 9
6.2 Increase CMW attention to specific issues related to 
women migrant workers 
In its Shadow Report of 2005, the Mexican Migration Forum emphasised
the need to issue migration documenta tion independent of an employer or
spouse, in order to prevent different forms of abuse and violence.However, the CMW ha s not made a pronouncement regarding
discrimination that women migrant workers face in the labour market,
gender-based violence in the workplace, the restrictions on their freedomof movement or the limitations on their access to health, education and
family unity. 
To address this, the CMW should  request specific information
regarding indicators, disaggregated by sex and nationality, to evaluateMexico's implementation of its pu blic policy. Finally, the Committee
could include the following recommendations for Mexico:
(a) Ratify the International Labour Or ganisation (ILO) Convention 189 on
Domestic Workers to strengthen pr otection for women migrant domestic
workers. 
(b) Bring labour and social security la ws into compliance with international
instruments, particularly in the case of domestic workers. 
(c) Implement clear procedures to provide assistance to undocumented
women migrant workers in the area of sexual and reproductive health,and train healthcare providers on migration and human rights, in order to
eliminate discriminatory practices. 
(d) Strengthen the INM’s capacity to protect the rights of migrants by
establishing evaluation mechanisms to detect migrants who have special
needs such as victims of kidnapping and trafficking in persons, refugees,unaccompanied and repatriated child mi grants; refer them to appropriate
g o v e r n m e n t  o f f i c e s  s u c h  a s  C O M A R ,  N a t i o n a l  S y s t e m  f o r  F a m i l y
Development (DIF), the Attorney General (PGR) and the ExecutiveCommission for Victim Support; and fa cilitate their access to justice. 
(e) Increase types and number of visas for migrants from Guatemala, El
Salvador and Honduras that allow documented travel through Mexico.
This would be in line with  Mexico’s commitment in the Special
Programme on Migration 2014-2018  to create an alliance with the US and
Central American countries to  promote regular migration.
88
88 Secretaría de Gobernación (n 12 above) 37.  Mexico and the ICRMW     247
6.3 Take into account the specific needs that women migrants 
face upon returning to Mexi co, as well as those who 
remain in communities of origin  
Finally, it is important to point out that while the Committee has made
recommendations regarding migrant wo rkers in transit and those who live
and work in Mexico, it has not take n a stance regarding migrant workers
and their families who have returned to  Mexico, often as a result of forced
return from the US. A million and a ha lf Mexicans were removed from the
US to Mexico between 2009-2013.89 Mexico should guarantee access to
health and education services for th e US-born children of Mexicans upon
return. It is equally important to address the concerns around family
separation when the children of retu rnees remain in the US. In addition,
the Committee has not yet made observations regarding the issues faced bythe spouses and family members left behind in the communities of origin
in Mexico, and the relevance of their investment of remittances in
development projects in their communities. 
7 Conclusion
Mexico was a leading advocate for the elaboration of the ICRMW. Over
the course of the last 15 years, th e country has made significant legal
changes in order to comply with th e ICRMW, but implementation of this
legal framework remains a challenge. The dearth of public information on
migrants’ access to rights and services means that there is little hard
evidence of de facto  compliance with the ICRMW. On a general level, the
enforcement of laws and policies that promote women migrants’ rights is
limited by a weak rule of law, corruption, impunity, xenophobia and the
lack of a gender perspective. Furthermore, implementation is impeded bybudgetary constraints and a lack of clear guidelines for state officials
concerning protection of migrants' ri ghts. Lastly, effective compliance with
the ICRMW cannot be analysed in isolation from the economic and
political interests of Mexico within the region that comprises North and
Central America, and its complex position as a country of origin, transit
and destination. While civil society is  working on tools and guidelines to
promote implementation of the ICRM W, the role of the CMW and its
observations are central. Specific  and assertive recommendations on
enforcement of ICRMW standards could give the Mexican government
the necessary direction to better achi eve effective implementation. Finally,
international acknowledgement of the migrant and refugee crisis in the
region, faced mainly by women and children, and recommendations from
89 US Department on Homeland Security 2013 Yearbook on Immigration Statistics (2014)
107 http://www .dhs.gov/sit es/default/files/publi cations/ois_yb_2013_0.pdf
(accessed 22 February 2016).248    Chapter 9
the Committee encouraging Mexico to work towards a solution, are of the
utmost importance.249Piyasiri Wickramasekara
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
Sri Lanka is primarily an origin count ry of labour migration. The oil boom
in the Gulf States in the early 1970s marked the beginning of significant
outflows of migrant workers from Sri Lanka. The contribution of labourmigration to the Sri Lankan economy is substantial. Migrant remittances
are now the major source of foreig n exchange. In 2014 the total value of
remittances reached US$7 billion, amo unting to 9,6 per cent of GDP, and
62 per cent of export earnings. A nnual reported outf lows of migrant
workers have ranged between 250 000 to 300 000 in the five years up to
2015.1 The total outflow of 300 413 workers in 2014 represents 3,5 per cent
of the employed population. While there are no estimates of the number of
foreign migrant workers in Sri Lanka,  the United Nations has estimated 38
700 persons as international migrants in the country in 2015,2 which is
only 0,2 per cent of the population. 
 The objective of this Chapter is to review the status of adherence in
law and practice to the 1990 Internatio nal Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families(ICRMW) which Sri Lanka acceded to on 11 March 1996. It first outlines
the migration context in Sri Lanka. Section 3 traces the background to
accession of the ICRMW. Section 4 highlights various policy and
institutional initiatives of Sri Lank a relating to migration and their
contribution to implementation of the ICRMW. Following a discussion of
interactions between the government and civil society with the Committeeon Migrant Workers (CMW) in Sectio n 5, the Chapter raises a number of
major issues relating to compliance with the Convention. The final section
draws some conclusions.
1 SLBFE ‘Annual statistical report of f oreign employment 2013: Sri Lanka Bureau of
Foreign Employment’ (2015).
2 UN DESA ‘International migratio n report 2015: Highlights’ (2016) 30.1CHAPTERTHE ICRMW AND
SRI LANKA0250    Chapter 10
2 Migration context of Sri Lanka 
Sri Lanka’s overseas migration patte rn has gone thro ugh several stages
over the years.3 The first outflows in the 1960s and 1970s related mainly to
the migration of skilled persons on a permanent basis, but the Gulf boom
in the early 1970s created a large demand for low skilled workers on
temporary contracts. The outflow gathered high momentum following
liberalisation of travel with the intr oduction of open economy policies in
1977. The main challenge foreseen at the time was the regulation of the
growing number of recruitment agencies.4 Sri Lanka enacted the Sri Lanka
Bureau of Foreign Employment Act in 1985 and established the Sri Lanka
Bureau of Foreign Employment (SLBFE) as a one stop-shop to deal with
administration of overseas employment. 
Since 1995, the annual numbers depa rting for overseas employment
have been above 150 000. Figure 1 shows the outflows by sex from 1995 to
2014. It also shows the changing shar es of males and females in total
outflows. 
Figure 1: Outflows by sex from 1995 to 2014
Annual migrant outflow data5 show a marked decline in the share of
female migrants, especially domestic wo rkers, in recent years. The share of
3 P Wickramasekara ‘International migrat ion and employment in the post-reforms
economy of Sri Lanka’ (2010).
4 D Soysa ‘Early days of SLBFE’ paper prepared for the ILO Regional Office for Asia
and the Pacific’ (unpublished & undated).
5 These statistics are collected by the SLBFE through registration of migrant workers. It
uses the term ‘housemaids’ to refer to female migrant domestic workers.
  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     251
female migrant workers fell from 55 per cent to 37 per cent of total outflows
during 2006-2014. Over the same period, the share of female domestic
workers (termed as ‘housemaids’ in  SLBFE statistics) in total annual
reported departures has fallen from 49,4 per cent to 29,5 per cent. This
marked decline is in line with government policy to discourage emigration
of low skilled female workers, especially domestic workers, throughseveral measures: raising minimum age limits according to destinations,
imposition of a security deposit re quirement for direct recruitments,
introduction of a Family Background Report to determine eligibility for
emigration of female workers with ch ildren less than five years, and the
mandatory NVQ3 qualification (Natio nal Vocational Qualification) for
female domestic workers.6 These figures probably underestimate actual
flows since some women seem to ha ve left the country through other
means such as visit visas. These features also lead to a number of
challenges related to vulnerability an d protection needs, high migration
costs, low remuneration an d resulting low remittances. 
The main features of Sri Lanka’s migration profile are: migration
mostly on temporary contract basis;  high share of low skilled workers
including domestic workers; concentration of flows to Gulf CooperationCouncil (GCC) destinations; the domina nt role of the private recruitment
industry in placements; and high share of female migration (although
declining) compared to other Sout h Asian countries. The GCC countries
account for almost 90 per cent of reco rded outflows from Sri Lanka, which
indicates that the vulnerability of mi grant populations is high given the
proverbial poor governance and protection levels in the subregion. Privateemployment agencies still account for 60 per cent of outflows again posing
formidable challenges in their regu lation to minimise malpractices.
3 Evolution of policy , inst itutions and legislation 
relating to migration
The continued focus on foreign employ ment of national workers has ruled
out any attention in national migratio n policies to the status of foreign
migrant workers inside Sri Lanka and their protection, a major thrust of
the ICRMW.
Table 1 provides an overview of  major changes in policies and
institutions on labour migration. It shows that the mandate on labour
migration had remained with the Mini stry of Labour for a considerable
time with a dedicated Ministry taki ng over the functions only in 2007.
6 MFEPW ‘Performance report 2014: Ministry  of Foreign Employment Promotion and
Welfare’ (2014).252    Chapter 10
The SLBFE, the main agency responsible for overseas employment
administration, was established by th e SLBFE Act 21 of 1985, the primary
legislation that deals with foreign employment, amended by Acts 4 of 1994
and 56 of 2009. From the outset, the SLBFE operated under the
supervision of the Ministry of Labour  until 2007 when it was transferred to
the newly created Ministry of Foreign Employment Promotion andWelfare (MFEPW). Most MFEPW pr ogrammes are administered by the
SLBFE. This change of ministries ha s both positive and negative aspects.
The advantage is that a dedicated mini stry can devote greater attention to
migration. The disadvantage is that labour migration is separated from
labour, employment and decent work policies in the process. With
ministries other than labour taking over  this role, there is also limited scope
for involvement of social partners and civil society in migration policy – a
recommended good practice in  international instruments.7
Table 1: Chronology of migration policy, institutions and legislation in Sri 
Lanka
7 P Wickramasekara ‘Labour migration in South Asia: A review of issues, policies and
practices’ International Migration Papers No 108 (2011).Year Event
Mid-1970s Temporary contract labour migration to  the Middle East from Sri
Lanka commences.
1980 Ministry of Labour in charge of migration.
Foreign Employment Agency Act 32 of 1980 to regulaterecruitment agents.
1983 The Ministry creates foreign employment wing.
1985 Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment (SLBFE) Act 21 of
1985 adopted, and the SLBFE created in th e same year.
1994 Revision of the 1985 SLBFE Act – Act 4 of 1994.1996 Sri Lanka accedes to the ICRMW on 11 March 1996.
2007 A new Ministry of Foreign Em ployment Promotion and Welfare
(MFEPW).
2008/2009 Sri Lanka’s first report to the Committee on Migrant Workers
(CMW) and its review
2008/2009 National Labour Migration Policy formulated and endorsed by
Cabinet.
2009 Revision of 1985 SLBFE Act – Act 56 of 2009.  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     253
A few observations can be made on developments since the 1990s:
(a) Frequent changes of ministry port folios dealing with  foreign employment
have made continuity of policies difficult.
(b) There is no evidence of any ma jor change to migration legislation,
especially after accession to the ICRMW in 1996. The revisions reflectedin Act 56 of 2009 were motivated by factors other than making it
consistent with the ICRMW .
(c) Sri Lanka has been a pioneer in As ia in spelling out a rights based
comprehensive National Labour Migration Policy8 based on the 2006
ILO Multilateral Framework on labour Migration.9 
(d) The Government has highlighted ‘[s]killed, safe migration’ as the major
focus of policy.10 This has led to measures wh ich try to reduce the share
of low-skilled workers, especially  female domestic workers, who go
abroad. The recognition that the state is unable to prevent the abuse and
exploitation of women workers overse as effectively, and the fact that
children left behind are subject to various abuses are the main reasons for
this policy. Raising of the minimum age for domestic workers depending2010 MFEPW abolished and foreign employment mandate transferred
to Ministry of External Affairs.
2010 National Advisory Committee on Labour Migration formed.November
2010Ministry of Foreign Employ ment Promotion and Welfare
(MFEPW) established as a separate ministry.
2010-2015 An ILO technical cooperation project to support the
implementation of the National Labour Migration Policysupported by Swiss Develo pment Cooperation Agency
operational.
2013 Second periodic report to CMW postponed at request of Sri
Lanka government.
2011-2016 Sri Lanka Employment Migration Authority Act being drafted
and discussed by MFEPW to replace SLBFE Act. 
2014 Introduction of a mandatory family background report for
women migrating as domestic workers.
2015 MFEPW renamed as Ministry of Foreign Employment (MFE).
2016 Second periodic report of Sr i Lanka to the CMW submitted on 3
May 2016.Discussion and review of the Second Periodic Report, August/
September 2016.
8 See MFEPW ‘National Labour Migrat ion Policy for Sri Lanka’ (2008).
9 ILO ‘The ILO multilateral framework on labour migration: Non-binding principles
and guidelines for a rights-based a pproach to labour migration’ (2006).
10 MFEPW (n 8 above).254    Chapter 10
on destinations and the introduction of a family background report for
women with children less than five years’ old are some of the measures
which have been adopted. 
4 Background to Sri Lank a’s accession to the 
ICRMW
Sri Lanka acceded to the ICRMW on 11 March 1996. It is important to
note that it was a bold decision to ha ve a one-step accession rather than a
two-step process of signature and ratification.11 While accession normally
takes place after a Convention enters into force, Sri Lanka acceded to the
ICRMW seven years before it came into force in July 2003.
There is very limited information on the background to the accession
to the ICRMW in March 1996. It is al so a formidable task to trace this
background 20 years after accessio n. An interview with Mr Prasad
Kariyawasam, member and former Ch air of the CMW revealed that the
main motive was the perceived need to protect Sri Lanka’s migrant
workers. A former senior diplomat of Sri Lanka was able to shed more
light on the issue. In his view, the re luctance on the part of the migrant
receiving countries of the Middle East to entertain bilateral approaches to
take up issues of intern ationally recognised rights of Sri Lankan migrant
workers was a compelling reason for Sri Lanka to seek multilateral means
to address the issue by ratifying the ICRMW. By acceding to the ICRMW,
the Sri Lankan government hoped th at the moral/legal force and the
institutional capability of the Conven tion would help to get international
attention focused on abuse and exploita tion of Sri Lankan migrant workers
through activities of international hum an rights agencies, UN agencies and
civil society.
Iredale and Piper in their analysis of obstacles to ratification of the
Convention in the Asia-Pacific region  have not elaborated on the reasons
why Sri Lanka acceded to it.12 Their second report for UNESCO on the
impact of the ICRMW in the Philip pines and Sri Lanka touched briefly
upon the issue.13 Their general observations primarily based on interviews
with government officials and NGOs are as follows: 
11 This distinction has been overlooked in the study by Iredale et al which refers to
ratification of the ICRMW rather than accession by Sri Lanka, which is technicallynot correct. See Iredale et al ‘Impact of  ratifying the 1990 UN Convention on the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Family: Case studies of the
Philippines and Sri Lanka’ ( 2005). While the legal effect is  the same, ratification is
possible only after the initial step of signature. See United Nations Treaty handbook
(2012).
12 Iredale et al ‘Identification of the Obstacles to the Signing and Ratification of the UN
Convention on the Protection of the Rights  of All Migrant Workers: The Asia-Pacific
Perspective’ (2003).
13 Iredale et al (n 11 above).  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     255
(a) The lead role in the accession was probably taken by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs rather than the line ministry – the Ministry of Labour.
(b) The decision to accede was not driven by a ‘vibrant civil society
movement’.
(c) They surmise that the decision was instigated by the UN in New York
and carried out by the government in power, based on the interviews
conducted by them. 
Iredale et al state: 
It is suspected by some NGOs that this was more a routine ratification on thepart of the Sri Lankan government ra ther than a political commitment to
protect migrant workers.14 
The present author interviewed key informants consisting of current and
former officials of the Ministry of External Affairs (now Ministry ofForeign Affairs), the Ministry of Labour and the Sri Lanka Bureau of
Foreign Employment. The author also consulted some records of the Sri
Lanka archives relating to the period immediately before accession, butwas not able to find any references to  the process. Accession to a complex
instrument such as the ICRMW consisti ng of 93 articles of text would have
required intensive review  and informed discussions. Direct accession also
probably restricted the scope for publ ic discussions or debates which would
have been possible during the normal time gap between a signature and the
eventual ratification, as in Banglade sh. Sri Lanka did not understand the
full gravity of responsibilities of accession at the time as admitted by the
former Chairman of the CMW.
15 
It is surprising that Sri Lanka’s first report to the CMW does not
mention any reasons or the background  to the accession  which would have
helped in understanding the process of implementation. It simply stated
that Sri Lanka as a state party soug ht to ensure minimum international
guarantees relating to the human ri ghts of migrant workers and their
families. It added an unrelated obse rvation: ‘However, “major labour”
recipient countries are yet to become parties to this Convention’.16
What is also often overlooked is that Sri Lanka made ‘declarations’
against four articles of the ICRMW up on accession when it deposited the
instrument. These mainly relate to righ ts of mobility, child rights and equal
treatment of foreign workers.17 While a declaration may simply state the
existing national laws and practices,  some of these could be considered
reservations if they limit or modify the obligations undertaken by the state
14 Iredale et al (n 11 above) 34.
15 Cited in Iredale et al (n 11 above).16 Initial report of Sri Lanka, CMW (23 April 2008), UN Doc CMW/C/LKA/1 (2008)
5. 
17 Arts 8(2), 29, 49 and 54.256    Chapter 10
party.18 Further research is necessa ry to see how the Sri Lankan
government has implemented these articles in practice.
5 Impact of the Convention on law and practice 
relating to migration an d migrant workers in Sri 
Lanka
This section reviews the major pieces of legislation and policies relating to
migration in Sri Lanka, and any links with the ICRMW. The need for
revision of the law in line with the ICRMW had been highlighted in several
important documents. The National La bour Migration Policy of 2008, for
example, stated:
One of the main gaps in the legislation is that the law has yet to be amended
following the ratification of the Intern ational Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families.19 
The Sri Lankan government in its in itial report to the CMW maintained
that existing legislation provided ma ny of the standards and guarantees of
the Convention. The fact remains, however, that the Constitution of SriLanka guarantees certain rights , including protection against
discrimination and the right of peacef ul assembly, freedom of association,
freedom to form and join a trade union, freedom to engage in any lawfuloccupation, or profession, and freedom of movement to citizens only. This
violates several provisions of the IC RMW such as articles 7, 26, 39 and 40,
amongst others.
20 
The CMW was not convinced of th e guarantees provided by the
existing legislation and expressed its regret 
that the State party has not taken any meas ures to ensure that its legislation is
in conformity with the Convention’ and recommended Sri Lanka ‘to take allnecessary measures for prompt harmon ization of its legislation with the
provisions of the Convention.21 
The section on migrant workers in the Sri Lanka National Action Plan for
the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights, 2011-2016 identified the
major issue in giving effect to th e ICRMW as follows: ‘Lack of adequate
18 Treaty handbook  (n 11 above). The author is grateful to Mr Bradford Smith, Secretary of
the CMW , Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Geneva, for this
clarification.
19 MFEPW (n 8 above) 49.20 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the hum an rights of migrants, François Crépeau:
Addendum – Mission to Sri Lanka, HRC (2 April 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/29/36/
Add.1 (2015); S Ranaraja Review of national legislation and regulations on migration for
foreign employment and their implementation  (2010).
21 Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Sri Lanka, CMW (14 December
2009), UN Doc CMW/C/LKA/1 (2009) 3.  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     257
national laws and policies to give direct effect to the UN Convention on
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and their Families’.22 
5.1 Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment Act 21 of 1985 
and its amendments
The major piece of legislation gove rning migration in Sri Lanka, the
SLBFE Act, was enacted in 1985 – el even years before the country’s
accession to the ICRMW. The main issu e to be discussed then is whether
the SLBFE Act has been revised to reflect the provisions of the acceded
ICRMW. It is worth pointing out, and indeed it is to the credit of Sri
Lankan legislators, that some of the provisions of the Convention had been
addressed to some exte nt in the 1985 Act: information provision, pre-
departure training, and regulation of  recruitment agencies, international
cooperation and consular services , and reintegration measures for
returnees.23 
The aforementioned National La bour Migration Policy of 2008
highlighted a number of areas to bring the SLBFE Act into conformitywith the ICRMW:
Among these are: translation and dissemination of the Convention to would-
be-migrants; making available the services of a legal counsel at the Sri Lankanembassies abroad; educatin g or informing would-be-migrants in more detail
of the social, cultural, and economic conditions and to explain the (labour
and other) laws and customs of the host country; ensuring that the
employment contract is made available to the workers in his/her own
language; making available free interpre tation in the langua ge of the migrant
workers when needed in the host country ; ensuring the voting rights of the
migrant workers; providing the necessary training to would-be migrants;
regulating the private agencies more ri gorously and to minimize trafficking
and irregular migration.24 
While some of the above measures have been implemented in varying
degrees, the overall impact of the Act on governance of labour migration
and protection of migrant workers and their families seems rather limited.
The Act was revised in 1994 and 2009, but an analysis of the legislative
texts shows that the purpose was no t to address Sri Lanka’s compliance
with the ICRMW following its accession. 
22 HRCSL ‘Sri Lanka national action plan for the protection and promotion of human
rights, 2011-2016’ (2011) 94.
23 MFEPW (n 8 above).
24 MFEPW (n 8 above) 47.258    Chapter 10
5.1.1 Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment (Amendment) Act 4 of 
1994
Under the amending Act 4 of 1994, the SLBFE was declared as a
scheduled institution under the Bribery Act with a view to preventing
corruption and bribery. It also formal ised the fee structure to be paid by
migrant workers and its distribution.25 This was important because the
SLBFE was expected to be a self-sustaining entity with no direct budget
support. The amended Act also provided for the Minister to determine and
adjust the fee structure from time to time through gazette notification. TheAct spelled out fines and imprisonment terms for violations of the Act by
migrant workers or licensed agents. The thrust of these measures,
therefore, was not to promote protection of workers, but to ensure smoothoperation of SLBFE and its programmes.
26 
5.1.2 SLBFE amendment Act 56 of 2009 
This amendment took place after the formulation of the National Labour
Migration Policy with the SLBFE also  participating as a key stakeholder
in that policy’s development proce ss. But the revision to the Act was
carried out by the SLBFE on its own as a parallel process with hardly anyconsultation with stakeholders.27 Surprisingly the revi sions also failed to
take into account the policy guidelines and the action plan contained in the
National Labour Migration Policy. No r was there any attempt to make it
compliant with the provisions of the ICRMW.28 
The primary amendments in the revised Act provided for:
(a) the authority of the SLBFE to ex amine documents to detect persons
going for overseas employme nt without registration; 
(b) the receipt by the SLBFE of social security levies from  employers abroad; 
(c) restrictions on publication of jo b advertisements by private employment
agencies without SLBFE approval; 
(d) recruitment agencies to recover ex penses directly from workers where no
commission is received from the fore ign employer or agent with SLBFE
approval. At the same time, SLBFE re served the right to review whether
commissions/fees we re reasonable;
25 The fee is distributed as fo llows: 70% to the recruitment agencies, 10% to the Workers’
Welfare Fund and 20% to the SLBFE for its operational expenses.
26 Ranaraja (n 20 above).
27 Migrant Forum Lanka (MFL) ‘Submission to the UN Committee on Migrant Workers
(CMW) by Migrant Forum Lanka on the situation of international outbound labour
migration in Sri Lanka’ (2013).
28 The author was directly involved as an ILO advisor in the formulation of the National
Labour Migration Policy, and used informal contacts with the SLBFE at the time to
request sharing of the amended draft Act with the ILO and national stakeholders for
review . The SLBFE, however, ignored the request.   The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     259
(e) wide ranging powers fo r officers of the SLBFE to arrest errant job agents
as the Act recognised SLBFE officers  t o  b e  p u b l i c  o f f i c e r s  u n d e r  t h e
Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code immune from lawsuit; and
(f) membership of the Association of Licensed Foreign Employment
(ALFEA) to be voluntary for licensed  agents. The SLBFE apparently was
not happy with the monopoly status of ALFEA and wanted to reduce itspowers.29 This, however, undermined the coordinating role of ALFEA as
its membership was reduced. Moreover, the revision did not modify other
references to ALFEA in the Act leading to some inconsistency about its
expected role.
Thus, the 2009 amendment has given wi de ranging powers to the SLBFE,
and has also undermined the coordina ting function of ALFEA. It is
difficult to argue that these were done for the sake of better protection and
welfare of migrant workers or to bring the law into line with the
ICRMW.30 Indeed there was no reference at all to the ICRMW in the
revised Act.
5.1.3 Proposed Sri Lanka Employment Migration Authority Act of 2011 
(MFEPW , 2012)
The Ministry of Foreign Employment  Promotion and Welfare finalised a
draft bill to convert SLBFE into the Sri Lanka Employment MigrationAuthority to be submitted to the Ca binet of Ministers and Chief Legal
Draftsman in 2012.31 It aims to provide an overarching role for the
Ministry in regard to overseas em ployment and inward migration, and
replace the SLBFE with an authority. The Legal Draftsman, however,
referred the draft Act back to the Mini stry asking for major revisions which
has again been delayed due to poli tical changes in early 2016. The new
Secretary of the Ministry has now appointed a committee to look into the
revision.
The 2012 draft Act covers all aspect s of the migration process, and
provides for the establishment of a number of institutions: the Sri Lanka
Employment Migration Authority, a national advisory council on
employment migration, a Sri Lank a Employment Migrants Foundation
(Rata Viruwo), an Overseas Sri Lankan Foundation, a foreign
employment promotion fund, a Workers Welfare Fund, and a migrant
information database. 
29 Personal communication to the author by a former Additional General Manager of the
SLBFE.
30 Ranaraja (n 20 above).
31 MFEPW (2012). The author had access to a dr aft version of the Act dated 21 March
2012, but not to any further revised versio n. The general observations made here
pertain to the above version, and may not repr esent the contents of the latest draft. The
government had made a copy of the draft Act available to the Special Rapporteur on
the human rights of  migrants during his visit in 2014, Crépeau (n 20 above). 260    Chapter 10
The objectives of the draft Act are arguably too long, running to 37
items. There seems to be some confus ion between objectives and functions
in this context. The SLBFE Act had only 19 objectives which itself was toolong.32 The draft Act contains detailed provisions which would have been
better placed as regulations and decrees under the Act. Moreover, the draft
Act seems to overlap partly with the mandates of other ministries such asthe Ministry of Labour and the Ministry of Health, a problem pointed out
by the Legal Draftsman’s Department.33 One positive aspect was
extension of legal cover age to foreign migrant workers, but this has
subsequently been dropped.34
The main problem with the Act is th at the protection objectives and
consistency with the ICRMW seem to be given secondary importance with
governance and regulation and diaspora concerns being predominant. Thebasic thrust is to convert the SLBFE into an authority with comprehensive
powers and functions. The draft does not refer to the ICRMW or any other
international instrument or to th e recommendation of the CMW asking
that Sri Lanka take all necessary meas ures for prompt harmonisation of its
legislation with the provisions of the Convention.35 A contrast can be
made with the title of the Bangladesh Overseas Employment and MigrantsAct 2013. The latter Act specifically ment ions the objectives of safe and fair
migration, ensuring rights and welfare of migrant workers, and making
provisions in conformity with the ICRMW and other international labour
and human rights conventions and tr eaties ratified by the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh. This is sadly lacking in the proposed Act.
The inclusion of inward migration (immigration or immigrant workers
inside Sri Lanka) does not seem to accord them rights spelled out in theICRMW provisions, but focusses on regi stration and regulation of foreign
workers. All these have led the UN  Special Rapporte ur on the human
rights of migrants to urge ‘the Sri Lankan authorities to revise the draft Actto ensure a human rights-based approach to migration’.
36 
5.2 National Labour Migration Policy , 2008
The National Labour Migration Policy for Sri Lanka is regarded as apioneering effort in Asia in spelling  out a full-fledged policy and following
a rights-based approach to labour  migration based on international
migrant-worker instruments including the ICRMW, ILO migrant-worker
32 Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment Act 21 of 1985.
33 Discussions with the ILO Office for Sri Lanka and the Maldives.34 As above.
35 n 21 above.
36 Crépeau (n 20 above) 6.  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     261
conventions37 and the ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour
Migration.38 The policy statement clearly provides:
The State undertakes primary responsibility for the protection of migrant
workers and their families. Based on the obligations listed in the ratifiedInternational Convention on the Protec tion of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and their Families, the State is committed to furt hering the rights
and protections of Sri Lankans migrating for employment.39 
Another example of good practice wa s the formulation of the National
Labour Migration Policy through a tr ipartite plus participatory process
involving all stakeholders concerned with migration in Sri Lanka. The
stated vision of the Policy is ‘to advance opportunities  for all men and
women to engage in migration for de cent and producti ve employment in
conditions of freedom, dignity, secu rity and equity’. The Policy’s three
objectives are:
(a) Better governance and regulation of labour migration; 
(b) Providing effective protection and services to migrant workers and their
families left behind; and
(c) Mobilising development contributions of labour migration.
The National Labour Migration Policy also contains an Action Plan for
implementation of the policy elements . The draft Policy was validated at a
national tripartite consultation in October 2008 with the Ministry of
Foreign Employment Promotion and Welfare adopting the policy
document and obtaining the approval of  the Cabinet of Sri Lanka in April
2009. Both the Ministry of Foreig n Employment and the SLBFE have
incorporated the National Labour Migration Policy into their policies and
programmes. The SLBFE corporate ac tion plan has been reorganised
under the three Policy objectives of governance, protection anddevelopment.40 Yet both the Ministry and the SLBFE have failed to place
copies of the Policy – the key document governing their policies and
programmes – on their websites. 
One limitation has been that no separate budget was allocated to
carrying forward the Action Plan of the National Labour Migration
Policy. The ILO has been assisting th e implementation of Policy through
support to the Sri Lanka governme nt and civil soci ety through two
technical cooperation projects funded by the Swiss Agency for
37 ILO Convention on Migration for Empl oyment, 1949 (No 97); ILO Convention on
Migrant Workers (Supplementa ry Provisions), 1975 (No 143).
38 ILO (n 9 above).
39 MFEPW (n 8 above) 19.
40 Interview with Mr KODD Fernando, General Manager, SLBFE.262    Chapter 10
Development Cooperation from 2011-2015.41 This has enabled Sri Lanka
to meet some of the obligations of the ICRMW such as free provision of
information, strengthening of cons ular facilities, and reintegration
support, amongst others. 
Although the number of foreign migr ant workers inside Sri Lanka is
believed to be small, a major gap in the National Labour Migration Policy
is that it does not cover them at all. There are unconfirmed reports that therevised draft Sri Lanka Employment Migration Authority Act no longer
covers ‘inward migration’.42 There is no information whether the current
ongoing revisions to the draft Act have reconsidered inclusion of foreignworkers under its coverage. 
5.3 The National Action Plan for the Promotion and 
Protection of Human Rights 2011-2016, Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka
‘Rights of migrant workers’ are one of the eight priority areas identified by
the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (HRCSL), and incorporated
into the Action Plan for 2011-2016.43 The ICRMW is one of the 15 focus
areas of the Action Plan with the goal of giving effect to the Convention at
the national level. The Plan rightly recognises ‘Lack of adequate national
laws and policies to give direct effe ct to the UN Convention on the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and their Fami lies’ and proposes three actions: 
(a) Review existing laws and policies and identify necessary changes to bring
them in line with the ICRMW;
(b) Based on the review, amend nati onal level laws and policies; and
(c) Translate the Convention into the official languages of Sri Lanka and
disseminate widely.
The key responsible agencies for implementation of these activities have
been identified as the MFEPW and the Ministry of Justice. All three
actions foreseen in 2011 to be complete d within a time frame of one and a
half years had not been implemented by mid-2016. There is no evidence of
a comprehensive review of existing la ws and policies and needed changes
– the first activity. As shown earlier, a draft Act is currently in limbo, and
41 The title of the Project is: ‘Promoting decent work through good governance,
protection and empowerment of migran t workers: Ensuring the effective
implementation of the Sri Lanka National Labour Migration Policy – Phase I andPhase II’.
42 Discussions with the ILO Office for Sri Lanka and the Maldives.
43 n 22 above.  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     263
in any case the objective was not to bring it in line with the ICRMW. As
regards translations and disseminatio n of the text of the ICRMW, the
HRCSL website shows that only the English version is still available.44
This means that even 20 years after accession, the Convention has not been
officially translated and disseminate d to major stakeholders by the state
party in question. The Action Plan of HRCSL is elaborate, but the author’sinterview with the HRCSL did not br ing out any evidence that it is
seriously carrying out any follow up of the migrant rights component or
coordinating with the relevant government agencies and other
stakeholders. 
6 Engagement of the state an d civil society with the 
Committee on Migrant Workers
6.1 State interaction with the CMW
As noted above, Sri Lanka acceded to  the Convention seven years before
it came into force, and its initial re port was due in 2004, but was submitted
only in 2008. The delay in submissi on was probably motivated by some
uncertainty about the format and content of the report, and the
Government’s desire to buy more time for preparation of the initial report.
Sri Lanka’s second periodic report was due on 1 July 2009, and the CMW
requested Sri Lanka to submit it  not later than 1 November 2011.45 But it
was postponed at Sri Lanka’s request to 2016 – again a delay of more than
four years! The second periodic report was eventually submitted by the
government on 3 May 2016.46 
Following its review of Sri Lanka’s initial report the CMW came up
with a list of issues for further clarification47 to which the Government
made a written reply.48 Following discussions and consultations with
other stakeholders, the CMW issued its Concluding Observations which
covered a wide range of issues: need for harmonisation of legislation with
the provisions of the Convention; ratification of ILO migrant worker
conventions (no 97 and no 143) and the two Protocols on trafficking in
persons and smuggling of migrants; training in and dissemination of the
Convention; application of all rights  without discrimination to foreign
migrant workers inside the country; protecting and empowering womenmigrant workers; strengthening cons ular functions for protection of
44 See http://hrcsl.lk/english/document-cent er/library/international/ (accessed 30 Nov-
ember 2016).
45 n 21 above.46 ‘Second periodic report of Sri Lanka’ (2016).
47 ‘List of issues to be taken up in connection with the consideration of the initial report
of Sri Lanka’ (2009).
48 ‘Written replies by the Government of Sri Lanka to the list of issues (CMW/C/LKA/
Q/1) to be taken up in connection with the consideration of the initial report of Sri
Lanka’ (2009).264    Chapter 10
migrant workers; voting rights for na tional workers abro ad; measures for
protection of workers in countries of destination; social security
agreements with countries of destination; regulation of recruitmentagencies; effective reintegr ation of returnees; stud y impact of migration on
children; and prevention of human trafficking and irregular migration. The
state party was expected to widely disseminate the ConcludingObservations, and also report on prog ress in the second periodic report.
49 
The CMW has identified a detailed list of issues to be addressed in Sri
Lanka’s second report.50 These cover mostly the issues raised in the
Concluding Observations in 2009: co mprehensive migration statistics;
comprehensive information on meas ures for the protecton and equal
treatment of women migrant domestic workers; regulation and monitoring
of recruitment agencies; reintegration of returnee workers; and theinsurance schemes and the role of th e Welfare Fund. Another issue raised
is whether the state party had taken any steps towards ratifying the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, and ILOConvention No 189 (2011) concerning decent work for domestic workers.
The List of Issues did not, however, re fer to the need for ratification of the
two ILO migrant worker conventions raised in the ConcludingObservations in 2009 issued in resp onse to Sri Lanka’s initial report.
Neither did it refer to the obvious relevance of the CMW General
Comment 1 of 2001 on migrant domest ic workers or General Comment 2
on the rights of migrant worker s in an irregular situation. 
 A number of positive developments  which partly address the issues
raised in the 2009 Concluding Observatio ns and the List of Issues prior to
the submission of Sri Lanka’s second  periodic report can be mentioned.
(a) The Government has developed a ‘Safe Labour Migration Information
Guide’ (SLMIG) with support from the ILO/Swiss Development
Cooperation Agency (SDC) migration project. 
(b) The Government ratified the Protoc ol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, especially Wo men and Children on 15 June 2015. 
(c) A Code of Ethical Conduct for Licensed Foreign Employment Agencies/
Licensees has been developed51 and private employment agencies have
been given required orientation by the SLBFE.
49 n 21 above.
50 ‘List of issues prior to the submission of the second periodic report of Sri Lanka’
(2013).
51 SLBFE ‘Code of Ethical Conduct for Licensed Foreign Employment Agencies/
Licensees’ (2013).  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     265
(d) A Sub Policy and National Action Plan on Return and Reintegration of
Migrant Workers was adopted in December 2015.52 
( e ) C o m p l a i n t s  m e c h a n i s m s  h a v e  b e e n  i m p r o v e d  w i t h  d e v e l o p m e n t  o f  a
centralised grievance mechanism and proposed special mediation courts.
(f) Availability of a decentralised cadr e of development officers including
migration development officers who can provide support to potential
migrants, departing migrant workers and returning migrant workers and
their families at the local level.
(g) Decentralisation of SLBFE to the provincial and district levels, and
establishment of Migrant Resource Centres to provide one stop services
at the local level.
(h) Special social security scheme for domestic work submitted to the
Cabinet for approval.
(i) Promotion of consular functions to service migrant workers through
introduction of a Manual for Labour Sections of Diplomatic Missions53
and related training to diplomatic staff.
(j) Agreement on domestic worker recruitment between the Ministry of
Foreign Employment Promotion and Welfare and the Ministry of
Labour of the Kingdom of Saudi Ar abia, which contains a number of
good practices relating to periods of leave, working hours, right to
communication, and non-retention of passports.
The government is yet to take action on some of the issues raised by the
CMW in the above reports. At the same time, abuses and exploitation of
workers in overseas destinations continue as highlighted in the 2016
Shadow Reports by civil society to the 25th Session of the CMW.54
Female workers are especially vulnerable being outside the labour law in
many countries. More than three-quarters of total complaints made by Sri
Lankan workers during 2011-2014 have been made by women workers.55
This is more than likely an underestimate given that not all workers
suffering abuse choose to lodge a complaint. 
The CMW requested the government to disseminate the 
concluding observations widely, incl uding to public agencies and the
judiciary, non-governmental organizati ons and other members of civil society,
52 MFE ‘Sri Lanka: Sub-policy and national action plan on return and reintegration of
migrant workers’ (2015).
53 MFEPW ‘Operational manual for Labour Sections of Sri Lankan diplomatic missions
in destination countries’ (2013).
54 ‘Sri Lanka NGO Shadow Report: Submitted by Action Network for Migrant Workers
(ACTFORM) and the Women and Media Co llective (WMC)’ (2016); GMPA (2016);
Shadow Report on Sri Lanka jointly submitted by 20 CSOs (2016); NCC in
collaboration with Intervention Movement Against Discrimination and Racism(IMADR) and Migrant News Lanka (MNL) ‘A response to the Second Periodic
Report (SPR) of Sri Lanka’ (2016). 
55 SLBFE ‘Annual Statistical Report of Foreign Employment 2013’ (2015).266    Chapter 10
and to take steps to make them know n to Sri Lankan migrants abroad and
foreign migrant workers residing or in transit in the Sri Lanka.56 
The author, however, could not trace any evidence of such dissemination
by the Government.
Interviews conducted by the author in early 2016 showed that both the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the MFE were aware of the need to submitthe second periodic report in 2016, but there was no indication that the
government had started on the proce ss. Despite the substantial time made
available, the actual second period ic report was prepared in a hurry
(judging by the contents) without any broad-based consultation with other
stakeholders, and submitted on 3 Ma y 2016 to meet the deadline of the
CMW.57 The report is in the form of specific answers to each issue listed
by the CMW in 2013, but it does not dire ctly address the specific issues or
sub-issues raised by the CMW. For example, there is no explanation of the
progress made in harmonising legislation with the ICRMW.
While the government has ratified  the Trafficking Protocol, it is
equally important to ratify the Protoc ol against the Smuggling of Migrants
by Land, Sea and Air in view of re cent large scale boat movements
especially to Australia – most of th ese represent smuggling attempts rather
than trafficking in persons. The Government has also failed to make
progress in regard to the ratificati on of the two ILO migrant worker
conventions (nos 97 and 143) as recommended by the CMW in 2009.Given that a substantial share of do mestic workers are internal workers,
there is no immediate prospect for ratification of the Convention which
requires bringing them under domesti c labour law, and expanding labour
inspection services.58 
Another issue relevant to the Government–CMW interaction is
recognition of the competence of the Committee by the state party in
regard to the inter-state complain t mechanism (article 76) and the
individual complaints procedure (artic le 77). This has been raised by the
CMW in both the 2009 Concluding Observations and the List of Issues
prior to the submission of Sri Lanka’s second periodic report . Only four
state parties (Mexico, Guatemala, El  Salvador and Uruguay) have made
the declarations provided for in ar ticle 77 recognising the competence of
the Committee to receive communications from individuals. These
mechanisms have therefore not yet come  into force in the absence of the
minimum ten declarations. Therefore, Sri Lanka falls into the majority of
56 n 21 above, 10.
57 n 46 above.
58 Interview with Senior Asst Secretary (Foreign Relations), Ministry of Labour and
Trade Union Relations. See also Esufally ‘Sri Lanka: Domestic workers – An analysis
of the legal and policy framework, decent work for domestic workers report no 1’
(2015).  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     267
state parties who have not recognised the competence of the CMW in
regard to both articles 76 and 77.
There is a related precedent in Sri Lanka in regard to the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ratified by Sri Lanka in 1997), which makes it unlikely that Sri Lanka
would make a declaration recognisin g the competence of the CMW under
articles 76 and 77. The Sri Lanka Supreme Court ruled in 2006 that the UNHuman Rights Committee had no ju dicial power under the Sri Lankan
Constitution in the case of Singarasa v Attorney General
59 in relation to the
aforementioned Optional Protocol. The Supreme Court maintained that
Sri Lanka was a ‘dualist state’ in wh ich treaty law does not automatically
become law in the internal legal orde r of Sri Lanka, unless such treaty is
transformed into the domestic law.60 The Supreme Court ruled in this case
that while the accession of Sri La nka to the ICCPR bound the state at
international law, it created no additional rights as recognised in the
ICCPR for individuals within the jurisdiction of Sri Lanka in the absenceof domestic legislation. The Supreme  Court also highlighted that the
accession by the President of Sri Lanka to the First Optional Protocol to
the ICCPR, which allows individuals to address complaints of violations
of ICCPR rights to the Human Righ ts Committee, wa s unconstitutional.
This interpretation has, howeve r, been subject to contention.61 
6.2 Interaction of civil society with the Committee on Migrant 
Workers 
As noted above, civil society did not play any major role in the ICRMW
accession decision unlike in the case of Bangladesh. In Sri Lanka,advocacy on migrant issues is carried out by a number of trade unions and
non-governmental organisations. Th e Migrant Service Centre under the
trade union Ceylon Workers Congress and the Migrant Workers Frontunder the National Trade Union Federation (NTUF) represent trade
union initiatives.
62 The Action Network for Migrant Workers
(ACTFORM) formed by the Women and Media Collective, the Law andSociety Trust, and the Migrant Forum Lanka repr esent major non-
governmental organisations working on migrant issues and rights. There
are also international NGOs such as the Solidarity Centre and CARITAS
with national level offices. There are, however, no national level
associations of migrant workers themselves. The MFEPW promoted amigrant workers foundation called ‘Rata Viruwo’ (which means
‘Expatriate Heroes’) – a grass roots le vel network – which had the potential
59 Singarasa v Attorney General  C Spl (LA) No 182/99; SCM (15th September 2006).
60 DL Mendis ‘An analysis of the Singarasa Case’ The Island  27 October 2006.
61 Mendis (n 60 above); K Pinto-Jayawardena ‘Will international treaties protect human
rights in Sri Lanka?’ (2013) 2 Advancing Together 4.
62 See Gunawardena (2014) for a detailed review  of trade union action related to migrant
workers in Sri Lanka.268    Chapter 10
to represent migrant workers, but it is no longer supported by MFE due to
its perceived excessive politicisation. 
Both the trade union movement and NGOs were active in the
discussion preceding Sri Lanka’s initia l report to the CMW. Civil society
also submitted a Shadow Report on the implementation of the ICRMW by
Sri Lanka. It highlighted some of the more serious violations of the rights
of Sri Lankan migrant workers overseas: 
[A]buse and exploitation of migran ts, violations of their terms of
employment, lack of facilities to exerci se their voting rights, right to freedom
of movement, the role of consular an d diplomatic missions, institutional
mechanisms set up to deal with migrant workers, access to training and access
to information.63 
Regarding consultation with civi l society, NGOs in their 2009 Shadow
Report clarified th eir point of view: 
Informal networking ta kes place between the SLBFE and civil society at
seminars and training programmes orga nised both by the state and non state
sector. Co-operation between civil society and the state is piecemeal and
sporadic with no formal mechan ism in existence to promote such
cooperation.64
A communication by Migrant Foru m Lanka to the CMW in 2013 also
referred to lack of adequate visibi lity in legislative amendments and
policies: 
There is a severe lack of adequate visibility and publicity given to the
processes of legislative amendments and drafting of policies, as well as
implementation of activities promotin g the rights of migrant workers and
their families. Even though the state has initially consulted a few selected
members of civil society and local st akeholders in the latest process of
amending the SLBFE Act 56 of 2009, no ne of the stakeholders were informed
about the final draft amendments to the law .65 
The CMW has encouraged Sri Lanka to involve civil society organisations
in the preparation of its second periodic report.66 The List of Issues prior
to the submission of Sri Lanka’s second periodic report asked for
information on ‘the mechanisms put in place by the State party to consult
and involve migrants, migrant rights groups and other relevant NGOs inthe design and implementation of policies on migration’.67 
63 ACTFORM & WMC ‘Sri Lanka NGO Shadow Report on the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers’ and their
Families’ (2008) 5.
64 ACTFORM & WMC (n 63 above) 26.65 MFL (n 27 above) 2-3.
66 n 21 above, 9; n 50 above.
67 n 50 above, 1.  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     269
It also raised the pertinent question  whether migrant rights groups are
represented on the Board of Directors of the Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign
Employment (SLBFE) and if not, to describe how the state party ensures
that their voices are adequately represented in the SLBFE. It is an obvious
anomaly that four members of ALFEA are represented on the SLBFE
Board while neither unions nor NG Os/migrant associations are
represented. Since the SLBFE is entrusted with regulation of recruitment
agencies, this leads to an obvious conf lict of interest. This issue has not
been addressed in the 2012 revision or the draft Sri Lanka EmploymentMigration Authority Act, which surprisi ngly contains no single reference
to NGOs, civil society or social part ners. The Joint CSO submission to the
2016 CMW proposed the inclusion of representatives of civil society
mandatory for the Board of Directors of SLBFE.68 
One mechanism for interaction is in  the National Advisory Committee
on Labour Migration established in 2010 by the Ministry of Foreign
Employment Promotion and Welfare. It is a follow up to the NationalLabour Migration Policy recomme ndation, and has provision for
representatives of two NGO representatives and a trade union. The
National Advisory Committee is ch aired by the Minister. Although it is
scheduled to meet twice a month, actu al meetings have been less frequent.
For example, the Committee had no t met even once by August 2016,
following the regime change in January 2016. This makes the followingstatement in 2016 in Sri Lanka’s second  periodic report highly misleading: 
’Since the National Advi sory Committee on Labour Migration comprises all
key stakeholders including NGOs, voice of the migrant workers is adequately
represented at decision & policy making level’.69 It is only an advisory body
which has no decision making powers. The shadow report of the National
Christian Council of Sri Lanka has described the Advisory Committee as a‘very loose, unrecognized body lacking any power for action’.70 
The author’s attempt to consult civi l society organisations in connection
with the present study did not succeed due to lack of any response or
cooperation from those contacted such as the Action Network for Migrant
Workers (ACTFORM) and the Women and Media Collective. This madeit difficult to get first-hand information on civil society perspectives on the
current situation. While the CMW expected civil society to work together
with the government on the second report, local civil society groups seem
to have focussed on their shadow reports71 without any coordination
among themselves.
68 Shadow Report on Sri Lanka jointly submitted by 20 CSOs (2016) (n 54 above).
69 n 46 above, 9.70 NCC (n 54 above) 8.
71 Sri Lanka NGO Shadow Report 2016 (n 54 above); Shadow Report on Sri Lanka
jointly submitted by 20 CSOs (2016) (n 54 above); NCC (n 54 above).270    Chapter 10
7 Major areas of concern
7.1 Provision of information
Article 33 of the ICRMW provides for the right of migrant workers to be
informed by the state of origin, the state of employment or the state of
transit, as the case may be, concerni ng: their rights arising out of the
Convention ; and the conditions of their admission, their rights and
obligations under the law and practi ce of the state concerned and such
other matters as will enable them to comply with administrative or other
formalities in that stat e. Such information should be provided free to
workers and members of their families.
The NGO Shadow Report to the CMW in 2008 highlighted gaps in
this context: 
No specific measures are being taken by government to disseminate and
promote the Convention. The SLBFE and its branch offices take on the role
of disseminating information to pros pective migrants as part of their
mandate.72 
One obvious gap is the virtual absence of publicity given to the
Convention. The Safe Labour Migrat ion Information Guide of the SLBFE
does not make any re ference to the ICRMW.73 Moreover, there is no
evidence that the ICRMW and the re lated General Comment 1 on migrant
domestic workers and General Comment 2 on the rights of migrant
workers in an irregular situation have  been translated into Sinhala and
Tamil for dissemination. It is important to translate the ICRMW and the
two General Comments into the two national languages for wide
dissemination to stakeholders and es pecially migrant workers and their
families. Indeed, even the English version of the ICRMW has not beenplaced on the website of the key agencies: the Ministry of Foreign
Employment, Ministry of Fore ign Affairs and the SLBFE. 
Sri Lanka has made more progress in regard to dissemination of
information on migration in safe an d dignified conditions. The SLBFE has
carried out safe migration sensitisat ion programmes in collaboration with
the ILO and a number of NGOs using its SLMIG. The emphasis has beenon training of Migration Development Officers (MDOs) as potential
trainers who are based in the field at divisional secretariat level. In turn
MDOs conduct awareness sessions for prospective migrants. Other
government officers (not  mandated with migration issues) also use their
field visits as a means to convey advi ce and information on safe migration
to community members. Thus, safe mi gration information is now said to
72 ACTFORM & WMC (n 63 above) 26.
73 GMPA (2016).  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     271
be mainstreamed in discussions on  women’s development, child rights
promotion, and livelihoods and welfare (Samurdhi) at the village level.74
The SLMIG has now gone through a second edition based on feedback
from field officers. An international NGO, Helvetas Swiss
Intercooperation, is also collaborating by implementing a project on safe
labour migration at the grassroots leve l in Sri Lanka on behalf of the Swiss
Agency for Development and Cooperation.75 The SLMIG does not,
however, contain any information on the ICRMW and how migrant
workers can benefit from it. Whether briefing on the ICRMW isincorporated into the training co urses for MDOs is also not known.
7.2 Voting rights of migrant workers
The CMW had raised the issue of voting rights for migrant workers in its
2009 Concluding Observations and also the List of Issues  to be addressed
in Sri Lanka’s second period ic report. In this contex t it is worth noting that
the Chairman of the National Worker s Congress wrote to the Elections
Commissioner on 4 January 2010 on voti ng rights for migrant workers and
other Sri Lankans resident  abroad stating that: 
At a time when Sri Lankan authorities are making every effort to enlist
support of the Sri Lankan Diaspora living abroad to participate in nationbuilding, it also becomes a national responsibility to enlist non resident Sri
Lankans in the po litical process.76 
The Action Plan of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka addresses
this issue under focus area 11.1, specif ically as the right to vote ensuring
franchise of migrant workers and the responsibility given to the
Commissioner of Elections Department to make recommendations to the
state.77 A further Action Plan was fore seen to conduct a study on the
absentee balloting system s in other countries and make proposals on a
suitable system to be adopted by Sri Lanka. However, there is no
indication that such a study has been  conducted for use by Sri Lanka. The
Action Plan aimed for according th is right by 2016 through postal voting
rights or other mechanism,78 which was hardly feasible in the absence of
any follow up action on the part of HRCSL.
74 Information supplied by Ms Swair ee Rupasinghe, ILO Office, Colombo.
75 HELVETAS ‘Safe and beneficial labour migration for Sri Lankan migrant workers’
(2014).
76 MSC-NWC ‘Migrant news letter’ (2010) 12.77 n 22 above.
78 P Mahanamahewa ‘Migrant workers’ voting rights’ Sri Lanka Daily Mirror  6 January
2015.272    Chapter 10
While the MFE at present is considering voting rights as a priority, the
Minister of Foreign Employment has me ntioned that voting  rights for Sri
Lankan migrant workers would be possible within the next five years.79
According to Sri Lanka’s second peri odic report, no progress had been
made as of May 2016.
7.3 Consular support
The ICRMW emphasises the role of cons ular officials in providing services
to migrant workers. Sri Lanka has had a long tradition of appointing
labour attachés to important destination countries to serve migrant
workers. Recently the government  has introduced a manual for Labour
Sections of Diplomatic Missions80 and provided related training to
diplomatic staff. However, the training has not been repeated for new staff.
Strangely this handbook refers only  to the Vienna Convention and does
not contain a reference to the ICRMW.  There is no information whether
separate orientation is provided on the ICRMW. The SLMIG provides
information on contacts abroad for mi grant workers. Some of the missions
operate safe houses fo r runaway migrant workers especially female
domestic workers. What is missing , however, is a one country team
approach like that provided by the Philippines. The latter has alsopromoted migrant resource centres at  embassies including hotlines and
legal support.
It is also worth pointing out that civil society has been critical that
some of the appointments to the overseas diplomatic missions areprimarily political and not based on merit. This significantly undermines
the support that can be provided to migrant workers.
81 
7.4  Irregular migration
Sri Lanka has made irregular migratio n a criminal offence which is not
consistent with the ICRMW. As th e Special Rapporteur on the human
rights of migrants has pointed out, it should be treated as an administrative
offence.82 There are no accurate estimates of irregular migration from Sri
Lanka or into Sri Lanka. The total numbers of Sri Lankan citizens in
irregular status in EU member st ates had increased from 3530 to 4475
between 2009 and 2011. The numbers or dered to leave also increased
between the two years with over 5 500 ordered to leave in 2011. The largest
numbers (though numerically sma ll) were in the UK followed by
79 I Mudugamuwa ‘Voting rights for Sri Lankan migrant workers’ Daily News  8 October
2015 http://www .dailynews.lk/?q=2015/10/08/ local/voting-rights-sri-lankan-mig
rant-workers (accessed 3 November 2017).
80 MFEPW (n 53 above).
81 Shadow Report on Sri Lanka jointly submitted by 20 CSOs (2016) (n 54 above).
82 Crépeau (n 20 above).  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     273
Germany, France, and Greece in 2011.83 Sri Lanka has entered into a
readmission agreement with the EU in 2004 although specific protocols
have taken much longer to develop. 
Following the termination of confli ct in 2009, there has been a surge
in irregular movements to Australia by boats, especially by members of the
Tamil community. Most of the irregu lar movements to a wide range of
countries took place during the conflict  period to escape from the fighting
as well as to seek better economic opportunities. It is difficult to understand
the surge in irregular movements, es pecially towards Australia, following
restoration of peace. As the Sri La nkan government has rightly pointed
out, the lack of economic opportuniti es and livelihood is common to all
communities in Sri Lanka, and is not confined to any specific ethnic group.
Traffickers and smugglers are probably able to operate more freely now,and provide false information to encourage people to leave.84 The
Australian High Commission quoted the figure of 1346 Sri Lankans
having landed in Australia illega lly in the first six months of 2012.
According to the High Commission, pe rsons arriving illegally by boat from
Sri Lanka had been much lower in previous years – 211 (2011), 536 (2010)
and 736 (2009).85 Sri Lanka has entered into a readmission agreement with
Australia, and is under an obligati on to deter irregular movements from
the country. 
Returned asylum seekers are taken into custody and must appear in
court, and are usually fined for the of fence of leaving the country illegally.
In early May 2016, for example, a group of 12 persons returned by
Australia from Cocos Island were a rrested and taken into custody by Sri
Lankan police.86 The Special Rapporteur also has highlighted the
detention of migrants in irregular status for long periods by Sri Lankan
authorities in 2014. He has reco mmended the decriminalisation of
irregular departures from Sri Lank a, and refraining from detaining
returned Sri Lankans who have migrated  irregularly. There is no evidence
that this recommendation has been followed up by the authorities.
7.5 Protecting migrant workers through bilateral agreements 
and MOUs and regional consultative processes.
Sri Lanka has managed to sign a number of bilateral MOUs with GCC
countries and Jordan. None of these MOUs, however, refer to
international instruments and only a very few mention protection of rights
83 P Wickramasekara ‘Much ado about nothing: Reflections on irregular migration’
(2013).
84 Wickramasekara (n 83 above).85 Sources cited in Wickramasekara (n 83 above).
86 B Doherty ‘Asylum seekers deported from Cocos Islands arrested by Sri Lankan
police’ The Guardian 7 May 2016274    Chapter 10
of migrant workers as an objective.87 Research by the author has
highlighted the lack of transparency, omission of critical issues such as
recruitment and confiscation of passpor ts, and lack of effective follow-up
and enforcement as major issues to be addressed in the context of such
MOUs.88 
The CMW in its 2009 Concluding Ob servations urged the government
to:
Continue its efforts to negotiat e bilateral agreements on labour
migration with major labour-receiving countries in order to secure
protection of the rights of migrant workers and to progressively and
verifiably mainstream relevant and appropriate provisions of theConvention into these agreements.89 
In practice however, this depends on the cooperation of destination
countries, none of which have rati fied international migrant worker
conventions. 
Sri Lanka participates in two regi onal consultative processes: the
Colombo Process of ministerial consultations of countries of origin whereit acted as the Chair from 2013-2017 and the Abu Dhabi Dialogue which
includes both Asian origin countries and GCC countries and carries more
weight. The Colombo Process has made only modest achievements overthe years, and the focus of the Abu Dhabi Dialogue is on less controversial
issues such as skills recognition, pr e-departure orientation and recruitment
practices.
90 The author did not find any reference to the ICRMW in their
recent declarations or reports of meetings.
8 Conclusion
The above analysis highlights the larg e unfinished agenda in ensuring that
migration for decent and productive em ployment occurs in conditions of
freedom, equality, security and human dignity as envisaged in the
National Labour Migr ation Policy of 2008. While Sri Lanka has
developed a mature migration administra tion system over the last three to
four decades, it is faced with a num ber of major constr aints, namely, its
role as an origin country, the predominance of low skilled migration,
concentration of migration flows in to GCC countries, control of the
87 LK Ruhunage ‘Consolidated Report on Assessing Labour Migration related Bilateral
Agreements (BLAs), Memorandum of Understandings (MOUs) and other similararrangements in the Asian region’ (2014).
88 P Wickramasekara ‘Bilateral Agreements and Memoranda of Understanding on
migration of low skilled workers: A review’ (2015).
89 n 21 above, 7.
90 P Wickramasekara ‘South Asian migration to the Gulf: A safety valve or a
development strategy?’ (2015) Migration and Development  1.  The ICRMW and Sri Lanka     275
migratory process largely by the private sector and lack of rapid local
economic development.
It is clear that Sri Lanka has so far not made any serious attempt to
harmonise national legislation with  the ICRMW. The Sri Lanka National
Action Plan for the Protection an d Promotion of Human Rights, 2011-
2016, spelled out actions for amending na tional laws and policies to bring
them in line with the Convention, but it  has failed to deliver on this target.
There is broad consensus in civil soci ety reports relating to Sri Lanka’s
second periodic review by the CMW that the standards of the ICRMW
should be incorporated into national legislation.91 
One redeeming feature is that a ri ghts based approach was followed in
the elaboration of the Nation al Labour Migration Policy92 with protection
and empowerment of migrant workers being one of the three main pillars
of the policy and related action plan . With the support of international
organisations such as the ILO, import ant strides have been made in the
implementation of policies relating to  major areas of concern. The ILO has
also tried to promote ILO migrant worker conventions as well asadherence to the ICRMW.93 Sri Lanka is also more conscious of the gaps
between policy, law and practice in regard to labour migration issues
through its interaction with the CMW, amongst others.
Priorities for improvement of law and practice would lie in several
areas. The revision of the SLBFE Act should be undertaken with emphasis
on aligning it with the provisions of the ICRMW and focusing on
protection of women and men migrant workers as the main objective. Amajor restructuring of the SLBFE would be useful to make  it more focused
on protection issues and service de livery to migrant workers and their
families. Discriminatory measures ag ainst women migrants such as the
Family Background Report needs to be urgently reviewed and replaced
with credible alternatives. It is encouraging to note that the Minister has
announced reviewing the Fa mily Background Report with a view to its
abolition.94 Serious attention needs to be given to reviewing the situation
of foreign workers in Sri Lanka and a dopting relevant legislation for their
protection.
At the same time, development strategy and policy in Sri Lanka should
also focus on generating decent work  opportunities, especially for women
91 Sri Lanka NGO Shadow Report (n 54 ab ove); GMPA (2016); Shadow Report on Sri
Lanka jointly submitted by 20 CSOs (2016) (n 54 above).
92 MFEPW (n 8 above).
93 The Colombo ILO Office organised a National Tripartite Workshop on International
Instruments for the Protection of Migrant Workers: Sri Lanka, Colombo on 26 July
2004 to promote the two ILO Conventions and the ICRMW where the author acted as
a resource person. The ILO/SDC technical cooperation projects have pointed out theneed for compliance with the ICRMW in several interventions.
94 C Dissanayake ‘Ministry to abolish FBR from female migrant workers’ The Ceylon
Daily News  25 December 2015.276    Chapter 10
migrant workers, inside the country to  ensure that migration takes place by
choice rather than need.PART IV: RELEVANCE 
NOTWITHSTANDING                       
NON-RATIFICATION278Beth Lyon*
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
The United States has never seriously considered signing the UN
International Convention on the Protec tion of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW, Migrant WorkersConvention, the Convention).1 Despite the country’s close involvement
with negotiating the Convention, the United States has shown no interest
in the treaty since promulgation. By side-stepping a human rightsapproach, the US misses a chance to coherently administer low wage
labour migration.
In the United States, all sides ag ree that irregular immigration is
undesirable, yet the country is deeply divided on the solution. The groupswishing to discourage immigration typically advocate for tighter visa
quotas, stricter border controls and more aggressive deportation
measures.
2 On the other hand, most migrants’ rights advocates seek
1 Clinical Professor of Law, Cornell Law School. This chapter contains passages from
an earlier piece entitled ‘The unsigned United Nati ons Migrant Worker Rights
Convention: An overlooked opportunity to  change the “brown collar” migration
paradigm’  (2010) 42 New York University Journal of International Law and Policy 389.  The
New York University Journal of International Law and Policy gave permission for thisuse of the 2010 article. Any errors are my own, but I am grateful to Alan Desmond,
Nicola Piper, two anonymous reviewers, and research assistants Daniel Finnegan and
Giulia Barbone for their invaluable comments and support. I also thank Cornell LawSchool for its financial support in the process of drafting this chapter.
1 International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, GA ( 18 December 1990), UN Doc A/RES/45/158
(1990).
2 See Republican Platform 2016 (18 July 2016)  https://prod-cdn static.gop.com/media/
documents/DRAFT_12_FINAL[1]-ben_ 1468872234.pdf 25-26, 42 (accessed 10 Jan-
uary 2017) (opposing amnesty and endorsing, inter alia, building a southern border
wall, expedited removal for ‘criminal aliens’, and mandatory minimum five year
sentence for re-entry); Federation for American Immigration Reform ‘Immigrationpriorities for the 2017 presidential transition: A special report from the Federation for
American Immigration Reform’ http://www .fairus.org/DocServer/research-pub/
FAIR_2017PresidentialTransitionDocum ent.pdf (accessed 10 January 2017). 1CHAPTERTHE ICRMW AND
THE US:
SUBSTANTIVE  OVERLAP ,
POLITICAL  GAP 1
*  ICRMW and the US     279
legalisation and better workplace protections for all low wage workers,
including those who are unauthorised migrants.3 Moderates of both wings
favour temporary worker programme s as a way to control migration,
though they differ over the optimal size and entry and work conditions of
the temporary workforce. Compromise has proved near impossible
through years of policy debate. The result is a series of superficial policyshifts that fail to address the under lying issues, producing an immigration
regime that seems to be  rudderless, offering only unenforceable and
increasingly harsh laws. 
In 1990, after ten years of negotiatio n that involved all regions of the
world,4 the UN General Assembly adop ted the ICRMW. To the surprise
of the negotiators, the Convention was not widely ratified.5 The major
countries of migrant employment that initially participat ed in negotiating
the Convention set it aside,6 and it languished for thirteen years before
accruing the 20 ratifications it needed to enter into force.7 The treaty now
has 38 signatories and 51 state parties.8
None of the current parties to the tr eaty is considered to be a country
of major migrant employment, although some (Argentina, Belize, Libya
and Venezuela) have significantly greater numbers of migrants per capita
than other countries in their respective regions.9 Only three of the parties
3 Democrats ‘Immigration Reform’ https: //www .democrats.org/issues/immigration-
reform (accessed 10 January 2017) (pledging to work for ‘comprehensive immigration
reform’ that ‘keeps families together’); American Immigration Lawyers Association
‘Featured issue: Earned legalization’ (2 April 2014) http://www .aila.org/advo-media/
issues/immigra tion-reform/earned-legalization (accessed 10 January 2017); American
Immigration Lawyers Association ‘AILA: The time is now to move away from the
negative rhetoric an d commit to real immigration refo rm’ (9 November 2016) http://
www .aila.org/advo-media/press-releases/ 2016/aila-move-away-from-the-negative-
rhetoric (accessed 11 January 2017); National Immigration Law Center ‘The POWER
Act: Protect our workers from Exploitation and Retaliation Act’ (October 2015)
https://www .nilc.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/power-act-2015-10-26.pdf
(accessed 10 January 2017). 
4 See LS Bosniak ‘Human rights, state sovere ignty and the protection of undocumented
migrants under the International Migrant Workers’ Convention’ in B Bogusz et al
(eds) Irregular migration and human rights: Th eoretical, European and international
perspectives  (2004) 311, 312 & n 6.
5 See, generally, A Pécoud & P de Guchteneire ‘Migration, human rights and the United
Nations: An investigation into the obstacles to the UN Convention on MigrantWorkers’ Rights’ (2006) 24 Windsor Yearbook of Access to Justice  241 244.
6 See Pécoud & Guchteneire (n 5 above) 242.
7 See United Nations Treaty Collection ‘Sta tus of International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families’
https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetail s.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=IV-13&chapter
=4&clang=_en (accessed 5 February 2017) (ICRMW Ratification Record); see also
ICRMW , art 87(1).
8 ICRMW Ratification Record (n 7 above).
9 See UN Department of Economic and Soci al Affairs ‘International migration 2015’
http://www .un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/publications/wall
chart/docs/MigrationWallC hart2015.pdf (accessed 10 January 2017) (showing
Argentina and Venezuela host 4,8% and 4,5% respectively, as compared with a SouthAmerican regional average of 1,4%, Belize has 15% per capita as compared with the
regional Central American average of 1,2% , and Libya has 12,3% compared with the
regional Northern Africa average of 1%).280    Chapter 11
to the treaty are high-income countri es: Chile, Seychelles, and Uruguay.10
The three lowest-income OECD countries, Chile, Mexico, and Turkey,
are parties to the Convention.11 There is some movement toward
ratification in the industrialised  world. The European Parliament,12 the
European Economic and Social Committee,13 and the Organisation of
American States14 have all favourably reported on the ICRMW and called
on the countries in those regions to ra tify it. However, there are obstacles
to immediate ratification by count ries of employment, including
prominently the ‘fear to be among the first’15 and domestic anti-immigrant
sentiment.16 Even as the Convention sl owly accrues country-of-origin
ratifications, advocates and officials in many countries of employment are
undertaking pre-ratification studies of the treaty vis-à-vi s domestic law and
the difficult politics of immigration.
Meanwhile, the US has not yet assessed the Migrant Workers
Convention in a substantive way. The United States’ delay in engaging the
Convention fits the country’s past  human rights treaty ratification
processes. When it does consider the ICRMW, the US is likely to heavily
restrict ratification of the Convention, just as it has in ratifying previous
human rights treaties. This chapter describes the United States’ substantiveobjections during the treaty negotiations, and points out that most of the
passages that were objectionable at the time were or have since become
part of US law. 
2 Brushing the dust off the UN Migrant Workers 
Convention
Many industrialised countries of em ployment, or destination countries,
including the United States, particip ated actively in the Migrant Workers
10 See The World Bank ‘High income’ http://data.worldbank.org/income-level/high-
income?view=chart (accessed 8 January 2017). 
11 See OECD ‘List of OECD Member Countries – Ratification of the Convention on the
OECD’ http://www .oecd.org/about/memb ersandpartners/list-oecd-member-coun
tries.htm (accessed 12 January 2017); Inde x Mundi ‘Country Comparison – GDP –
Per Capita (PPP)’ http://www .indexmundi.com/g/r.aspx?v=67 (accessed 12 January2017). 
12 See Resolution on the EU’s Rights, Priorities and Recommendations for the 58th
Session of the UN Commissi on on Human Rights in Geneva, CHR (31 January 2002),
Eur Parl Doc P5-TA (2003)0034 5. 
13 Opinion on the International Convention  of Migrants, EESE (30 June 2004), SOC/
173 (2004). For detailed discussion of the EU context, see the chapter by Desmond in
this volume.
14 See The human rights of a ll migrant workers and their families, AG (4 June 2002),
AG/RES 1898 (XXXII-O/02) (2002) (Resolution adopted at the fourth plenarysession held on 4 June 2002).
15 See N Piper & R Iredale ‘Identification of the obstacles to the signing of the United
Nations Convention on the P rotection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers 1990: The
Asia-Pacific perspective’ (2004) Asia Pacific Migration Research Network (Working
Paper 14) 8; Pécoud & Guchteneire (n 5 above) 258.
16 See Pécoud & Guchteneire (n 5 above) 259-61.  ICRMW and the US     281
Convention’s ten-year drafting process. Twenty five years later, not one of
these countries has signed or ratified the Convention.17 During those 25
years, the United States has ratified six other human rights treaties.18
2.1 The Migrant Workers Conven tion has passed through few 
stages of the US multilat eral treaty-making process
Article II of the US Constitution sets forth the basic requirements of the US
ratification process: ‘[The President]  shall have Power, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make Treaties, provided two thirds
of the Senators present concur ... ’19 The framers’ intent was for the Senate
to be closely involved in all stages of the treaty-making process.20
However, the Senate’s role in the treaty-making process changed as thebody expanded and the number of international agreements became toogreat to make close involvement in negotiation practicable.
21 According to
a Congressional Research Service Handbook on the treaty-making
process, 
the Senate role [in treaty formation]  now is primarily to pass judgment on
whether completed treaties should be ratified by the United States. The
Senate’s advice and consent is aske d on the question of Presidential
ratification.22
The Handbook describes modern multilateral treaty-making23 as a ten-step
process:24 (1) the Secretary of State authorises negotiation; (2) the US
representative negotiates with representatives of other country orcountries; (3) negotiators agree on te rms and, upon authorisation of the
Secretary of State, the US representative signs the treaty; (4) the President
may submit the treaty to Senate; (5) the Senate Foreign Relations
17 See ICRMW Ratification Record (n 7 above); see also The Migrant Workers
Convention, art 87(1). Note that the USSR, listed in n 25 as a country-of-employment-participant in the negotiations, has since dissolved, but its major successor nation,
Russia, has not ratified the ICRMW .
18 The United States has ratified the followi ng six international human rights treaties
since 1990: (1) in 1992 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR); (2) in 1994 the International Conven tion on the Elimination of all forms of
Racial Discrimination (CERD); (3) in 1994 the Convention against Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT); (4) in 1999 the
Convention Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of
the Worst Forms of Child Labour; (5) in 2002 the Optional Protocol  to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the Involvem ent of Children in Armed Conflict; and (6)
in 2002 the Optional Protocol to the Conventi on on the Rights of the Child on the Sale
of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography.
19 US Const art II, § 2, cl. 2.
20 See Congressional Research Service 106th Congress Treaties and other international
agreements: The role of the United States Senate: A study prepared for the Committee on ForeignRelations, United States Senate  (2001) 2-3.
21 As above. 
22 Congressional Research Service (n 20 above) 3. 23 Different processes apply to Executive Agreements and bilateral treaties. See
Congressional Research Service (n 20 above) 21-26, 8-9, 10. 
24 Congressional Research Service (n 20 above) 8-9.282    Chapter 11
Committee considers the treaty and decides whether to report it favourably
to the Senate; (6) the whole Senate may consider the treaty, and a 2/3
majority may vote to approve a resolution of ratification, and the Senatemay ‘approve it as written, approve it with conditions, reject and return it,
or prevent its entry into force by withholding approval’;25 (7) after
renegotiating any terms brought in to question by the ratification
resolution, the President may sign the instrument of ratification; (8) the
President may deposit the instrument of ratification with the designated
depository, whereupon (9) the treaty enters into force according to its
terms, and thereby becomes binding und er international law; and (10) the
President proclaims entry into force, pr oviding domestic notification of the
new law.
2.1.1 Steps one and two: Active ex ecutive engagement  in negotiation
Professor Louis Henkin invoked the flying buttress as a metaphor of the
United States’ relationship to the international human rights treaty regime– in the words of Professor Margaret  McGuinness, ‘the US supports the
cathedral of international human rights from the outside, rather than as a
pillar from within the system’.26 One reason for this image is that the
U n i t e d  S t a t e s  h i s t o r i c a l l y  p a r t i c i p a t e s  a c t i v e l y  i n  h u m a n  r i g h t s  t r e a t y
development but does not readily join human rights treaties as a party
subject to international monitoring. 
Through Eleanor Roosevelt, the United States was instrumental in
steering the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Universal
Declaration)27 to successful completion.28 Subsequently the United States
continued to play an active role  in negotiating major human rights
treaties.29 In fact, past US executives carried out negotiations on human
rights treaties over the objections of the Senate and established domestic
actors. For example, the United States  was heavily involved in negotiating
the ICCPR despite domestic outrage over  the socialist nature of the rights
it contained.30 US participation in nego tiations leading to the
International Criminal Court similarly suffered from the opposition of the
Department of Defence.31 Negotiation of the Migrant Workers
25 n 20 above, 3.
26 ME McGuinness ‘Sanchez-Llamas, American human rights exceptionalism and the
VCCR norm portal’ (2007) 11 Lewis & Clark Law Review  47 52 (citing L Henkin
‘Rights: American and human’ (1979) Columbia Law Review  405 421).
27 Universal Declaration of Human Rights , GA Res 217A (12 December 1948), UN Doc
A/810 (1948).
28 See NH Kaufman Human rights treaties and the Senate: A history of opposition  (1990) 66-
67.
29 See, eg, LA Rehof Guide to the Travaux Préparatoires of the United Nations Convention on
the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women  (1993); S Detrick (ed)  The
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child: A guide to the ‘Travaux Préparatoires’(1992).
30 See Kaufman (n 28 above) 69-93.
31 J Stork ‘International Criminal Court’ (1998) 4 Foreign Policy in Focus 1 1-3.  ICRMW and the US     283
Convention appears to have had a less controversial domestic backdrop,
however, and the United States engaged in the process.
In 1979, the UN General Assembly created a Working Group to draft
a convention to protect migrant workers and their families.32 Although the
United States abstai ned from this vote,33 the formal reports of the Working
Group reflect hundreds of intervention s by the United States over the ten
years of negotiations.34 On more than one occasion, the United States was
instrumental in breaking impasses  by proposing compromise language,
participating in info rmal consultations,35 and registering its underlying
understanding of particular provisions.36
During the negotiations, the United  States occasionally expressed
ambivalence about the Convention . In 1986, the US Working Group
representative stated that a reservation to Convention article 16(9) would
likely be registered ‘if and when the present Convention is submitted to theSenate’.37 In 1987, the US Representative 
stated that his Government was not yet convinced of the need for a
convention on the human ri ghts of migrant workers, and that if such a need
were demonstrated, such a convention should be negotiated in [the] ILO.38
At the same time, the negotiation history reveals a United States that was
committed to the goals of the Convention. For example, the United States
32 Measures to Improve the Situation and Ensure the Human Rights and Dignity of All
Migrant Workers, GA (17 December 1979), UN Doc A/RES/34/172 (1979) 3.
33 United Nations Bibliographic Information System ‘Voting Record for A/RES/34/
172’ http://unbisnet.un.org:8080/ipac 20/ipac.jsp?session =147W47X4410Q2.12957
3&menu=search&aspect=power&npp=50&ipp=20&spp=20&profile=voting&ri=&index=.VM&term=res+34%2F172&matchopt box=0%7C0&oper=AND&x=0&y=0&as
pect=power&index=.VW&term=&matchoptbox=0%7C0&oper=AND&index=.AD
&term=&matchoptbox=0%7C0&oper=A ND&index=BIB&term=&matchoptbox=0
%7C0&ultype=&uloper=%3D&ullimit=&u ltype=&uloper=%3D&ullimit=&sort
(accessed 20 December 2009). 
34 See, eg, Measures to Improve the Situatio n and Ensure the Human Rights and Dignity
of all Migrant Workers: Report of the Open-Ended Working Group, ECOSOC
(25 November 1980), UN Doc A/C.3/35/13 (1980) annex VI; Measures to Improve
the Situation and Ensure the Human Rights and Dignity of all Migrant Workers:
Report of the Open-Ended Working Grou p, ECOSOC (23 November 1981), UN Doc
A/C/36/10 (1981) 31; Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, Report of the Open-Ended Working Group on the Drafting of an
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers andTheir Families, ECOSOC (10 October 1986) , UN Doc A/C.3/41/3 (1986) hereinafter
(October 1986 Working Group Report).
35 See, eg, Measures to Improve the Situatio n and Ensure the Human Rights and Dignity
of all Migrant Workers: Report of the Open-Ended Working Group, ECOSOC
(23 November 1981), UN Doc A/C.3/36/10 (1981) 31. 
36 See, eg, Report of the Open-Ended Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (21 June 1990), UN Doc A/C.3/45/1 (1990) 34.
37 October 1986 Working Group Report (n 34 above) 226. 38 Report of the Open-Ended Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (22 June 1987), UN Doc A/C.3/42/1 (1987) 326.284    Chapter 11
introduced and successfully advocated for Convention coverage of foreign
investors, thereby creating a new category of protection under the treaty.39
The United States also sought succ essfully to broaden the Convention’s
protection of migrants’ associational rights.40 In the June 1989 Working
Group session, the first in which the Bush administration participated, the
US Representative made a statement that was taken to be a change ofposition by the United States. The Representative urged that the Working
Group take the time to iron out the final details of the Convention before
submitting it to the General Assembly.41 In his remarks, the US
Representative stated that ‘[m]y de legation is pleased that the Working
Group has made substantial progress th is session towards completing the
Convention’.42 The representatives of several other countries immediately
associated themselves with this intervention.43 According to the reported
reaction of the Moroccan Representative, 
the statement by the United States was very useful, especially since in the
Third Committee the United States dele gation had always voted against the
resolution of the draft Convention that  the Working Group was in the process
of drafting.44
Working Group Vice-Chairman Juhani Lönnroth observed that, during
the negotiations between 1979 and 1989: 
 There was a rather widespread belief that the United States would not sign
and ratify the Convention in the immediate future. But it was equally evidentthat the United States wished to make the draft meet high legal standards and
to make its content as close to its interests as possible in order to create
prerequisites for an eventual ratification at some later stage.45 
It is not clear whether the US delegation’s positive contributions over the
course of the treaty-drafting process reflected a change of heart by the
Reagan administration, or merely due diligence to conduct thenegotiations in a meaningful way. 
39 See Report of the Open-Ended Working Gr oup on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (15 October 1985), UN Doc A/C.3/40/6 (1985) 104-111.
40 See ECOSOC Report (n 38 above) 236. 41 See Report of the Open-Ended Working Gr oup on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (19 June 1989), UN Doc A/C.3/44/1 (1989) 307. 
42 n 41 above, 307.
43 n 41 above, 308-09.
44 n 41 above, 311.45 J Lönnroth ‘The International Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families in the contex t of international migration policies: An
analysis of ten years of negotiation’ (1991) 25 International Migration Review  710 734.  ICRMW and the US     285
2.1.2 Steps three and four: Delayed ex ecutive signature and submission to 
Senate, and the slow move from the ‘f lying buttress’ to the ‘pillar from 
within’
 The United States’ delay between pr omulgation and signature of the
Migrant Workers Convention is not unusual. Step three in the generic
treaty process laid out above, ‘neg otiators agree on terms and, upon
authorization of the Secretary of State, the US representative signs thetreaty,’ appears to anticipate that an executive, fresh from negotiating the
terms of a treaty and voting for its promulgation, will sign the document.46
However, in the case of human rights treaties, the more common
occurrence is a significant delay betw een promulgation and US signature.
Thus the vast majority of human rights  treaties are shepherded through the
ratification process by an executive that did not negotiate them.
According to a Department of St ate Treaty Analyst writing in 2008,
the executive branch has given ‘no serious consideration’ to signing either
the ICRMW, or the ILO Conventions that deal with migrant workers.47
Interviews with domestic and inte rnational government officials and
advocates reveal that the Migrant Wo rkers Convention receives virtually
no attention in the United States from either civil society or government
because of the assumption that any attempt to define immigrants as rightsholders is a political non-starter.48 
In the case of the Convention on  the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women, in 1980 20 members of  the House of Representatives
introduced a resolution urging th e President to sign the treaty.49
Meanwhile, the Migrant Workers Conv ention has received virtually no
public attention from the Senate.50 Even the UN Economic and Social
Council, when it commissioned a seri es of studies on the Convention’s
prospects for ratification in a variety of countries, did not examine the
United States.51 
2.1.3 Delayed Senate approval
From the earliest days of the human rights treaty regime, the Senate has
struggled with whether and how to incorporate international norms into
domestic law.52 Even when the content of a treaty appears to be
46 See n 20 and n 23 above and accompanying text.
47 E-mail from J Sherer on 24 January 2008.
48 E-mail from J Sherer (n 47 above); E-mail from A Pécoud on 1 October 2008.
49 See H Res 738 (96th) (1980): A resolution re lating to the United  Nations Mid-Decade
Conference for Women. 
50 In a search of the Congressional Record, I found only one mention of the Migrant
Workers Convention, a reference in a wri tten statement by the International Council
of Voluntary Agencies entered by Sena tor Ted Kennedy in 1992 138 Cong Rec S 106,
111 (22 January 1992). 
51 See E-mail from A Pécoud (n 48 above).286    Chapter 11
unobjectionable, for example in the case of the Genocide Convention,
concerns about loss of sovereignty seem  to hold particular sway in the
realm of human rights treaty ratification.53 According to Professor Natalie
Kaufman, ‘the actual content of the tr eaties is not viewed as the primary
determinant of the current situatio n. Perception is important, not
content.’54 Given the sensitive nature of immigration policy, it is likely that
a convention on migrant workers’ rights would also encounter opposition
and lengthy debates.
2.1.4 Restrictions  on ratification
It is common for the United States to aggressively seek to limit the
consequences of human rights treaty ratification on the domestic legal
system.55 Restrictions on ratification, in the form of reservations,
understandings, and declarations  (RUDs), serve this function.56 When the
earliest human rights treaties were promulgated, the question of the
appropriate way to handle thes e restrictions was unsettled.57 The
international community ha d to strike a balance between universality, in
the form of widespread ratification , and the integrity of the treaty.58
Therefore, state parties may make uni lateral reservations to human rights
treaties. This is permitted only when  reservations do not contravene the
‘object and purpose’ of the treaty,59 a norm that has proven to be virtually
ineffective as a barrier to unilater al reservations on ratification.60
In its ratification of human rights treaties, the United States has taken
this practice further than with respect to any other type of treaty.61 In fact,
it has regularly applied a set of restrictions based on what the late Senator
Jesse Helms termed the ‘sovereignty package’.62 Over the years, the
‘sovereignty package’, as applied in the context of human rights treaties,
has evolved to include the following restrictions: an ‘understanding’ that
assures federal and state government  cooperation to ensure compliance
52 See Kaufman (n 28 above) 2. The US Sena te Subcommittee on Human Rights and the
law held a hearing on this issue, which was long overdue. For the archived webcast, see
US Senate Committee on the Judiciary ‘The law of the land: US implementation ofhuman rights treaties’ ht tp://judiciary.senate.gov/ hearings/heari ng.cfm?id=4224
(accessed 16 December 2009). 
53 Written statement by the International Co uncil of Voluntary Agencies (n 50 above)
287-88; see also Kaufman (n 28 above) 184-193.
54 Kaufman (n 28 above) 181.
55 See E Neumayer ‘Qualified ratification: Explaining reservations to international
human rights treaties’ (2007) 36 Journal of Legal Studies  397 404 (calling the United
States a ‘notorious example’ of the use of RUDs).
56 As above.57 See L Lijnzaad Reservations to un-human rights treaties: Ratify and ruin?  (1995) 15.
58 See Lijnzaad (n 57 above) 23. 
59 Lijnzaad (n 57 above) 28-29.60 Lijnzaad (n 57 above) 95.
61 Congressional Research Service (n 20 above) 286.
62 Kaufman (n 28 above) 187.  ICRMW and the US     287
with the treaty;63 a declaration that the terms of the treaty are not ‘self-
executing’, or not enforceable in domestic court, until they have been
implemented in domestic legislation;64 and an understanding that ‘nothing
in [the treaty] establishes a basis for jurisdiction by any international
tribunal, including the International Criminal Court’.65 The ‘sovereignty
package’ is controversial internationally. The US ratification restrictions
have garnered formal protests from other state parties to human rights
treaties,66 sparked inter-governmental policy statements designed to limit
restrictions,67 and elicited widespread censure from domestic
constituencies.68 While the question of whether non-self-execution can be
read into a treaty that was not ratified on that explicit understanding has
been the subject of debate and litigation,69 US courts do enforce explicit
non-self-execution ratification restrictions.70
63 United Nations Treaty Collection ‘Status of International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights’ http://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/MTDSG/Volume%20I/
Chapter% 20IV/IV-4.en.pdf (accessed 6 November 2016); United Nations Treaty
Collection ‘Status of International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofRacial Discrimination’ https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=IND&
mtdsg_no=IV-2&chapter=4&cl ang=_en (accessed 5 November 2016); United Nations
Treaty Collection ‘Status of Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of theChild on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict’ https://treaties.un.org/
Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=IV-11-b&chapter=4&clang=_en
(accessed 6 November 2016). 
64 As above.
65 Status of Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict (n 63 above). Note also that tworatifications involved what Senator Helms termed the ‘sovereignty proviso’, conditions
included in the Senate resolution ratifying the Genocide Convention but not included
in the Convention against Torture instrument of ratification deposited by thePresident. Congressional Research Serv ice (n 20 above) 134-35. The ‘sovereignty
proviso’ stated that the President would not deposit the instrument of ratification until
he had notified ‘all present and prospective ratifying parties ... that nothing in thisConvention requires or author izes legislation, or other ac tion, by the United States of
America prohibited by the Constitution of the United States as interpreted by the
United States.’ Congre ssional Research Service (n 20 above) 134, 287.
66 See, eg, Status of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (n 63 above);
United Nations Treaty Collection ‘Status of Convention against Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment’ https://treaties.un.org/
pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-9&chapter=4&clang=_en
(accessed 20 December 2009). 
67 C Redgwell ‘US reservations to human rights treaties: All for one and none for all?’ in
M Byers & G Nolte (eds) United States hegemony and the foundations of in ternational law
(2003) 392, 397-98.
68 Eg, Press Release, American Civil Liberties Union and Human Rights Watch Report
on US Violations of International Human Rights Covenant ‘Groups call on Clinton
administration to correct abuses, ensure that international standards can be invoked inUS courts’ (14 December 1993) http://w ww .skepticfiles.or g/aclu/12_14_93.htm
(accessed 5 November 2016). 
69 The Supreme Court has read such a treaty to be non-self-executing and thus
unenforceable in US courts. See Medellin v Texas  552 US 491, 505 (2008) (quoting
Igartúa-De La Rosa v United States  417 F 3d 145, 150 (1st Cir 2005)). For scholarship on
this issue, see MS Flaherty ‘History right?: Historical scholarship, originalunderstanding, and trea ties as “supreme law of the land”’ (1999) 99 Columbia Law
Review  2095; CM Vázquez ‘Laughin g at treaties’ (1999) 99 Columbia Law Review  2154;
CM Vázquez ‘Treaties as law of the land : The supremacy clau se and the judicial
enforcement of treaties’ (2008) 122 Harvard Law Review  600.
70 CA Bradley ‘Our dualist Constitution, an d the internationalist conception’ (1999) 51
Stanford Law Review  529 539-40. 288    Chapter 11
In addition to the aforementioned  understandings and declarations,
the United States imposes additional restrictions it calls reservations,
restricting its commitme nt to substantive provisions of human rights
treaties that conflict – or potentially conflict – with domestic law. For
example, in its ratification of the ICCPR, the United States reserved the
right to execute convicted criminals for crimes committed below the age of
1871 to shield the United States fr om the ICCPR’s prohibition on the
juvenile death penalty.72 The US practice of participating in treaty
negotiation while delaying and severely  restricting ratification has earned
it the label of a ‘double standard state’.73
2.1.5 Domestic law assessment of  the Migrant Workers Convention
The provisions of the Convention that apply to undocumented migrants
are, to a great extent, a recitation of international norms to which the
United States has already accede d by virtue of previous treaty
ratifications.74 In fact, 23 provisions of the ICRMW75 m er e l y  e ch o  t h e
language of treaties the US has ratified.76 An additional two provisions,
which do not correspond to protections already ratified by the United
States, adopt the language of the Universal Declaration,77 a document that
the United States helped to draft78 and in favour of which the country
voted in 1948.79 Moreover, each of these two provisions – protection from
arbitrary deprivation of property and the right to secondary education forundocumented migrant children, is firmly established in US domestic
71 Status of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (n 63 above). 
72 ICCPR, art 6(5). See generally Congression al Research Service (n 20 above) 291. For
arguments against restrictions on ratification in general see L Henkin, ‘The Covenanton Civil and Political Rights’ in RB Lillick (ed) US ratification of the human rights treaties:
With or without reservations?  (1985) 22.
73 See Neumayer (n 55 above).
74 JAR Nafziger & BC Bartel ‘The Migrant Workers Convention: Its place in human
rights law’ (1991) 25 International Migration Review  771 781-82.
75 See Nafziger & Bartel (n 74 above) 789-99; see also ICRMW , art 10 (corresponding to
CAT art 16); art 16 (corresponding to CAT art 14).
76 See Nafziger & Bartel (n 74 above) 789-99. 77 See ICRMW , art 15 (corresponding to Un iversal Declaration art 17); ICRMW , art 30
(corresponding to Universal Declaration art 26). 
78 See MA Glendon A world made new: Eleanor Roosevelt and the creation of the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights  (2000).
79 For information and background on the voting of states regarding the Universal
Declaration, see generally Glendon (n 78 above) 143-72. Note that the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights is a declaration, not a treaty, and therefore is not as a
whole formally binding on the United States. See H Hannum ‘The status of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in  national and international law’ (1995-1996)
25 Georgia Journal of International and Comparative Law  287 290. Some provisions of the
Declaration, such as the prohibition on torture contained in art 5, are now accepted by
the US as binding on this country through the international law devices of customaryinternational law . See Hannum 306; Filartiga v Pena-Irala  630 F 2d 876, 879 (2d Cir
1980). However, arts 17 & 26 of the Univer sal Declaration are not amongst these
provisions. Nevertheless, the United States’ endorsement of the Declaration lendsweight to the argument that the above-mentioned parallel articles in the Migrant
Workers Convention (arts 15 and 30) are not fo reign to the United States. See generally
Restatement (Third) of  the Foreign Relations Law of the United States § 701 (1987).  ICRMW and the US     289
law.80 Thus, a significant portion of th e ICRMW overlaps with the United
States’ existing obligations.
The Senate and Administration are like ly to be most protective of their
immigration enforcement prerogatives. However, the Convention doesnot mandate legalisation. In fact, arti cle 35 of the Convention clarifies that
the treaty does not require govern ments to offer regularisation to
undocumented migrants, though article 69 does set out factors to be takeninto account when state parties consid er the possibility of regularisation
and article 22 places due process restrictions on individual expulsion
decisions. 
A sensitive area of immigration poli cy involves the visa eligibility of
migrant workers’ families. Article 38 requires states of employment to
‘make every effort to authorize [leg ally present] migrant workers and
[family members] to be temporarily absent without effect upon theirauthorization to stay or to work’.
81 With regard to workers who are lawful
permanent residents (LPR), the United States makes precisely that
provision, permitting LPR-status migrants to undertake temporary visitsabroad without running any risk of jeopardising their status.82 With regard
to temporary entrants, however, no such provision for temporary travel is
made, potentially creating a de jure  conflict between article 38 and US law.
Some Convention articles offer su bstantive immigration protections to
legally present workers aimed at protecting family reunification. Article
44(2) directs that state parties 
take measures that  they deem appropriate an d that fall within their
competence to facilitate the reunific ation of [authorized] migrant workers
with their spouses [or equivalents] ... as  well as with their minor dependent
unmarried children, 
and directs that ‘on humanitarian ground s, [state parties] shall favourably
consider granting equal treatment to other family members of migrant
workers’.83 As to the first requirement, the language ‘take measures that
they deem appropriate’ prevents this clause from conflicting with domestic
law. However, the second phrase re quires examining whether those family
reunification protections that are in  place are being extended to ‘other
family members’. This, too, is a weak requirement, using the mandating
language of ‘shall favourably cons ider’, but if that language were
interpreted to be binding, the US domestic immigration system wouldpresent a de jure  conflict with article 44 as well. There are numerous
instances in US law of more favourable treatment for nuclear as opposed
80 US Const amend V; Plyler v Doe  457 US 202 (1982).
81 ICRMW , art 38(1).
82 See 8 U.S.C. §1101(a)(27(A) (2009); Chavez-Ramirez v INS  792 F 2d 932 (9th Cir 1986).
83 ICRMW , art 44.290    Chapter 11
to extended, or ‘other’ family members.84 Similarly, if ‘favourably
consider’ is interpreted to be binding, article 50(1) raises a de jure  conflict.
Article 50(1) requires states to ‘f avourably consider’ granting family
members of deceased or divorced mi grant workers authorisation to stay
and to take into account the length of time already spent in that state.85
These provisions, though arguably weakly worded, raise potential conflicts
that would likely require either a change in US law to guarantee
conformity or spark a restriction on ratification.86 Moving toward
modifying US law on this point would better comport with the UnitedStates’ obligation under ICCPR article 23(1) to treat the family as ‘the
natural and fundamental group unit of so ciety[,] entitled to protection by
society and the State’.87
Thus US ratification of the ICRMW would likely be conditioned on a
set of reservations, under standings and declarations , by way of an initial
package proposed by the Executive upon signature, followed by Senate
stipulation upon authorisation to ratify, and formalised by the final act ofratification by the President. These limitations would likely include the
longstanding generic rese rvations, such as the fe deral/state understanding
and the non-self-execution declaration, as well as a series of substantivereservations and declarations addr essing both clear and potential
substantive conflicts between the Convention and domestic law. 
In future fuller assessments of the Convention, additional differences
between US law and the Convention will be identified. In the context ofsuch differences, however, it is impo rtant to underline that US ratification
o f  h u m a n  r i g h t s  t r e a t i e s  t y p i c a l l y  i n cludes a declaration that the treaty
provisions are not ‘self-executing’ . This means that restrictions on
ratification will likely prevent judicial reconciliation of de jure  conflicts,
because at first courts will not have jurisdiction over implementation of the
treaty. The non-self-executing restriction on ratification would prevent anyprovision from being invoked in US do mestic courts unless the legislature
has ‘executed’ that provision in domest ic legislation. This provision, along
with the various substantive restrictions that are likely to limit ratification,
appears to block domestic law from any real change in the absence of
legislative implementation.
88 Ratification of the Convention would
involve the country in a much-needed self-examination process but would
84 Eg, TA Aleinikoff et al Immigration and citizenship: Process and policy  (2003) 277-80.
85 ICRMW , art 50(1).
86 For example, the death of an immigration family petitioner, before the petition has
been approved, as well as in most other situations, automatically revokes the petition
and strips the family member of the petitioner of the right to status in the United
States. See Abboud v INS  140 F 3d 843, 849 (9th Cir 1998); Dodig v INS  9 F 3d 1418 (9th
Cir 1993).
87 ICCPR, art 23(1).
88 See Vázquez ‘Treaties as law of the land ’ (n 69 above) 695; CM Vázquez ‘Judicial
enforcement of treaties: Self-execu tion and related doctrines’ (2006) 100 American
Society of International Law Proceedings  439 439. See generally RB Lillich (ed) US
ratification of the human rights treaties: With or without reservations?  (1981).  ICRMW and the US     291
not threaten longstanding policies. As noted above, this limited domestic
role for ratified human rights treaties was not the original vision for the UN
human rights treaty regime, but it is the likely short-term domestic legal
effect of ratification of the Migr ant Workers Convention in the US.
2.2 US signature is unlikely , though the United States recently 
agreed to take ‘deliberative action’
For the first 21 years after promulgation of the Migrant Workers
Convention, the US government rarely , if ever, publicly discussed it.
Informal indications were that the Convention was extremely low on the
list of ratification priorities. Desp ite President Obama’s signature of the
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,89 his pledge to
ratify several other internat ional human rights treaties,90 his statements on
the urgency of poverty allevi ation in the Global South,91 and some steps to
improving conditions for migrant workers, his administration’s few
statements on the ICRMW were uniformly negative. 
The US had occasion to reaffirm its intentions with regard to the
Convention when it passed through the UN’s Universal Periodic Review
(UPR) process in 2010-2011 and again in  2015. Participating states urged
the United States to ratify a number of human rights treaties, and manyincluded the Migrant Workers Convention in the list.92 Egypt, Turkey,
and Guatemala made freestanding recommendations on the ICRMW
alone, emphasising its importance over other unratified treaties.93 From
the responses of the US representatives emerge three tiers of support for un-
ratified human rights treaties. A ha ndful of conventions received the
strongest positive indications. These were the treaties the representatives
89 See The White House Office of the Pre ss Secretary ‘Remarks by the President on
Signing of UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Proclamation’
(24 July 2009) http://www .whitehouse. gov/the_press_offi ce/Remarks-by-the-
President-on-Rights-of-Persons-with-Disabilities-Proclamation-Signing/ (accessed
5 November 2016). 
90 ‘Obama pledge on treaties a complex undertaking’ San Francisco Chronicle  1 December
2008 A1. 
91 ‘Obama’s $845 billion UN plan forwarded to  US Senate floor: “Global Poverty Act” to
cost each citizen $2,500 or more’ WorldNetDaily  28 July 2008 http://www .wnd.com/
index.php?pageId=70308 (accessed 5 November 2016). 
92 Report of the Working Group on the Univ ersal Periodic Review*: United States of
America, HRC (4 January 2011), UN Doc A/HRC/16/11 (2011) paras 92.1(Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela), 92.6 (Sudan); 92.15 (H aiti) (2011 UPR USA
Working Group Report); Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review* United States of  America, HRC (20 July 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/30/12
(2015) paras 176.25 (Indonesia), 176. 28 (Cabo Verde), 176.33 (Ghana), 176.53
(Honduras), 176.54 (Chile), 176.59 (Gua temala) (2015 UPR USA Working Group
Report). 
93 2011 UPR USA Working Group Report (n 92 above) paras 92.29 (Egypt), 92.30
(Turkey), 92.31 (Guatemala); 2015 UPR US A Working Group Report (n 92 above)
para 176.59 (Guatemala).292    Chapter 11
identified as those for which ‘the Administration is most committed to
pursuing ratification’.94 Without any qualifying language, the US
expressed ‘support’ for the recommendations urging ratification of theseinstruments: the Convention on the El imination of Discrimination against
Women, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and
the ILO Convention concerning Discrimination in Respect ofEmployment and Occupation (ILO Convention No 111).
95 At the second
tier of support appears the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).
The US responded to the recommendations to ratify the CRC by indicatingsupport expressed with the qualifier, ‘as we support its goals and intend to
review how we could move toward its ratification.’96 At the lowest tier of
support fall several treaties,97 including the Migrant Workers Convention.
The US consistently responded to re commendations to ratify the ICRMW
with ‘we cannot support’,98 ‘we do not support’,99 or that the
recommendation ‘does not enjoy our support.’100 
There has, however, been one development that signaled a more
nuanced US approach to the Migran t Workers Convention. In 2015, a few
countries recommended that the US ‘con sider’ ratifying particular treaties,
including the ICRMW.101 The US responded: ‘we support
recommendations urging deliberative  actions on treaties or domestic
institutions, such as th at we “consider” them’.102 At the UPR session
wrapping up the 2015 US review, the representative of the Philippines
welcomed the United States’ acce ptance of its recommendation to
consider the ICRMW.103 I t  r e m a i n s  t o  b e  s e e n  w h a t  a  c o m m i t m e n t  t o
‘consider’ and to take ‘deliberative action’ means for US review of the
Convention. With the advent of a Trump administration, the promised
deliberative action seems unlikely. 
94 Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review United States of
America Addendum Views on conclusions and/or recommendations, voluntary
commitments and replies presented by the State under review*, HRC (8 March 2011),
UN Doc A/HRC/16/11/Add.1 (2011) para 29 (hereinafter 2011 US UPR Response). 
95 2011 US UPR Response (n 94 above) para 28.
96 2011 US UPR Response (n 94 above) para 28; Report of the Working Group on the
Universal Periodic Review*: United States of America: Addendum: Views onconclusions and/or recommendations, voluntary commitments and replies presented
by the State under review, HRC (14 September 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/30/12/Add.1
(2015) para 20 (hereinafte r 2015 US UPR Response).
97 Other explicitly disfavoured treaties included the ICCPR, the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPED),
the Optional Protocol to the ICCPR, the American Convention on Human Rights, theRome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and the ILO Convention on
Domestic Workers (No 189).
98 2011 US UPR Response (n 94 above) para 29.99 2015 US UPR Response (n 96 above) para 22. 
100 2011 US UPR Response (n 94 above) para 30.
101 2015 UPR USA Working Group Report (n 92 above) paras 176.55 (Burkina Faso),
176.60 (Philippines).
102 2015 US UPR Response (n 96 above) para 28.
103 UN Web TV ‘USA UPR adoption – 22nd Session of Universal Periodic Review’
(15 May 2015) http://webtv .un.org/search/usa-upr-a doption-22nd-session-of-
universal-periodic-review/4238252840001? term=upr&languages=&sort=date
(accessed 6 November 2016).   ICRMW and the US     293
3 Lost opportunity to rationalise low wage labour 
migration policies
By failing to sign or assess the Migrant Workers Convention, the United
States misses an important opportunity to protect one of the country’s
most subordinated populations. By exposing more US citizens to the
notion that migrant workers are the subjects of a human rights treaty,
engaging with the Convention might co ntribute to shifting the political
climate toward policy reform. Ratification would also improve the UnitedStates’ reputation abroad, increasing  its world leadership vis-à-vis the
Global South, improving the US-Mexico relationship, and enabling the
United States to shape the development of the emerging international lawstandards on migrant workers. Work ing with the Convention would also
help the United States identify best practices and further badly needed
cross-agency examination of this co untry’s fragmented temporary worker
programme.
In the words of Professor Oona Hathaway, ‘treaties shape behavior
not simply by influencing tangible benefits and not simply because they
create legitimate legal obligations, but also by providing nations with a
powerful expressive tool’.
104 The United States desperately needs
expressive tools for addressing migration. By restricting opportunities for
legal low wage labour migration and failing to enforce employer sanctions,the United States has developed the world’s largest per capita
undocumented migrant population, one of the world’s most deadly
peacetime borders, and the most pove rty-stricken low-income workforce
in the industrialised world. Most agr ee, on humanitarian, labour, fiscal,
international relations and security grounds, that these are urgent
problems. Yet, except for policies of increased enforcement, domesticpolicy reform proposals have failed politically. Signature and ratification
of the ICRMW would help to re-frame the debate on migrant labour and
refocus attention on no n-enforcement solutions to irregular migration,
urging the United States along a path toward a rational global approach to
low wage labour migration.
4 Conclusion
The United States has always had an  unusually contradi ctory relationship
with the Migrant Workers Convention. At the UN ECOSOC level, the
United States routinely opposed promulgation of the treaty. However,once the Working Group tasked with drafting the Convention convened,
the United States participated active ly in negotiations, even on occasion
104 OA Hathaway ‘Do human rights trea ties make a difference?’ (2002) 111 Yale Law
Journal  1935 2020.294    Chapter 11
lending its influence to breaking  impasses and moving negotiations
forward. Once negotiations conclude d, however, the United States has
given no serious consideration to si gning the Convention. Most recently,
while participating in the UPR, the US  opposed calls for it to ratify the
treaty, though it did respond favourably to one request to deliberate on the
possibility of ratification. There is re latively little conflict between US law
and the substantive protections of th e Convention, and what conflicts may
exist would likely be buffered upon ra tification owing to the United States’
typically aggressive practice of restri ctions on ratification. Even with its
general history of slow human rights treaty ratification, the United States’
treatment of the ICRMW stands out as particularly delayed, owing not to
concerns about law, but to the politicised nature of the country’s low wagelabour migration regulation. The politi cs of immigration continue to result
in widespread suffering that could be lessened if the US legislature adopted
a human rights framework in assessing its policy priorities. Engaging withthe Migrant Workers Convention would be an important step toward re-
casting this fraught policy area.295Alan Desmond*
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
Since the adoption by consensus of the United Nations (UN) International
Convention on the Protection of th e Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families (ICRMW)1 by the UN General Assembly on
18 December 1990, the issue of international migration has grown in
prominence.2 This makes all the more re markable the fact that the
ICRMW has enjoyed a mixed reception at  the level of the EU institutions
while being for all practical purpos es ignored by the governments of EU
1 This chapter draws on earlier work by the author, namely, ‘The triangle that could
square the circle? The UN International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Thei r Families, the EU and the Universal
Periodic Review’ (2015) 17 European Journal of Migration and Law  39; and ‘The
development of a common EU migration policy and the rights of irregular migrants:
A progress narrative?’ (2016) 16 Human Rights Law Review  247.
1 UN International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Fa milies, GA (18 December 1990), UN Doc A/RES/45/158
(1990) 3.
2 This is evidenced by, inter alia, the a ppointment in 2015 by the Secretary-General of
the Council of Europe of a Special Repres entative on migration and refugees; the
appointment in 2004 by th e African Commission on Huma n and Peoples’ Rights of a
Special Rapporteur on refug ees, asylum Seekers, migrants and internally displaced
persons; the addition in 1999 by the then UN Commission on Huma n Rights (now the
Human Rights Council) of the UN Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants to its system of special p rocedures; and the appointment by the UN
Secretary-General in 2006 of a Special Repres entative on internat ional migration and
development. For other UN-related developments indicative of the increasing
attention being paid by states and intergovernmental/regional organisations to
international migration see paras 12-26 of th e Report by the Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of migrants, François Crépeau: ‘Global migration governance’, GA
(7 August 2013), UN Doc A/68/283 (2013). Th e number of international migrants,
persons living in a country other than where they were born, was estimated to be 244million or 3,3 per cent of the global populati on in 2015. This repres ents an appreciable
increase on the 2,8 per cent share of the global population made up by international
migrants in 2000. See Population facts: Trends in international migration 2015 (Factsheet No
2015/4 of the Population Division of the DESA of the UN Secretariat)  http://www .un.org/
en/development/desa/popula tion/migration/publications/populationfacts/docs/
MigrationPopFacts20154.pdf (accessed 15 June 2017).1CHAPTERA VEXED  RELATIONSHIP :
THE ICRMW
VIS-ÀVIS  THE EU
AND  ITS
MEMBER  STATES2
*296    Chapter 12
member states. Indeed, the ICRMW stands out as the only one of the ten
core international human rights instruments3 not yet signed or ratified by
any of the 28 EU member states (EU28).4 Against this background, this
chapter will do three things. The second section will demonstrate that the
failure of EU member states to ratify is in keeping with a wider reluctance
amongst states to confer legally enforceable rights on migrants throughbinding multilateral agreements in the realm of migration. While this
might help us to better understand non- ratification on the part of the EU28,
the third section will illustrate how diff icult it is to understand some of the
EU attitudes towards the Convention by exposing the gross hypocrisy in
the failure of the European Commission and the Council of the European
Union to endorse ratification by member states. The fourth section willargue that despite the poor fortunes experienced by the Convention in the
EU so far, the human rights advanc es which have been brought about by
the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in 2009 have created an EUlegal landscape more propitious to ratification of the ICRMW. 
It is worth highlighting at the outs et that when discussing migration in
the EU context we are talking about non-EU citizens or, to use the
technical term, third-country nation als (TCNs). EU citizens who move
from one EU country to another enjoy a robust catalogue of rights by
virtue of their EU citizenship and the rules on freedom of movement
3 There is some inconsistency within the UN as to the exact number of core instruments.
The website of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
contains references both to nine and ten core international human rights instruments.This chapter refers to ten core international instruments which are to be understood as
the nine core human rights treaties adopted by the UN General Assembly between
1965 and 2006 as well as the Opti onal Protocol to the Conv ention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Trea tment (OP-CAT). The implementation by
state parties of each of these ten instruments is overseen by a monitoring bodycomposed of independent experts. While a number of the treaties have been
supplemented by optional protocols, OP-CAT is the only such protocol with a
dedicated monitoring body. This is presumably why it is at times numbered amongstthe core instruments, as distinct from the other eight optional protocols whose
implementation by state parties is overs een by the monitoring body supervising the
treaty to which the optional protocol relates. For a full list of the ten core internationalhuman rights instruments and their monitoring bodies see http://www.ohchr.org/
EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CoreInst ruments.aspx (accessed 15 June 2017).
4 All of the ten core instruments are open for signature by states. Signature does not
impose positive legal obligations on a state, but indicates the state’s intention to
express its consent to be bound by the treaty at a later date. A state expresses its
consent to be bound by ratifying the treaty which occurs when an instrument ofratification is deposited with the UN Secretary-General at UN headquarters in New
York. In the period between signature and ratification, which is not subject to any time
limit, a state may seek approval for the treaty at the domestic level and may amend
domestic policy and legislation to ensure they comply with the treaty. There are
currently 15 states which are signatories to the ICRMW but have not yet ratified. An
instrument of accession is an instrument of ratification which has been depositedwithout having been preceded  by signature. Of the 51 state parties to the ICRMW , 23
signed and ratified while 28 acceded. For further information see UN Treaty handbook
(2012).   The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     297
within the EU which go beyond the minimum standards elaborated in the
ICRMW.5 Ratification of the ICRMW by an EU member state would
therefore primarily be to the benefit of non-EU migrants in the ratifyingstate. It is also worth pointing out that the EU as a regional organisation
cannot ratify the ICRMW as ratification is open only to states. As we will
see presently, however, the EU has a key role to play in determiningwhether its constituent states take action in respect of the ICRMW.  Any
discussion concerning the ICRMW and the EU merits mention of the fact
that the Convention may be seen as a European text. This may come as a
surprising assertion, given that Europe an states were unenthusiastic about
the idea of a UN convention on migr ant workers’ rights to begin with,
viewing UN involvement in this field as  inappropriate in light of the ILO’s
existing instruments and established ro le in the field of labour standards.
6
Indeed, disdain for a new UN instrument was also evident when western
European states rejected the first draft of the Convention submitted to theGeneral Assembly working group as a ‘blank cheque for continued illegal
migration’.7 Subsequently, however, a number of Mediterranean and
Scandinavian countries – Finland, Gr eece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Sweden
and later Norway – came together in an informal group known as MESCA
which provided the working group with an alternative outline of the
Convention which became the definitive structure. It is therefore perhapsunsurprising that, while the interest of  some of the MESCA states in the
proposed Convention was no doubt prompted by the fact that they were at
the time primarily countries of origin  rather than destination, the ICRMW
has been characterised by one expert  who participated in the drafting
process as ‘fundamentally a European text, although modified by the long
negotiation process’.8
The failure so far of any of the EU28 to ratify the ICRMW is, in
practical terms, to the detriment of migrants. The EU is an important
5 See for example Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of the Un ion and their family
members to move and reside freely within th e territory of the member states amending
Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and repeal ing Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC,
72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC, 90/364/EEC, 90/365/EECand 93/96/EEC. OJ L158/77, OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, 77-123.
6 S Grant ‘The recognition of migrants’ rights within the UN Human Rights System:
The first sixty years’ in M Dembour and T Kelly (eds) Are human rights for migrants?
(2011) 35.
7 R Böhning ‘The ILO and the new UN Conven tion on Migrant Workers: The past and
future’ (1991) 25 International Migration Review  701.
8 G Battistella ‘Migration and human rights: The uneasy but essential relationship’ in
P de Guchteneire et al (eds) Migration and human rights: The United Nations Convention
on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (2009) 55. The ‘long negotiat ion process’ of the ICRMW is
not, however, the longest negotiation process involving core international human
rights instruments. Both ICCPR and CES CR were adopted in 1966 after 14 years of
negotiations.298    Chapter 12
destination for a significant number of migrants.9 Non-application of the
ICRMW to EU member states means that the migration law, policy and
practice of those states is not subject to close examination by a body ofindependent experts dedicated to clarifying the practical requirements of
an instrument setting out the mini mum international standards of human
rights protection for migrant workers an d their families. This is also to the
detriment of the functioning of the Committee on Migrant Workers
(CMW),10 the body which monitors compliance by state parties with the
ICRMW, as the Committee is deprived of the insight and input ofindependent experts from an important migrant destination region with a
highly developed system of human righ ts protection. Similarly, because of
the volume of migrants in the EU and the fact that most EU member stateshave robust democratic in stitutions and vibrant civil society activity, non-
ratification by the EU28 means that examples of rights’ violations from
this important migrant destination region are not referred to theCommittee, with the Committee consequently not in a position to issue
guidance and clarify standards for st ates which are in a comparatively
strong position to implement such guidance. This clearly impacts thedevelopment and application of inte rnational human rights law as it
applies to migrants. 
Endorsement of the ICRMW by th e European Commission and
Council of the European Union and its ratification by EU member stateswould also be of great symbolic sign ificance. It would send a clear message
that the ratifying state takes the issu e of migrants’ rights seriously, that
human rights are not only for the citizens of the EU, but for all peopleregardless of their country of origin or status in the destination country.
Apart from the practical impact on migration law and policy that
ratification might have, it could also help to change the public narrativearound migration, something which is as important as laws and policies in
ensuring the realis ation of human rights in practice.
9 It is estimated that in 2015,  2.7 million TCNs migrated to the EU. On 1 January 2016,
the number of people living in the EU28 who were citizens of non-member countries
was 20.7 million, while the number of peop le living in the EU28 who had been born
outside of the EU was 35.1 million. For more detailed information see Eurostat: http:/
/ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/
Migration_and_migrant_ population_statistics (accessed 15 June 2017).
10 The literature on the Committee on Migr ant Workers is sparse. The only detailed
studies are C Edelenbos ‘Committee on Migr ant Workers and implementation of the
ICRMW’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 8 ab ove) 100-121; and V Chetail ‘The Committee
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families’ in P Alston & F Mégret (eds) The United Nations and human rights: A critical
appraisal  (forthcoming, 2018).   The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     299
2 State aversion to binding multilateral 
commitments concerning migration and 
migrants’ rights
Investigations into the non-ratification of the ICRMW in the EU have
pointed to a lack of awareness of th e Convention as a significant problem11
and, in addition, have yielded a wide variety of state objections to the
instrument.12 These include the financial and administrative burden that
ratification would impose on a stat e; the incompatibility of certain
provisions of the Convention with a state’s legal and constitutional
framework; the redundancy of the Conv ention in light of the protection of
migrants’ rights provided by national  legislation and the regional and
international instruments to which a st ate is party; and the competence of
the EU in migration matters which, it is claimed, precludes ratification of
the Convention by any one individual EU member state. This latter claim
will be dealt with in detail presently. 
Another oft-rehearsed objection is that ratification of the Convention
would result in a significant encroach ment on the sovereignty of states,
tying states’ hands when  it comes to deciding who may enter their
territory. It is important to note in this regard that article 79 of the
Convention provides explicitly that  nothing in the document shall affect
the right of each state party ‘to esta blish the criteria governing admission
of migrant workers and members of their families’. Thus while the
Convention is largely concerned with migrants’ rights, it cannot beinterpreted as usurping the power of state parties to regulate the admission
of non-nationals. The potentially mo st fatal accusation levelled at the
Convention is that by failing to distinguish between lawfully and
unlawfully present migrants13 it incentivises irregular migration. This is
also the laziest charge, as the most cu rsory reading of the text makes clear
that only certain fundamental rights, outlined in Part III of the text, are
accorded to all migrants. The Convention thus makes a very clear
distinction between these two categories of migrants. 
11 It is difficult to resist the impression that there is a certain reticence on the part of the
UN itself vis-à-vis promotion and awareness-raising of the Convention. This is
evidenced, albeit anecdotally, by the fact that the ICRMW is the only one of the ten
core international human rights instruments for which there is no material in the UN
historic archives of the Audiovisual Library of International Law http://legal.un.org/
avl/ha/humanrights.html (accessed 15 June 2017).
12 See for example E MacD onald & R Cholewinski The Migrant Workers Convention in
Europe: Obstacles to the ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families: EU/EEA perspectives  (2007). 
13 Most recently and egregiously repeated in para 13, Council of the European Union
‘Conclusions of the Council and of the Representatives of Governments of the
Member States meeting with in the Council on the 2013 UN  High-Level Dialogue on
Migration and Development and on broadening the development-migration nexus’
(2013) http://register.consilium. europa.eu/doc/srv?l=EN&f=ST%2012415%20201
3%20INIT (accessed 15 June 2017).300    Chapter 12
The wealth of foregoing ostensible obstacles notwithstanding, studies
undertaken suggest that the principa l barrier to ratification of the
Convention is a lack of political will.14 With many perceived obstacles a
result of misconception or misrepesentation, there are few real legal
obstacles to ratification which, in an y case, could be neatly dealt with by
means of a reservation or minor chan ges to domestic legislation. Lack of
political will to ratify is not, however, confined to the ICRMW. There is
something about migrants, and migrant workers in particular, that makes
states reluctant to consent to binding multilateral legal standards whichfocus on protecting their rights. EU member states evince this reluctance
regardless of the venue from wh ich such standards originate. 
The EU28 aversion to binding mult ilateral commitments concerning
migrants’ rights is evident from their approach to the conventionselaborated under the auspices of the Council of Europe,
15 a regional
intergovernmental organisation establ ished in the aftermath of World War
II to promote democracy, human rights  and the rule of law which numbers
all EU states amongst its 47 members. The Council of Europe has
produced over 200 treaties,16 a number of which specifically concern the
conferral of rights on migrant workers and often require equality oftreatment between migrants and host state citizens. These migrant-focused
documents have almost invariably fail ed to secure any meaningful degree
of support amongst states. The European Convention on Establishment,17
which deals with entry, residence and employment rights, was opened for
signature in 1955 but has been ratifi ed by only ten EU member states18 as
well as two other Council of Europe  members. The European Convention
14 K Touzenis & A Sironi Current challenges in the implementation of the UN International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families (2013) 4 http://www .europarl.europa .eu/RegData/etudes/etudes/join/
2013/433715/EXPO-DROI_ET(2013)433715_EN.pdf (accessed 15 June 2017);
M D’Auchamp Rights of migrant workers in Europe  (2011) 6 http://www .europe.
ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/Migra nt_Workers.pdf (accessed 15 June 2017).
15 The Council of Europe is a distinct enti ty from the EU. Established in 1949, its
institutional structure comprises a committee of ministers and a parliamentaryassembly. Unlike the EU, the statute of the Council of Europe does not provide for the
creation of a federation or union. Through the conclusion of a wide range of important
multilateral conventions it has fostered collaboration and closer links on economic andsocial matters between its members. Its aim of unifying the continent in the aftermath
of World War II was impeded by the advent of the Cold War, but since 1989 it has
expanded its membership to include the countries of central and Eastern Europe. Itsflagship institution is the European Court of Human Rights. For further information
see B Wassenberg History of the Council of Europe (2013).
16 For the full list see http://www .coe.int /en/web/conventions/fu ll-list (accessed 15
June 2017). While Council of Europe convention s are prepared within  the institutional
framework of that organisation, the majority of its treaties are open for accession by
non-member states.
17 European Convention on Establishmen t (ETS No 19) 529 UNTS 141, entered into
force 23 February 1965.
18 Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Ir eland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Sweden and the United Kingdom. It has al so been signed by Austria and France. For
further information see http://www .coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/
conventions/treaty/019 (accessed 15 June 2017).  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     301
on Social Security,19 opened for signature in 1972, has been ratified by
eight states, seven of which hold EU membership.20 The European
Convention on the Legal Status of Migrant Workers,21 opened for
signature in 1977, has 11 state parties, of which six are EU member
states.22 A feature of these conventions wh ich limits their application and
simultaneously, one might imagine, ma kes ratification more palatable, is
the fact that they oblige contracting states to apply the conventions only in
respect of individuals who are citizens  of other states which have ratified
them. The more recent Convention on  the Participation of Foreigners in
Public Life at Local Level,23 opened for signature in 1992, differs from the
aforementioned treaties in that it ap plies to all lawfully resident migrants
in a contracting state, regardless of wh ether their country of origin has also
ratified. It has, however, attracted a similarly low number of ratifications:
just nine countries, including six EU member states,24 have deposited
instruments of ratification with th e Secretary-General of the Council of
Europe. 
The Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in
Human Beings,25 which since being opened for signature in 2005 has been
ratified by all EU member states and by all remaining member states of theCouncil of Europe apart from Russia,26 might be viewed not so much as
an exception to the rule as a reflection of greater willingness on the part of
states to cooperate in relation to in dividuals viewed as helpless victims of
great injustice.27 Their manifest vulnerability allows them to be perceived
as more deserving of protection than individuals who move across borders
19 European Convention on Social Security  (ETS No 78) 1710 UNTS 6, entered into
force 1 March 1977.
20 Austria, Belgium, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal and Spain. It has also
been signed by Czech Republic, France, Gr eece and Ireland. For further information
see: http://www .coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/treaty/078(accessed 15 June 2017).
21 European Convention on the Legal Stat us of Migrant Workers (ETS No 93) 1496
UNTS 3, entered into force 1 May 1983. 
22 France, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and Sweden. It has also been signed by
Belgium, Germany, Greece and Luxembourg . For further information see http://
www .coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-li st/-/conventions/t reaty/093 (accessed
15 June 2017).
23 Convention on the Participation of Foreigners in Public Life at Local Level (ETS No
144) 2044 UNTS 737, entered into force 1 May 1997.
24 Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Italy,  Netherlands and Sweden. In addition, the
Convention has been signed by Cyprus, Lithuania, Slovenia and the United Kingdom.
For further information see http://www .coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/treaty/144 (accessed 15 June 2017).
25 Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (CETS
No 197) 2569 UNTS 33, entered into force 16 May 2005.
26 Russia has not yet signed. Belarus, a non-member state of the Council of Europe,
ratified on 1 March 2014. For further in formation see http: //www .coe.int/en/web/
conventions/full-list/-/conventions /treaty/197 (accessed 15 June 2017).
27 This may also at least partly explain the high rate of ratification of the Convention
relating to the Status  of Refugees 189 UNTS 150, ente red into force 22 April 1954, and
its 1967 Protocol, which has 146 state parties.302    Chapter 12
of their own free will28 in search of better employment and living
opportunities. A further factor explai ning the ratification readiness of
states vis-à-vis anti-t rafficking instruments29 may be the migration control
and law enforcement aspect as these instruments also aim at preventing
trafficking and prosecuting traffickers.
In light of the foregoing it can come  as little surprise that, rather than
any migrant-specific treaty, the Counc il of Europe instrument which has
been of greatest benefit to the protection of migrants’ rights is the European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR),30 a  b i l l  o f  r i g h t s  o f  g e n e r a l
application which sets out the minimu m level of human rights protection
that member states of the Council of Europe must provide. The function of
the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in adjudicating on alleged
violations of the ECHR represents the most effective system of legalremedy under any human rights treaty.31 Even here, however, state
resistance to recognition and protection of migrants’ rights is evident in the
ECtHR’s development of its case law. The right of migrants to take acase32 alleging a violation of one or more of the rights set out in the ECHR
stems from article 1 which provides that state parties must secure the rights
in the Convention to everyone within  their jurisdiction. While the ECtHR
28 The extent to which those moving across international borders in search of
e m p l o y m e n t  c a n  b e  s a i d  t o  b e  a c t i n g  o f  t h e i r  o w n  f r e e  w i l l  i s  o f  c o u r s e  o p e n  t o
question. See for example M Ngai Impossible subjects: Illegal aliens and the making of
modern America (2004) and S Sassen Losing control? Sovereignty in an age of globalization
(1996) who shows that migrants’ presence in a host state is ofte n produced by specific
economic, colonial, military and other ties between different countries. Similarly, in
the context of irregular migration, the European Commission has conceded that thedemand for irregular labour migration is created by employers, thus implicitly
recognising that irregular migrants are themselves in many cases only partially
responsible for their irregular status. See ‘Communication from the Commission to theCouncil and the European Parliament on a Common Policy on Illegal Immigration’
(2001) 23.
29 Like the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human
Beings, the UN Palermo Protocol has also been widely ratified and currently has 170
state parties. Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in PersonsEspecially Women and Children, supplem enting the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Orga nized Crime 15 November 2000, 2237 UNTS 319; Doc A/
55/383, entered into force 25 December 2003.
30 Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ETS No
5) 213 UNTS 222, entered into force 3 Se ptember 1953, as amended by Protocols Nos
3, 5, 8, 11 and 14 which entered into f orce on 21 September 1970, 20 December 1971,
1 January 1990, 1 November 1998 and 1 June 2010 respectively. 
31 While initially states ratifying the ECHR could opt not to recognise the right of
individuals to apply to the ECtHR, the right of individual petition has beencompulsory since 1998. See Article 34 of P rotocol No 11 to the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, restructuring the control
machinery established thereb y, (ETS No 155) 2061 UNTS 7, entered into force 1
November 1998. It is also relevant in this  regard that since 1993 ratification of the
ECHR is a requirement for countries seekin g to join the EU in accordance with the
‘Copenhagen criteria’ agreed by the Europ ean Council. See ‘European Council in
Copenhagen 21-22 June 1993 Conclusions of the Presidency’ SN 180/1/93 REV 1
para 7(A)(iii).
32 As is the case with other human rights treaties, an individual complaint may be
successfully submitted to the monitoring body, in this case the ECtHR, subject to a
number of admissibility criteria including th e exhaustion of domestic remedies. See art
35 ECHR.  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     303
has delivered a number of importan t and groundbreaking rulings in
defence of migrants’ rights,33 Marie-Bénédicte Dembour has recently
shown how the ECtHR in its rulings concerning migrants seems to be atpains not to upset states.34 The Court’s deference to states’ right to exercise
migration control has led it to treat migrants first and foremost as aliens
subject to state control,35 with their ECHR rights being relegated to the
status of exceptions36 to the rule of state power to regulate the entry,
residence and expulsion of migrants . State aversion to being bound to
respect migrants’ rights finds expression, if not endorsement, even in thejurisprudence of intern ational judicial fora.
State suspicion of binding multil ateral agreements concerned with
conferring rights on migrants simila rly obtains in relation to treaties
elaborated under the auspices of th e International Labour Organisation
(ILO), an agency established in 1919 to set labour stan dards and promote
decent work which numbers all of the EU28 amongst its 187 member
states.37 The ILO has a constitutional mandate for codifying standards
concerning migrant workers,38 and the role of ILO Conventions in the
governance of labour migration and the protection of migrant workers is
exemplified by  the Migration for Employment Convention39 and the
Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention.40 The former,
adopted by the General Conference of  the ILO in 1949, currently counts
ten EU member states41 amongst its 49 state parties while the latter,
adopted in 1975, has gained 23 ratifica tions including a mere five from EU
states.42
Instead of embracing legally binding standards which confer
enforceable rights on migrants, states prefer to deal with international
33 See for example Cruz Varas & Others v Sweden,  ECHR (20 March 1991) 15576/89;
Chahal v The United Kingdom , ECHR (15 November 1996) 22414/93; Hirsi Jamaa &
Others v Italy , ECHR (23 February 2012) 27765/09.
34 M Dembour When humans become migrants: Study of the European Court of Human Rights
with an Inter-American counterpoint  (2015) 507.
35 Dembour (n 34 above) 5.
36 Dembour (n 34 above) 119.37 For an indepth analysis of the ILO and its relationship with the ICRMW , see the
chapter by Cholewinski in this volume.
38 See Preamble to the Constitution of the ILO, Recital 2.39 Convention concerning Migration for Employment (Revised) 1949 (No 97), entered
into force 22 January 1952.
40 Convention concerning Migrations in Abusive Conditions and the Promotion of
Equality of Opportunity an d Treatment of Migrant Workers, 1975 (No 143), entered
into force 9 December 1978.
41 Belgium, Cyprus, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, the
United Kingdom. For further information see http://www .ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/
f?p=NORMLEXPUB:11300:0::NO:11300:P11300_INSTRUMENT_ID:312242:NO
(accessed 15 June 2017).
42 Cyprus, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia and Sweden. For further information see http://
www .ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p= NORMLEXPUB:11300:0::NO:11300:P11300_
INSTRUMENT_ID:312288:NO (accessed 15 June 2017).304    Chapter 12
migration through informal dialog ue and voluntary, non-binding
processes.43 Multilateral discussion of  international migration thus
currently occurs within two complementary fora.44 The Global Migration
Group, comprising 22 entities belonging to the UN system, was
established by the UN Secretary-General in 2006 with the somewhat
supine-sounding purpose of achieving an improved UN response to the
issue of international migration and of  promoting wider application of the
relevant migration-relate d norms and instruments.45 The Global Forum
on Migration and Development is an annual state-led consultative process
established in 2007 following state oppo sition to the creation within the
UN of a forum for discussion of migration.46 Its focus on the economic
development aspects of migration has gi ven rise to criticism concerning a
lack of attention to the human rights of migrants.47 
More recently, the adoption by the UN General Assembly of the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants48 in response to large
movements of people across internat ional borders has set in motion a
process of negotiations which is in tended to culminate in 2018 in the
adoption of a Global Compact for sa fe, orderly and regular migration and
a separate Global Compact on refug ees. Given that even in relation to
migrants in vulnerable situations  the Declaration commits states to
‘consider developing non-binding guiding principles and voluntary
guidelines’,49 it seems safe to assume that the compact for regular
migration will not see states signing up to binding legal obligations vis-à-
vis migrants’ rights. In light of a ge neral preference amongst states for
dealing with international migratio n in informal venues which produce
non-binding outcomes50 and the associated reluctance of states to assume
binding legal obligations through ratification of multilateral treaties
elaborated expressly for the purpose of securing migrants’ rights, it cancome as little surprise that the ICRMW has so far failed to gain a single
signature or ratification amongst the 28 member states of the EU.
43 See generally Crépeau (n 2 above).
44 V Chetail ‘The transnational movement of persons under general international law –
Mapping the customary law foundations of international migration law’ in V Chetail
& C Bauloz (eds) Research handbook on international law and migration  (2014) 5.
45 See the website of the Global Migration Group http://www .globalmigration
group.org/ (accessed 15 June 2017).
46 Crépeau (n 2 above) para 22. See also  the website of the GFMD http://www .
gfmd.org/ (accessed 15 June 2017).
47 Crépeau (n 2 above) para 50.
48 Draft resolution referred to the high-level plenary meeting on addressing large
movements of refugees and migrants, GA (13 September 2016), UN Doc A/71/L.1
(2016) (New York Declaration).
49 New York Declaration (n 48 above) para 52.50 Chetail has suggested that the proliferation of non-binding standards and consultative
processes amongst a multiplicity of actors with different agendas may aggravate the
fragmentation of international migration law norms. Chetail (n 44 above) 9.  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     305
3 Human rights double standards
This section argues that the inacti on of the EU28 in relation to the
ICRMW is inconsistent with the supp ort shown by those same states for
other core human rights instruments. It also contends that there is a similar
incoherence in the EU’s recommendat ions to third countries to ratify
human rights treaties while failing to encourage rati fication of the
ICRMW by its own constituent member states. Although ratification has
been expressly endorsed by some EU entities, there is currently a crucial
lack of support for such a step from two of the key EU institutions, namely,
the European Commission and the Council of the European Union.
Broadly speaking, the overall structure and underlying rationale of the
ICRMW is similar to that of the ot her core international human rights
treaties. Like the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(CRPD)51 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),52 the
ICRMW takes the rights set out in th e two covenants, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)53 and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR),54 and
codifies and elaborates on them in relation to a particularly vulnerable
category of persons, in this case migrant workers and members of their
families.55 There is, however, no similarity between the ICRMW and the
other core treaties when it comes to the rate of ratification by states. While
the failure of the EU28 to sign or ratify the ICRMW might seemunremarkable in the context of treati es concerning migrants’ rights, it
begins to appear surprising when we widen our purview of inquiry to
include ratification by EU states  of the other core human rights
instruments. Every single EU stat e has ratified the International
Convention on the Elimination of A ll Forms of Racial Discrimination,56
ICCPR, CESCR, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,57 the Convention against Torture and
51 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabiliti es 2515 UNTS 3, entered into
force 3 May 2008. 174 state parties.
52 United Nations Convention  on the Rights of the Ch ild 1577 UNTS 3, entered into
force 3 September 1990. 196 state parties.
53 International Covenant on Civil and Politi cal Rights 999 UNTS 171,  entered into force
23 March 1976. 169 state parties.
54 International Covenant on  Economic, Social and Cu ltural Rights 993 UNTS 3,
entered into force 3 January 1976. 165 state parties.
55 More detailed analysis of the provisions of the Convention can be found in, eg,
R Cholewinski Migrant workers in international human rights law: Their protection in
countries of employment  (1997) chap 4; L Bosniak ‘Human  rights, state sovereignty, and
the protection of undocumented migrants under the International Migrant WorkersConvention’ (1991) 25  International Migration Review  737; K Touzenis & A Sironi (n 14
above). 
56 International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
660 UNTS 195, entered into force 4 January 1969. 178 state parties.
57 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discriminati on against Women 1249
UNTS 13 entered into force 3 September 1981. 189 state parties. 306    Chapter 12
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degradin g Treatment or Punishment (CAT)58
and the CRC. All member states have either signed or ratified the OP-
CAT59 and the CRPD . The International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearanc e has been signed or ratified by all
but four EU member states.60 Of all the core instruments, it is comparison
with the CRC which most sharply brings the fate of the ICRMW intofocus. Adopted by the UN General A ssembly in November 1989, one year
and one month before adoption of the ICRMW, the CRC had been ratified
by all states currently holding EU membership by March 1995. While the
CRC entered into force in September 1990, less than a year after it was
opened for signature, it was not unt il 2003 that the ICRMW gained the 20
ratifications required for its entry into force. In the intervening 13 years theICRMW has attracted an additional 31 ratifications to bring the total
number of state parties to 51, a figure  which pales in comparison to the 196
state parties to the CRC.
The attitude towards the ICRMW at the EU level goes some way to
explaining this egregious exception to the trend amongst the EU28 to ratify
the core instruments. The EU, however, speaks with many voices and its
attitude to the ICRMW differs across different EU institutions and bodies.The European Parliament, one of th e seven institutions of the EU,
61 has
been vociferous and consistent in its endorsement of the Convention. In a
resolution on human rights in the EU  in 1998 it reproached member states
for not yet having ratified the Conv ention and urged them to do so,
repeating the call on at least eight subsequent occasions,62 most recently in
2009 in a resolution on the situation of fundamental rights in the EU.63 In
2013 the Parliament propos ed an amendment to th e text of the seasonal
workers directive,64 seeking to insert a paragraph into the Preamble stating
58 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment 1465 UNTS 85, entered into  force 26 June 1987. 162 state parties.
59 Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Pu nishment 2375 UNTS 237, en tered into force 22 June
2006. 83 state parties.
60 International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance 2716 UNTS 3, entered into force 23 December 2010. 57 state parties.
The EU member states which have yet to take action in respect of this treaty are
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia and the United Kingdom.
61 Article 13 of the Treaty on European Unio n provides that the institutional framework
of the EU comprises seven institutions, namely, the European Parliament; the
European Council; the Council of the European Union (often just called ‘the
Council’); the European Commission; the Court of Justice of the European Union; theEuropean Central Bank; the Court of Auditors.
62 December 18, The UN Migrant Workers Convention: Steps towards ratification in Europe
(2007) 22 available at: http://www .epi m.info/wp-content/ uploads/2011/02/The-
UN-Migrant-Workers-Convention-steps-towards-ratification-in-Europe.pdf (accessed
15 June 2017).
63 European Parliament Resolution on the situation of fundamental rights in the
European Union 2004-2008 P6_TA(2009)0019 (2009)  para 158, available at: http://
www .europarl.europa.eu/sid es/getDoc.do?type=TA&reference=P6-TA-2009-0019&
language=EN&ring=A6-2008-0479 (accessed 15 June 2017).
64 Directive 2014/36/EU of the European Parl iament and of the Council of 26 February
2014 on the conditions of entry and stay of  third-country nation als for the purpose of
employment as seasonal workers [2014] OJ L94/375.  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     307
that the ICRMW guides states in ensuring that migrants’ rights are
respected when policies relating to the migration of labour are drawn up
and implemented.65 The amendment was not, however, taken up. Support
for ratification has also been expressed by two consultative bodies of the
EU, namely the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic
and Social Committee, with the latter  going so far as to issue an own-
initiative opinion in 2004 devoted specific ally to the issue of ratification of
the Convention. The Opinion conc luded by calling on the European
Commission and the Council of the European Union to undertake thenecessary political initiatives to ensure  that member states ratify within 24
m o n t h s  a n d  t h a t  t h e  E U  r a t i f y  a s  s o o n  a s  i t  i s  i n  a  p o s i t i o n  t o  s i g n
international agreements.66 The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe has also called on the member states of the Council of Europe to
ratify the ICRMW,67 a point worthy of note given that the EU28 are all
members of the Council of Europe.
It is perhaps surprising in light of  its current stance that in 1994 the
European Commission, the executive arm of the EU, urged member states
to ratify the ‘unique’ Convention as a way of ensuring the full protection
of the human rights of irregular migrants, such a rights-based approachbeing necessary to ensure the credibil ity of restrictive policies concerning
irregular migration.68 According to the Commission ratification would
also ensure that the rights accorded to migrants in the EU correspond tothe highest international norms and wo uld give eloquent testimony to the
value attached by the EU to improving the situation of migrant workers
and their families.69 In the intervening two decades, however, the
Commission has not seen fit to repe at this recommendation, providing
evidence instead that it now takes a less positive view of the Convention.70
The Commission’s statement in 2013,  for example, that the ICRMW
makes insufficient distin ction between the economic and social rights of
regular and irregular migrant workers71 was repeated by the Council of the
European Union in its Conclusions72 ahead of the UN General
Assembly’s second High-Level Dialog ue on International Migration and
Development, an unconvinc ing assertion which drew a reaction from the
65 Council of the European Union, Inte rinstitutional File: 2010/0210 (COD), 15033/13,
25 October 2013.
66 EESC Opinion on the International Convention on Migrants (Own-initiative opinion)
(2004) 7, para 6.2.
67 Recommendation No 1737 of 17 March 2006 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe.
68 European Commission, Communication to the Council and the European Parliament
on Immigration and Asylum Po licies (1994) 29, paras 109-110.
69 European Commission (n 68 above) 35, para 132.70 See H Oger ‘The French political refusal on  Europe’s behalf ’ in De Guchteneire et al
(n 8 above) 319. 
71 European Commission, Communication on Maximising the Development Impact of
Migration: The EU contribution for the UN High-level Dialogue and next steps
towards broadening the develo pment-migration nexus (2013) 6.
72 Council of the European Union (n 13 above) para 13. 308    Chapter 12
Committee on Migrant Workers73 as well as the International and
European Trade Union Confederations.74 
More recently, in April 2014, a question submitted to the Commission
from a member of the European Parliament (MEP) asked whether theCommission took the view that member states should ratify the ICRMW
and whether it would be beneficial for the EU to adopt the principles and
rights outlined in the Convention as a frame of reference for a commonmigration policy. In her response the then Commissioner for Home
Affairs, Cecilia Malmström, stated that ratification by member states
would require prior authorisation by the EU for those elements that affectEU competences.
75 Just over a year later, in June 2015, a similar question
from two MEPs inquiring whether the Commission knew why member
states had not signed the ICRMW elicited an altogether different responsefrom Dimitris Avramopoulos, the Commissioner for Migration, Home
Affairs and Citizenship. The Commissi oner stated baldly that signature
and ratification of the Convention is  a matter of national competence.76
These contradictory responses from the Commission concerning the
Convention suggest either a hostile intent or an overarching indifference
towards this core human rights instrument. 
Given that one of the many reasons advanced by states in justification
of non-ratification is EU competence in the field of migration and asylum,
it is worth addressing in some deta il the issue of prior authorisation
highlighted by Commissioner Malmströ m. The complicated nature of the
political and legislative decision-makin g structure at the EU level, and the
opacity lent to that structure by nomenclatural nice ties which mask
important differences between various actors, means that invocation of a
73 The Committee wrote to the Permanent Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations Office and other international organisations in Geneva by letter dated
22 August 2013 in relation to the matter. In its letter, th e Committee expressed concern
over the statement and emphasised that th e Convention is firmly grounded in the
principles and standards of the wider human rights framework, that it seeks to
establish minimum standards that state parties should apply to migrant workers and
members of their families, irrespective of their migratory status, and that it does notcreate new rights or establish additional rights for migrant workers. The Committee
highlighted that many of the rights found in the Convention are also found in the
ICCPR, CESCR and other core human rights treaties to which member states of theEuropean Union are already party. The letter also requested a meeting. E-mail from
the Secretary of the Co mmittee on 24 June 2016.
74 Letter sent by E-mail to Mr Herman Van Rompuy, President, European Council 1
October 2013, Ref: Comments  on the Council’s Conclu sions on the 2013 UN High-
Level Dialogue on Migration development and on broadening the development-
migration nexus adopted in Brussels on 19 July 2013. See http://www .etuc.org/sites/
www .etuc.org/files/011013_President_Va n_Rompuy.pdf (accessed 15 June 2017).
75 Question for written answer to the Commission, 10 April 2014. Reply 4 July 2014.
12.11.2014, OJ C 399/1. Also available via the website of the European Parliament
http://www .europarl.euro pa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=WQ&reference=E-2014-
004511&language=EN (accessed 15 June 2017).
76 Question for written answer to the Co mmission, 18 June 2015. Reply 28 September
2015. Available on the webs ite of the European Parl iament http://www .europ
arl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type =WQ&reference=E-2015-009955&language=EN
(accessed 15 June 2017).  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     309
requirement for prior authorisation can have the presumably desired effect
of bringing any non-EU specialist up  s h o r t .  I s  i t  t r u e  t h a t  u n i l a t e r a l
ratification by one member state is a non-starter in light of EU migration
competence and that, instead, a coor dinated approach to ratification is
required at the EU level? If this is the case, are there any insurmountable
obstacles to obtaining prior authorisation from the EU? 
The Treaty on the Functioning of the EU (TFEU), one of the two
treaties on which the EU is founded,77 provides that the EU has exclusive
competence for the conclusion of an international agreement to the extent
that such conclusion may affect common EU rules or alter their scope.78
Furthermore, the Court of Justice of  the EU (CJEU) has held that when
the subject matter of an agreement falls  partly within the competence of the
EU and partly within that of the me mber states, the EU institutions and
member states must cooperate both in  the process of ratification and in
implementation of the obligations that ratification brings about.79 If it
follows from these treaty and judicial requirements that prior authorisationfrom the EU is necessary for member states to ratify the ICRMW, such
authorisation would seem to be a question of political will as there appears
to be no legal obstacle to the EU providing authorisation. Indeed, such
endorsement was recently given in the case of the 2011 ILO Convention
concerning domestic workers,80 half of whom are migrants.81 
In 2013, in light of the EU’s comm itment to the decent work agenda
and to improving labour standa rds worldwide, the Commission
proposed82 that the Council of the European Union83 authorise member
states to ratify the ILO Convention.84 The proposal stated that while most
of the Convention’s rules on decent work were already part of EU law,
authorisation to ratify was necessary as the Convention’s provisions on
migrant domestic workers potentially a ffect an area falling exclusively
within EU competence, namely, the free movement of workers. Following
77 The other foundational treaty is the Treaty on European Union (TEU), also referred to
as the Treaty of Maastricht after the city in the Netherlands in which it was drafted in
1991 and signed in 1992. See Co nsolidated versions of th e Treaty on European Union
and the Treaty on the Func tioning of the European Unio n OJ C 202, 7.6.2016, 1-388.
78 Art 3(2) TFEU.
79 Opinion 2/91 of the ECJ of 19 March 1993 relating to the Chem icals Convention No
170, ECR 1993-I, paras 36 & 38.
80 Convention concerning decent work for domestic workers, 2011 (No 189), entered into
force 5 September 2013. 24 state parties.
81 This figure of 50% is attributed to Eurostat in the European Parliament Draft
Recommendation on the draft Council decision authorising member states to ratify the
Convention concerning dece nt work for domestic worker s (2013). This information is
not currently available from the Eurostat website.
82 The Commission has the right of initiative to propose laws for adoption by the
European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. See art 17(2) TEU.
83 The Council of the European Union comprises government ministers from each EU
member state. Together with the European Parliament, it negotiates and adopts laws
on the basis of proposals from the European Commission.
84 Proposal for a Council Decision authorising member states to ratify, in the interests of
the European Union, the Convention concerning decent work for domestic workers,
2011, of the International Labour Organ isation (Convention No 189) (2013).310    Chapter 12
endorsement of the Commission pr oposal by the European Parliament85
the Council of the European Union issued a decision authorising
ratification in January 2014.86 Shortly afterwards, Commissioner
Malmström urged all member states to ratify.87 So far six member states
have ratified.88 It is difficult to reconcile the demonstable support of the
Commission and the Council of the European Union for the ILOConvention with their aversion to the ICRMW. Might it be due to the
former instrument’s appl ication of protection standards to a group that
includes but is not limited to migrants? There is certainly no legal reasonwhy the EU could not follow the same process in the case of the ICRMW.
It is also worth noting that two states, Germany and Italy, had ratified the
ILO Convention before authorisatio n was given by the Council of the
European Union. Why, one might therefore ask, should member states
await prior authorisation before ratifying the ICRMW? 
The lack of support from the Commission and the Council of the
European Union for this core human rights instrument sits uneasily withthe statement in the TEU that the EU  is founded on values including
respect for human rights, with the EU’s aim being to promote these
values.
89 How does the inaction of these key EU institutions around the
ICRMW square with the EU’s treaty obligation to contribute to the strict
observance and development of international law?90 This inaction appears
hypocritical when we take into consideration EU efforts to promotehuman rights beyond its borders. In 2012 the EU adopted its Strategic
Framework and Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy91 the goal
of which was to integrate and promote human rights in all EU externalactions. An attempt to meet the EU’s treaty obligation to advance
democracy, the rule of law and the universality and indivisibility of human
rights, the Strategic Framework set out general principles andcommitments while the Action Plan enumerated concrete actions that
would be pursued in realisation of the general principles. 
Of particular relevance in the context of the ICRMW is the fact that
the Strategic Framework pledged EU commitment to the universality of
human rights and called on all states to ratify and implement the key
85 European Parliament Draft Recommendation (n 81 above). 
86 Council Decision of 28 January 2014 authori sing member states to ratify, in the
interests of the European Union, the Convention concerning decent work for domesticworkers, 2011, of the International Labour  Organisation (Convention No 189) (2014).
87 Cecilia Malmström EU Home Affairs Commissioner ‘Unlocking the potential of
migration for inclusive development’ ( 15 May 2014) http://eur opa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-14-380_en.htm (accessed 15 June 2017).
88 Belgium, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Portugal. For further information see
http://www .ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en /f?p=NORMLEXPUB: 11300:0::NO:11300:P1
1300_INSTRUMENT_ID:2551460:NO (accessed 15 June 2017).
89 Arts 2 and 3(1) TEU.
90 Art 3(5) TEU.91 Council of the European Union ‘EU Strategic Framework and Action Plan on Human
Rights and Democracy’ (2012) 1-2 ht tp://www .consilium .europa.eu/uedocs/
cms_data/docs/pressdat a/EN/foraff/131181.pdf (accessed 15 June 2017).  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     311
international human rights treaties, with the Action Plan seeking to
promote universal adherence to human  rights through intensification of
efforts to promote ratification of ke y international human rights treaties.92
Responsibility for this action item  was given to the Commission, the
member states and the Europe an External Action Service.93 It is difficult
to understand how the EU or its member  states can plausibly advise other
states to ratify any of the core in ternational human rights instruments
while the ICRMW goes unsigned and unratified by the entire EU. This,
however, is exactly what is happenin g. To give just one example amongst
the very many available, Saudi Ar abia has received recommendations
from eight of the EU28 to ratify some of the core instruments including the
ICCPR and CESCR during the unive rsal periodic review (UPR),94 the
Human Rights Council mechanism established in 2008 during which the
human rights record of each UN memb er state is open to review by all
other states.95 While the 2012 Action Plan expired in 2014, it has been
followed by an Action Plan for 2015-201996 which seeks to continue efforts
to realise the programme outlined in the 2012 Strategic Framework. One
of the action items in the Action Pl an for 2015-2019 involves supporting an
initiative to achieve global ratifi cation and implementation of CAT by
2024. How such an initiative can be expected to have any credibility in
light of EU28 inaction on the ICRMW is unclear.
Such inaction also suggests a certain incongruity in the context of the
EU position vis-à-vis the UN’s UPR mechanism. The EU regularly
expresses its commitment to the UPR,  urging all countries to cooperate
effectively.97 Since the UPR began operating in 2008 each EU country has
received a minimum of three recommendations from member states of the
UN to ratify or consider ratification of the ICRMW, with the EU28
collectively receiving a combined tota l of more than 230 recommendations
92 Council of the European Union (n 91 above) Action II(4)(a).
93 The European External Action Service, formally established in 2011 following entry
into force of the Treaty of Li sbon in 2009, is the diplomatic service of the EU. It assists
the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to implement the EU’s
Common Foreign and Security Policy.
94 Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Saudi Arabia, HRC
(26 December 2013), UN Doc A/HRC/25/3 (2013).
95 The Human Rights Council was created by the UN General Assembly ‘Resolution 60/
251 of 15 March 2006 on the Hu man Rights Council’ ( 2006). The Resolution also
mandated the Human Rights Council to ‘undertake a universal periodic review, based
on objective and reliable information, of the fulfilment by each State of its humanrights obligations and commitments in a manner which ensures universality of
coverage and equal treatment wi th respect to all States’. 
96 Council of the European Union, Council Conclusions on the Action Plan on Human
Rights and Democracy 2015-2019 (2015).
97 A recent example is to be found in the ‘Council Conclusions on EU priorities at UN
Human Rights Fora’ in 2016 whic h highlighted the EU’s view of the importance of the
UPR and included a call to all countries to fully engage with and commit to the UPR
(2016) http://www .consilium.europa.eu/e n/press/press-releases/2016/02/15-fac-un-
human-rights-fora/ (a ccessed 15 June 2017).312    Chapter 12
concerning this core human rights instrument.98 Recommendations made
during the UPR are not legally binding on the recipient state and they may
be either accepted or rejected.99 Recommendations to ratify the ICRMW
are generally rejected by the EU28. Given the EU’s consistent expression
of firm support for the UPR, one might expect that the sheer regularity and
volume of recommendations to the EU28 relating to the ICRMW fromstates across the globe during the UPR would require some positive action
from the EU or its member states in respect of the ICRMW if they are to
live up to the EU’s demand that all countries fully engage with thisimportant mechanism for human rights promotion and protection. 
4 The EU legal landscape after the Treaty of 
Lisbon: More conducive to  ratification of the 
ICRMW?
This section argues that recent year s have witnessed a number of important
human rights advances in the field of  EU law which make ratification of
the ICRMW more feasible, though not necessarily more likely. It involves
an examination of the evolving role and competence of the EU in the fieldof migration law and policy and how the Convention may or may not fit
within the framework of such law and policy. 
The key legal development in the slow construction of a common EU
migration policy was the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam in1999. The Treaty brought the Schengen acquis  within the remit of the
EU
100 and conferred (shared) competence on the EU over asylum and
migration. The Treaty of Amsterdam articulated the aim of establishingprogressively an area of freed om, security and justice (AFSJ)101 and it
facilitated development of a common migration policy by making a
98 For a detailed examination of ICRMW-related recommendations made during the
UPR to EU member states, see A Desmond ‘The triangle that could square the circle?
The UN International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families, the EU and the Universal Periodic Review’(2015) 17 European Journal of Migration and Law  39.
99 The UN resolutions establishing and amending the UPR do not discuss state responses
to recommendations in terms of acceptance and rejection, but rather provide thatstates may accept or note recommendations. Noted recommendations are those which
do not enjoy the support of the state underg oing UPR, but may still be implemented
and monitored. The terminology of acceptance and rejection is used by states. 
100 The Schengen area is a free movement zone  comprising Iceland, Norway, Switzerland
and all EU member states with the exce ption of Ireland, the United Kingdom,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus and Romania. The Schengen acquis , the rules governing the
Schengen area, were initially developed on an intergovernmental basis outside of the
framework of the EU, but became a matter of EU competence by virtue of a protocol
to the Treaty of Amsterdam: Protocol No 2 integrating the Schengen acquis into the
framework of the European Union, [1997]  OJ C340/93. For an overview of the acquis ,
see the annex to the aforementioned Protocol No 2.
101 Art 61 of the then EC Treaty.  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     313
number of areas, including irregular migration, subject to measures
adopted by the Council of the European Union.102
EU competence over asylum and migration matters was, however,
subject for a transitional period of five years to a number of limitations
which significantly constrained the development of a common EU policy
and perpetuated the prioritisation of migration control over respect for the
rights of migrants which had charac terised intergovernmental cooperation
in this field prior to the Treaty of Amsterdam.103 As well as the opt-outs
secured by Ireland, the UK and Denmark, the jurisdiction of the CJEU
was restricted to consideration of preliminary references from national
courts or tribunals of final instance , the roles of the Commission and the
European Parliament were circumscri bed and the Council was required to
act unanimously.
The practical realisation of the mandate in the Treaty of Amsterdam
to create an AFSJ was discussed in two important policy documents,
namely the Vienna Action Plan104 and the Tampere Conclusions.105 The
Tampere Conclusions, the first mult i-annual programme setting out policy
goals and guidelines for creating an AFSJ noted the need to ensure fair
treatment of TCNs, but such treatm ent was discussed in the context of
lawfully present TCNs. Both the Vienna Action Plan and the TampereConclusions evinced a preoccupation with prevention and reduction of
irregular migration which was to be achieved through, inter alia , a
coherent EU policy on readmission and return,106 further harmonisation
of member states’ laws on carriers’ liability107 and closer cooperation
between member states’ border control services.108
It is therefore perhaps not surprising that the common migration policy
which has developed since 1999 within  the framework of the Tampere
Conclusions and subsequent  multi-annual programmes109 has been
criticised for treating irregular migrat ion largely as a security issue, with
insufficient attention paid to irregular migrants’ rights,110 and for a less
102 Art 63(3)(b) of the then EC Treaty.
103 See generally R Cholewinski ‘The EU acquis  on irregular migration ten years on: Still
reinforcing security at the expense of rights?’ in E Guild & P Minderhoud (eds) The
first decade of EU migration and asylum law (2012) 127-178.
104 Action Plan of the Council and the Commission on how best to implement the
provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam on an area of freedom, security and justice(1999).
105 Presidency Conclusions, Tampere Europ ean Council, 15-16 October 1999, Bulletin
EU 10-1999.
106 Action Plan (n 104 above) para 36(c)(ii).
107 Action Plan (n 104 above) para 36(d)(iv).
108 Presidency Conclusions (n 105 above) para 24.109 The Hague Programme strengthening freedom , security and justice in the European
Union (OJ 2005 C 19/1); The Stockholm Prog ramme: An open and secure Europe
serving and protecting the citizens (OJ 2010 C 115/1); European Council,
Conclusions of the Meet ing on 26/27 June 2014 in Ypres, doc EUCO 79/14. 
110 R Cholewinski ‘The EU acquis  on irregular migration ten years on: Still reinforcing
security at the expense of rights?’ in Guild & Minderhoud (n 103 above) 128.314    Chapter 12
than full-blooded vindication of the human rights of lawfully resident
TCNs.111 The security and law enforcement approach to irregular
migration is strikingly exemplified by the adoption by the JHA Council in
2010 of 29 measures to reinforce protec tion of the external borders and
address irregular migration.112
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in De cember 2009 effected
a number of important institutional and legislative changes which are of
particular relevance for the AFSJ an d the field of migration and asylum.
The Council of the European Union is no longer required to act
unanimously in this field and the ordinary legislative procedure has beenextended beyond measures  concerning asylum and borders to include legal
and labour migration,113 transforming the European Parliament into co-
legislator. In addition, the CJEU can now give preliminary rulings to any
national court or tribunal on the validity of acts in the AFSJ by EU
institutions.114 The Treaty of Lisbon also imposed an obligation on the EU
to accede to the ECHR115 and made the Charter of Fundamental Rights
legally binding on the EU.116 These are changes which advance the
development of common migration la w and policy, as well as enhancing
the recognition and vindication of mi grants’ rights and increasing the
chances of a rights-based approach being taken to legislation in the field of
migration.
The twin developments of the post-Lisbon competence of all national
judges to seek preliminary rulings from the CJEU117 and the urgent
procedure for preliminary rulings agreed in 2008118 have already
occasioned changes in the field of i rregular migration which indicate that
the paucity of questions referred by national judges on migration mattersprior to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon may be a trend that has
been consigned to the past.119 The combined total of such questions in the
111 The extent to which the goal of fair treatment of lawfully-resident TCNs has been
realised is itself questionable. See gene rally, L Halleskov Storgaard ‘The Long-Term
Residents Directive: A fulfilment of the Ta mpere objective of near-equality?’ in Guild
& Minderhoud (n 103 above) 299-327.
112 Commission Staff Working Document on the fulfilment of the 29 measures for
reinforcing the protection of the external borders and combating illegal immigration
adopted at the Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting, held on Brussels on 25 and26 February 2010 (2010).
113 Arts 77-79 TFEU.
114 Arts 19 and 267 TFEU.115 Art 6(2) TEU.
116 Art 6(1) TEU. 
117 Art 267 TFEU.118 Council Decision of 20 December 2007 amen ding the Protocol on  the Statute of the
Court of Justice [2008] OJ L 24/42, and amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the
Court of Justice adopted by the Court on 15 January 2008 [2008] OJ L24/39. The
Council called on the Court to apply the urgent preliminary ruling procedure in
situations involvin g deprivation of liberty, Statement [2008] OJ L24/44.
119 For more on this issue see D Acosta Arcarazo & A Geddes ‘The development,
application and implications of an EU rule of law in the area of migration policy’
(2013) 51 Journal of Common Market Studies 179-193; S Peers ‘Justice and home affairs
law since the Treaty of Lisbon: A fairy-tale ending?’ in D Acosta Arcarazo &  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     315
five years pre-Lisbon was six,120 with almost the same number again being
referred in the first year after th e entry into force of the Treaty,121 and 17
preliminary references concerning  migration matters being made in
2011.122 This spike in the number of pr eliminary references concerning
migration issues provides the CJEU with more opportunities to flesh out
the substance of the human rights pr otections enjoyed by migrants in EU
law.123 The rulings delivered in response  to such preliminary references
contribute to the development of common EU law and policy in the
migration realm.
Another impact of the Treaty of Lisbon, that of extending the
competence of the comparatively migrant-friendly European Parliament
as co-legislator to include measures on  labour and legal migration, has also
yielded important results from the perspective of the protection ofmigrants’ rights. Despite the criticisms  sustained by the Parliament for its
endorsement of the Return Directive,124 its involvement in the legislative
process did ensure some important safeguards against expulsion125 and it
has since shown its willingness to take an independent stand where it views
EU measures as coming up short from a human rights perspective.126
Indeed, the involvement of the Parlia ment in the negotiations over the
Seasonal Workers Directive127 ensured the inclusion of important
safeguards from exploitation for seasonal workers as well as equal
treatment with nationals in a number of areas.128
119 C Murphy (eds) EU security and justice law: After Lisbon and Stockholm  (2014) 17-37.
120 Acosta Arcarazo & Geddes (n 119 above)  180.
121 Acosta Arcarazo & Geddes (n 119 above)  181.
122 Acosta Arcarazo & Geddes (n 119 above) 181.123 For a discussion of the human rights protection framework for irregular migrants
emerging from the ju risprudence of the CJEU see A Desmond ‘The development of a
common EU migration policy and the rights of irregular migrants: A progress
narrative?’ (2016) 16 Human Rights Law Review  247. See also the recent ruling of the
CJEU finding that the Return Directive prevents a TCN who has not yet been subjectto a return procedure being imprisoned sole ly for entering a member state illegally
across an internal border of the Schengen area. C-47/15 Judgment of the Court
(Grand Chamber) of 7 June 2016 Sélina Affum v Préfet du Pas-de-Calais and
Procureur général de la Cour d'appel de Douai.
124 Directive 2008/115/EC of the Europea n Parliament and of the Council of
16 December 2008 on common standards an d procedures in member states for
returning illegally staying third-country nationals [ 2008] OJ L348/98. The Return
Directive is the most significant piece of EU legislation adopted in the realm of
irregular migration.
125 A Baldaccini ‘The return and removal of irregular migrants under EU law: An analysis
of the Returns Directive’ (2009) 11 European Journal of Migration and Law  2.
126 R Clancy ‘EU rejects single permit draft as potentially violating fundamental rights’
22 December 2010, Expatforum.com http ://www .expatforum.com/articles/eu-
rejects-single-permit-draft-as-potentially-violating-fundamental-rights.html (accessed
15 June 2017).
127 Directive 2014/36/EU of the European Parl iament and of the Council of 26 February
2014 on the conditions of entry and stay of  third-country nation als for the purpose of
employment as seasonal workers [2014] OJ L94/375.
128 J Fudge & P Herzfeld Olsson ‘The EU Seasonal Workers Directive: When
immigration controls meet labour rights’ (2014) 16 European Journal of Migration and
Law 439. 316    Chapter 12
4.1 The Charter and accession of the European Union to the 
European Convention on Human Rights
Adopted by the Parliament, Council  and Commission in 2000 and
proclaimed in 2007, the Charter of Fundamental Rights gained binding
legal effect with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in December
2009.129 The Charter has been described as a Bill of Rights for EU citizens,
which has transformed the relationsh ip between the individual and the
state due to the fact that it provides a set of rights and entitlements whilebeing neither nation-state constitu tion nor international human rights
treaty.130 Enjoyment of the rights codified in the Charter is not, however,
restricted exclusively to EU citizens. While there are some limitations inthe Charter concerning the rights of migrants in an irregular situation,131
only one of the Charter’s seven Chap ters, namely, Chapter V on Citizens’
Rights, contains provisions with a citi zenship limitation and even then that
Chapter’s provision on the right to good administration is applicable to all
persons, and not just citizens.132
The scope of the Charter is not the only feature of the document which
endows it with the potential to make a significant impact in the field of
migration. While it is not intended to  expand EU competence or the scope
of EU law,133 the Charter has been characterised by the Presidents of the
ECtHR and the CJEU as the reference text and starting point for theCJEU’s assessment of the rights it contains,134 and it recognises a number
of migration-related rights not explic itly enumerated in the ECHR such as
the right to asylum,135 the rights of the child136 and the right to an effective
remedy against all decisions of national authorities applying EU migration
measures.137 The Charter thus reveals the ex tent to which many aspects of
EU migration law are now rights-based and no longer discretionary.138
The Charter, however, sets out a minimum level of rights protection
and expressly permits the EU and individual member states to provide
greater rights protections than thos e contained in the Charter and the
ECHR.139 Where the Charter sets out rights which correspond to rights
guaranteed by the ECHR, the meaning and scope of such rights are to be
129 Art 6(1) TEU.
130 E Guild The European Union after the Treaty of Lisbon: Fundamental rights and EU
citizenship (2010) 1.
131 For example art 34 of the Charter on social security and social assistance.
132 Art 41 of the Charter.133 Art 51(2) of the Charter.
134 Joint Communication from Presidents Costa and Skouris, press release No 75 issued
by the Registrar of the ECtHR (2011).
135 Art 18 of the Charter.
136 Art 24 of the Charter. 
137 Art 47 of the Charter.138 S Peers ‘Immigration, asylum and the European Union Charter of Fundamental
Rights’ in Guild & Minderhoud (n 103 above) 468.
139 Arts 52(3) and 53 of the Charter.  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     317
the same as those laid down by the ECHR.140 Thus, for example, article 4
of the Charter which corresponds to article 3 ECHR is to be interpreted
and applied in line with article 4 principles and jurisprudence. 
Over the past decade the status of the ECHR in the EU legal order has
been bolstered, with the CJEU holding that the ECHR is an integral part
of the general principles of law whose observance the Court ensures,141
and the Charter suggesting the use of the ECHR as a minimum standard
of protection.142 The Treaty of Lisbon further entrenched the position of
the ECHR in the EU legal order by ob liging the EU to accede to the
Convention.143 Although the Opinion of the CJEU on the incompatibility
of the accession agreement with the Treaty on European Union seems to
have brought to nought the accession obligation,144 t h e  E U  i f  i t  d o e s
eventually accede will be in the same position as member states vis-à-visthe ECHR, with the rights enshrined therein becoming binding on the EU
and its institutions, and individuals, including migrants, enjoying the right
to bring a complaint about infringement of ECHR rights by the EU beforethe ECtHR.
145
Given the growing importance of ECtHR case law in the EU legal
order following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the
Charter, the evolving case law of the ECtHR concerning migrants’ rights
may be used to further advance the protection of such migrants’ rights
within the EU legal framework.146 In particular, the recent cases of the
ECtHR finding that deportation from the EU of irregular migrants wouldconstitute a violation of the right to respect for private life and family life
enshrined in article 8 ECHR147 may come into play to the advantage of
migrants in CJEU rulings on article 7 of the Charter and in decisions takenby member states pursuant to the Retu rn Directive to return or regularise
140 Art 52(3) of the Charter.
141 C-540/03 European Parliament v Council  [2006] ECR I-5769.
142 Art 52(3) of the Charter.
143 Art 6(2) TEU.
144 See Opinion of the CJEU that the agreement on the accession of the EU to the ECHR is not
compatible with Article 6(2) TEU or with Protocol 8 relating to Article 6(2) of the T r eaty on
European Union on the accession of the Union to  the European Convention on the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms Opinion 2/13 of the Court  (18 December 2014).
145 Accession by the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights:
Answers to frequently asked questions (1 June 2010) http://www .echr.coe.int/
Documents/UE_FAQ_ENG.pdf (accessed 15 June 2017).
146 The ICRMW has been cited three times by the ECtHR. Each citation was made by
Judge Pinto De Albuquerque in a separate, concurring opinion in rulings delivered by
the Grand Chamber in which the respondent state had been found to have violated theECHR. See Hirsi Jamaa (n 33 above) concurring opinion of Judge Pinto De
Albuquerque; De Souza Ribeiro v France,  ECHR (13 December 2012) 22689/07,
concurring opinion of Judge Pinto De Albuquerque joined by Judge Vu činić; Biao v
Denmark , ECHR (24 May 2016) 38590/10, concur ring opinion of Judge Pinto De
Albuquerque.
147 For example Rodrigues da Silva & Hoogkamer v The Netherlands , ECHR (31 January
2006) 50435/99; Butt v Norway , ECHR (4 December 2012) 47017/09;  Kaplan & Others v
Norway, ECHR (24 July 2014) 32504/11; Jeunesse v The Netherlands , ECHR (3 October
2014) 12738/10.318    Chapter 12
unlawfully present TCNs. Such arguably  rising human rights protection
standards for migrants may serve to undermine objections to ratification of
the ICRMW proceeding from claims th at it would increase financial and
administrative burdens and that some  provisions woul d be incompatible
with states’ legal frameworks.
4.2 EU migration law and the ICRMW
The EU’s common migration policy  and the UN’s ICRMW have been
described as being animated by the same dual concern with, on the one
hand, ensuring fair treatment of migrants and, on the other hand,
managing migration flows.148 The preoccupation of the ICRMW with
codifying the rights of migrants stands  in sharp contrast with the focus of
EU activity in the migration field on  codifying rules for the regulation of
TCNs’ entry to and movement in the EU.149 But does this divergence of
priorities mean that the ICRMW is irretrievably incompatible with EU
migration law and policy, thereby pr ecluding ratification by EU member
states?
There are clearly aspects of EU migration law which fall short of
ICRMW standards. One striking instance of this divergence is the
principle of equality of treatment be tween migrants and citizens which, so
central to the ICRMW,150 has been considerably attenuated in the
development of a common EU migration policy.151 Article 11 of the Long-
Term Residence Directive,152 for example, specifies a number of areas
such as education and employment where long-term resident TCNs shouldenjoy equal treatment with citizens and also provides for the restriction of
equality of treatment to certain core benefits. Article 11 of the Long-Term
Residence Directive finds its equivalent in article 45 of the ICRMW which
is far more migrant-friendly. The equa l treatment principle in article 45 is
not only less subject to restrictions, but article 45 applies to all lawfully
resident TCNs, and not just thos e who are long-term residents. 
At the same time, however, there are aspects of EU migration law
which are more generous than what would be required by the ICRMW.153
The obligation to facilitate family reunification imposed on member states
by the Family Reunification Directive154 goes beyond the minimum
148 E MacDonald & R Cholewinski ‘The ICRMW and the European Union’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 8 above) 375.
149 As above.
150 See arts 18, 25, 28, 30, 43, 44,  45, 54 and 55 of the Convention.
151 For more detailed discussion of the dilution of the equal treatment principle in this
context, see MacDonald & Cholewinski (n 148 above) 373-77.
152 Council Directive 2003/109/EC of 25 Novemb er 2003 concerning the status of third-
country nationals who are long-term resi dents, OJ L 16, 23 January 2004, 44-53.
153 For more detail on this, see K Touzenis & A Sironi (n 14 above) 14-19.
154 Council Directive 2003/86/EC  reunification of 22 Sept ember 2003 on the right to
family reunification, OJ L 251, 3 October 2003.  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     319
required by article 44 of the Convention. Similarly, article 35 of the Charter
recognises the right of everyone  t o  p r e v e n t i v e  h e a l t h  c a r e  a n d  m e d i c a l
treatment, while article 28 of the Co nvention requires that irregular
migrants have access only to emergency medical care.
Finally, it would seem that there are also areas where the Convention
chimes concordantly with EU migr ation law. Article 69 of the ICRMW
requires state parties to take appropriate measures to eliminate situationswhere migrant workers and members of  their families are irregularly
present. While this provision can be read as potentially imposing a
regularisation obligation on states,155 it arguably goes no further than the
requirement of the Return Directive to expel or regularise unlawfully
present migrants. The aspiration of th e Directive to eliminate the presence
of irregular migrants in the EU is evident in the obligation on memberstates issue a return decision to any TCN staying without authorisation.156
Indeed, the Commission has observed that the effect of the Directive is to
ensure that a person is either legally present in the EU or is issued with areturn decision.157 
5 Conclusion
The failure of any of the 28 member states of the EU to sign or ratify theICRMW is symptomatic of a wider reluctance amongst states to acceptlegally binding obligations in the form of multilateral agreements focused
on the protection of migrants’ righ ts. Such failure is, however, jarring
when viewed in the context of the rati fication of other core international
human rights instruments. Despite th e recent negative and contradictory
statements from the Commission and the Council of the European Union
concerning the ICRMW, there is reason to believe that the inaction of the
EU28 vis-à-vis the Convention could change. 
As illustrated above, there are aspects of EU migration law which are
either consistent with or more migrant-friendly than the ICRMW. The fact
that EU migration law is in some key areas less generous than ICRMWstandards in the rights it grants TCNs is not in and of itself a definitive
barrier to ratification by member states as there is no legal impediment to
going beyond the minimum standards required by EU legislation in this
field. Furthermore, the creation by th e Treaty of Lisbon of an EU legal
landscape, dominated by instruments such as the Charter and the ECHR,
155 B Ryan ‘Policy on the ICRMW in the United Kingdom’ in De Guchteneire et al (n 8
above) 284-85. 
156 Art 6(1), Directive 2008/115/EC of the Eu ropean Parliament and of the Council of
16 December 2008 on common standards an d procedures in Member States for
returning illegally staying third-countr y nationals, OJ L 348/98, 24 December 2008.
157 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
Economic and Social Committee and the Co mmittee of the Regions: Communication
on Migration (2011) 9.320    Chapter 12
in which the human rights of migran ts can be more ea sily vindicated,
cannot but be a positive development from the point of view of efforts to
advance the issue of ratification at the EU level. Objections aroundadministrative and financial bu rdens and claims of unacceptable
encroachment on states’ sovereignty hold ever less water as the common
EU migration space that has been evolving since 1999 accords an ever
more robust catalogue of rights to all migrants. Is it overly optimistic to
suggest that never before, from a legal point of view, have conditions in the
EU been so favourable to ratification  of the Convention and the legal costs
of ratification to member states so low?
If the EU is to have any credibility as a human rights actor on the
global stage it is essential that the Commission and the Council of the
European Union adopt a more informed and favourable approach towardsthe ICRMW. EU support and activity in relation to the ILO Convention
concerning decent work for domestic wo rkers makes it clear that there are
no insurmountable legal obstacles to EU-level endorsement of ratification.
Even in the absence of such endo rsement, the ratification of the
Convention on domestic workers by Germany and Italy before
authorisation had been issued by the Council makes clear that unilateral
ratification is possible. Invocation  of EU competence in the field of
migration as a bar to unilateral ratifica tion does, however, vividly illustrate
its power to influence the ratification rate of the ICRMW, both inside and
outside the EU. While the results of studies showing that the EU could
play a crucial role in encouraging ratification among member states
158 will
come as little surprise, the strong message of support for this core humanrights instrument which ratification by member states would send may be
heeded by countries beyond the EU’s borders.159 Asian states, for
example, often wait for Western countries to take the lead when it comesto ratifying international conventions.160 This serves to underline the
importance of securing the support of the Commission and the Council of
the European Union for the ICRMW, in addition to that already expressed
by the European Parliament and bodies such as the Committee of the
Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee. 
In order to secure the additional endorsement of the Council and the
Commission and ensure positive EU action vis-à-vis the ICRMW, it
would be necessary to have the support of at least a handful of influential
member states.161 This, in turn, would more readily be brought about by
concentrated advocacy on the part of civil society. In this regard signs of
renewed civil society activity around  the issue of the ICRMW in recent
158 MacDonald & Cholewinski (n 12 above) 20 & 28.
159 MacDonald & Cholewinski (n 12 above) 19-20.160 N Piper ‘Obstacles to, and opportunities for, ratification of the ICRMW in Asia’ in
De Guchteneire et al (n 8 above) 177.
161 MacDonald & Cholewinski (n 148 above) 387.  The ICRMW vis-à-vis the EU and its member states     321
years, is to be welcomed.162 Similarly, the persistence with which non-EU
countries recommend the EU28 to take  action in relation to the ICRMW
could be employed both to galvanise wider civil society engagement in the
issue of ratification and as leverage in the hands of civil society to prompt
member state movement towards ratification. The more time that passes
without EU support for this core human rights instrument, the less likely itwill be that member states will ratify.
162 See for example the activities of Migrants  Matter, a group established by postgraduate
human rights st udents in Venice in 2013 to ra ise awareness of the ICRMW and
advocate for its ratification by EU member states (www .migrantsmatter.org) and Step
It Up, a global campaign launched by the Migrant Forum in Asia network andaffiliated civil society organisations, the Committee on Migrant Workers and the ILO
to highlight the significance of the ICRMW in the run up to the 25th anniversary of its
adoption on 18 December 2015 (http://cmw25.org/). 322BIBLIOGRAPHY
Books
Ackerman, AS La ley, el orden y el caos. Construcción  social del Estado y el inmigrante en
Ecuador (Instituto de Altos Estudios  Nacionales, Quito: 2014)
Acosta Arcarazo, D & Murphy, C (eds) EU security and justice law: After Lisbon and
Stockholm  (Hart Oxford 2014)
Agamben, G Homo sacer (Palo Alto CA: Stanford University Press 1995)
Aleinikoff, TA; Martin, D; Motomura, H & Fullerton, M Immigration and
citizenship: process and policy  (West Group: Eagan, 2003)
Alston, P & Mégret, F (eds) The United Nations and human rights: A critical appraisal ,
2nd ed, (Clarendon Press: Oxford, forthcoming 2018)
Amnesty International Living in the shadows. A primer on the human rights of migrants
(London: Amnesty International 2006)
Anderson, B Imagined communities (New York: Verso 1983)
Arendt, H The origins of totalitarianism  (New York: Harvest Books 1973)
Bade, KJ Migration in European history (Oxford: Berghahn Books 2003)
Basch, L; Glick Schiller, N & Szanton Blanc, C Nations unbound: Transnational
projects, postcolonial predicaments and deterritoriali zed nation-states (New York:
Routledge, 1994)
Bauman, Z Society under siege (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press 2002)
Benhabib, S The rights of others: Alie ns, residents and citizens (Cambridge University
Press 2004)
Bertoli, S & Marchetta, F Migration, remittances, and poverty in Ecuador  (Centre
d'Etudes et de Recherches sur le Développement International, Auvergne 2014)
Betts, A Global migration governance  (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011)
Betts, A Survival migration: Failed governance and the crisis of displacement  (Ithaca NY:
Cornell University Press 2013)
Bibler Coutin, S Nations of emigrants: Shifting boundaries of citizenship in El Salvador
and the United States (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press 2007)
Björkdahl, A From idea to norm: Promoting conflict prevention.  (Sweden: Lund
University 2002)
Boeles, P; Den Heijer, M; Lodder, G & Wouters, K European migration law
(Intersentia: Antwerp-Oxford-Portland 2009)
Boli, J & Thomas, GM (eds) Constructing world culture – International non-
governmental organizations since 1875  (Palo Alto CA: Stanford University Press
1999)
Bosniak, L The citizen and the alien: Dilemmas of contemporary membership (Princeton
NJ: Princeton University Press 2008)
Brubaker, R Nationalism reframed: Nationhood and the national ques tion in the new
Europe  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1996)
Brysk, A  human rights and private wrongs: Constructing global civil society (New York:
Routledge 2005)
Buitrón, E Estudio sobre el Estado de la Trata de Personas en Ecuador  (United Nations
Office on Drug and Crime, Lima 2011)  Bibliography     323
Burgorgue-Larsen, L; Ubeda De Torres, A The Inter-American Court of Human
Rights: Case law and commentary  (Oxford University Press: Oxford 2011)
Carens, JH The ethics of immigration  (OUP: New York 2013)
Castles, S; De Haas, H; & Miller, M The age of migration: International population
movements in the modern world  (Basingstoke: Palgrave 2013)
Chetail, V & Bauloz, C (eds) Research handbook on inte rnational law and migration
(Edward Elgar: Cheltenham 2014)
Cholewinski, R Migrant workers in international huma n rights law: Their protection in
countries of employment  (Clarendon Press: Oxford 1997)
Comaroff, J & Comaroff, JL (eds) Civil society and the political imagination in Africa
(University of Chicago Press 1999)
Craid, JDR & Lynk, SM Globalization and the future of labour law (Cambridge
University Press 2006)
Dancygier, RM Immigration and conflict in Europe  (Cambridge University Press
2010)
De Genova, N & Peutz, N (eds) The Deportation regime: Sove reignty, space, and the
freedom of movement (Durham NC: Duke University Press 2010)
De Guchteneire, P et al (eds) Migration and human rights: The United Nations
Convention on Migr ant Workers’ Rights  (CUP: Cambridge 2009)
De Schutter, O International human rights law  (Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge 2014)
Dembour, MB When humans become migrants: Stud y of the European Court of Human
Rights with an Inter-American counterpoint  (Oxford University Press: Oxford 2015)
Dembour, MB & Kelly, T (eds) Are human rights for migrants?  (Routledge: Abingdon
2011)
Detrick, S  (ed) The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child: a guide to the
‘Travaux Préparatoires’ (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers: Boston/Dordrecht, 1992)
Díaz Prieto, G & Kuhner, G  Un viaje sin rastros.  Mujeres migrantes que transitan por
México en situación irregular (Mexico City: H Cámara de  Diputados & Instituto
para las Mujeres en la Migración 2014)
Dudziak, M Cold War civil rights: Race and the image of American democracy  (Princeton
NJ: Princeton University Press 2000)
Escobar, A & Alvarez, SE (eds) The making of social movements in Latin America:
Identity, strategy, and democracy (Boulder: Westview Press 1992)
European Agency for Fundamental Rights Migrants in an irregular situation employed
in domestic work: Fundamental rights challe nges for the European Union and its Member
States  (Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union 2011)
European Union Agency for Fundamen tal Rights and Council of Europe Handbook
on European law relating to asylum, border and immigration  (Brussels: Belgium,
2014)
Fiddian-Quasmiyeh, E; Loescher , G; Long, K & Sigona, N (eds) The Oxford
handbook of refugee and forced migration studies  (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2014) 
Fourastié, J Les Trente Glorieuses, ou la ré volution invisible de 1946 à 1975  (Paris:
Fayard 1979)
Galbraith, JK The affluent society  (New York: Houghton Mifflin Company 1958)
Garcia, M From the jaws of victory: The triumph and tragedy of Cesar Chavez and the
Farm Worker Movement (University of California Press 2014)
Gilpin, R Global political economy: Understanding the international economic order
(Princeton N.J.: Princeto n University Press 2001)324    Bibliography
Gindin, S & Panitch, L The making of global capitalism: The political economy of
American empire  (New York: Verso 2012)
Glendon, MA A world made new: Eleano r Roosevelt and the crea tion of the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights  (Random House Trade Paperbacks: New York,
2000)
Glendon, MA A world made new: Eleanor Roosevel t and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights  (New York: Random House 2001)
Grugel, JB & Piper, N Critical perspectives on global go vernance: Rights and regulation in
governing regimes (London: Routledge 2007)
Guild, E & Minderhoud, P (eds) The first decade of EU migration and asylum law
(Martinus Nijhoff: Leiden 2012)
Held, D; McGrew, A; Goldblatt, D & Perraton, J Global transformations: Politics,
economics, and culture  (Palo Alto CA: Stanford University Press 1999)
Helleiner, E Forgotten foundations of Bretton Wood s: International de velopment and the
making of the postwar order  (Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press 2014)
Henkin, L; Cleveland, SH; Helfer, LR; Neuman, GL & Orentlicher, DF (eds)
Human rights , 2nd ed (Foundations Press 2009)
Hochschild, A King Leopold’s ghost: A story of greed,  terror, and heroism in colonial Africa
(New York: Macmillan 1998)
Honig, B Democracy and the foreigner  (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press
2001)
Hunt, L Inventing human rights: A History  (New York: Norton 2008)
Isin, EF Being political: Genealogies of citizenship  (Minneapolis MN: University of
Minnesota Press 2002)
Jessop, B The capitalist state (New York: New York University Press 1982)
Kaufman, NH Human rights treaties and the Senate: A history of opposition  (University
of North Carolina Press: Chapel Hill, 1990)
Knippen, J; Boggs, C & Meyer, M An uncertain path: Justic e for crimes and human
rights violations against migr ants and refugees in Mexico (WOLA, Washington, DC
2015)
Koselleck, R Futures past: On the semantics of historical time (New York: Columbia
University Press 1979)
Kuper, A (ed) Global responsibilities: Who must deliver on human rights ? (London:
Routledge 2005)
Ladame, PA Le Rôle des Migrations dans le Monde Libre  (Droz 1958)
Lijnzaad, L Reservations to un-human rights  treaties: ratify and ruin?  (Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers: Boston/Dordrecht, 1995)
Lillich, RB (ed) US ratification of the human rights tr eaties: With or without reservations?
(University of Virginia Press: Charlottesville, 1981)
Lim,  LL The sex sector: The economic and social bases of prostitution  in Southeast Asia
(Geneva: ILO 1998)
Loescher, G Beyond charity: Internat ional cooperation and the global refugee crisis
(Oxford University Press 1993)
MacDonald, E & Cholewinski, R The Migrant Workers Co nvention in Europe:
Obstacles to the ratification of the International Convention  on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families: EU/EEA perspectives(UNESCO: Paris 2007)
Macpherson, CB The Political theory of possessive individualism: From Hobbes to Locke
(Oxford University Press 2011)  Bibliography     325
Marks, S & Clapham, A International human rights lexicon  (Oxford University Press
2005)
Marshall, TH Citizenship and social class and other essays (Cambridge University Press
1950)
Mazower, M Dark continent: Europe’s twentieth century (New York: Vintage 2000)
Mckeown, A Melancholy order: Asian migration and the globalization of borders (NY:
Columbia University Press 2008)
Moyn, S The last utopia (Cambridge MA: Belknap Press 2012)
Nail, T The figure of the migrant  (Palo Alto CA: Stanford University Press 2015)
Ngai, M Impossible subjects: Illegal aliens and the making of modern America  (Princeton
NJ: Princeton University Press 2004)
Noiriel, G The French melting pot: Immigration,  citizenship and national identity
(Minneapolis MN: University  of Minnesota Press 1996)
Ong, A Flexible citizenship: The cultur al logics of transnationality (Durham NC.: Duke
University Press 1999)
París, MD & Zenteno, R Detención y devolución de niños, niñas y adolescentes (NNA)
migrantes no acompañados (Tijuana: El Colegio de la Frontera Norte 2015)
Pécoud, A Depoliticising migration: Global go vernance and international migration
narratives  (Basingstoke: Palgrave 2015)
P e e r s ,  S ;  G u i l d ,  E ;  A c o s t a ,  D ;  G r oenendijk, K & Moreno-Lax, V (eds) EU
Immigration and Asylum Law (text and commentary) , Volume 2, EU Immigration
Law (Martinus Nijoff: Leiden- Boston 2012)
Ponce Leiva, J Emigración y Política Exterior en Ecuador (Centro Estudios
Internacionales, Abya Ya la, Flacso, Quito 2005)
Provera, MA The detention of asylum seekers in  the European Union and Australia  (Wolf
Legal Publishers 2013)
Ramírez Gallegos, JP Con o sin pasaporte. Análisis socio-antropológico sobre la migración
ecuatoriana (Instituto de Altos Estudios Nacionales, Quito 2010)
Ramírez Gallegos, JP La política migratoria en Ecuador. Rupturas, tensiones,
continuidades y desafíos  (Instituto de Altos Estudi os Nacionales, Quito 2013)
Rehof, LA Guide to the Travaux Préparatoires of the United Nations Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women  (Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers: Boston/Dordrecht, 1993)
Rice, A & Crawford, M  Liberating sojourn: Frederick Douglass and transatlantic reform
(Athens GA: University of Georgia Press 1999)
Riles, A The network inside out (Ann Arbor MI: University of Michigan Press 2000)
Rodier, C Xénophobie business: À quoi servent les contrôles migratoires?  (2012)
Rose-Ackerman, S Corruption: A study in political economy  (Academic Press: New
York 1978)
Rostow, WW The stages of economic growth: A non-communist manifesto (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 1960)
Ruhs, M The price of rights: Regulating  international labor migration  (Princeton
University Press: Princeton 2013)
Rupp, LJ Worlds of women: The making of an international women's movement
(Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press 1997)
Santayana, G The life of reason: Introduction and reason in common sense  (Constable:
London 1906)
Sassen, S Losing control? Sovereignty in an age of globalization  (Columbia University
Press: New York 1996)326    Bibliography
Sassen, S Territory, authority, and rights (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press
2006)
Shachar, A The birthright lottery: Citize nship and global economy. (Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press 2009)
Scott, J Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed
(New Haven CT: Yale University Press 1998)
Solimano, A Migraciones Internacionales en América Latina. Booms, Crisis y Desarrollo
(Fondo de Cultura Económica, México DF 2008)
Steiner, HJ; Alston, P & Goodman, R (eds) International human rights in context:
Law, politics, morals, 3rd ed (Oxford University Press 2008)
Tarrow, S Power in movement: Social move ments and contentious politics  (Cambridge
University Press 1994)
Torpey, J The invention of the passport: Survei llance, citizenship, and the state
(Cambridge University Press 2000)
Tyagi, Y The UN Human Rights Committe e, Practice and Procedure (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2011)
Urry, J Mobilities (Cambridge UK: Polity Press 2007)
Von Benda-Beckmann, F; Von Benda-Beckmann K & Eckert, J (eds) Rules of law
and laws of ruling: On the governance of law  (London: Routledge 2009)
Wassenberg, B History of the Council of Europe (Council of Europe: Strasbourg 2013)
Weissbrodt, D The Human Rights of Non Citizens  (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2008)
Westad, OA The Global Cold War: Third world interventions and the making of our times
(Cambridge University Press 2007)
Wickramasekara, P International migration and employm ent in the post-reforms economy
of Sri Lanka  International Migration pr ogramme (ILO: Geneva 2010)
Wilsher, D Immigration detention: Law, history, politics  (Cambridge University Press
2012)
Worsley, P The three worlds: Culture and world development  (University of Chicago
Press 1984)
Woytinsky, WS & ES World population and produc tion, trends and outlook  (The
Twentieth Century Fund, New York, Ixxii, 1953)
Zolberg, A A nation by design: Immigration policy in the fashioning of America
(Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press 2006)
Chapters in books
Arcentales, J ‘Derechos de las Personas en Movilidad Humana en el año 2011’ in
Informe Sobre Derechos  Humanos en Ecuador (Programa Andino de Derechos
Humanos, Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar, Quito 2011)
Battistella, G ‘Migration and human rights : The uneasy but essential relationship’
in Cholewinski, R; De Guchte neire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human
rights: The United Nations Conven tion on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 2009)
Bosniak, L ‘Human rights, state sovereig nty and the protection of undocumented
migrants under the International Migr ant Workers’ Convention’ in Bogusz, B;
Cholewinski, R; Cygan, A & Szyszczak, E (eds) Irregular migration and human
rights: Theoretical, European, and international perspectives  (Martinus Nijhoff:
Leiden 2004)
Bosworth, M & Turnbull, S ‘Immigrati on detention, punishment, and the
criminalization of Migration’ in Pickering, S & Ham, J (eds) The Routledge
Handbook on Crime and International Migration (Abingdon: Routledge 2015)  Bibliography     327
Chetail, V ‘The Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families’ in Alston, P & Mégret, F (eds) The United
Nations and human rights: A critical appraisal  2nd edn (forthcoming Clarendon
Press: Oxford 2018)
Chetail, V ‘The transnationa l movement of persons under general international law
– Mapping the customary law foundation s of international migration law’ in
Chetail, V & Bauloz, C (eds) Research handbook on international law and migration
(Edward Elgar: Cheltenham 2014) 
Cornelisse, G ‘Immigration detention and th e territoriality of universal rights’ in
De Genova, N & Peutz, N (eds) The deportation regime: Sovereignty, space, and the
freedom of movement  (Durham NC: Duke University Press 2010)
Crépeau, F ‘Foreword’ in Berg, L (ed) Migrant rights law work : Law’s precariousness
at the intersection of immigration and labour (London: Routledge, forthcoming)
Crush, J; Williams, V; & Nicholson, P ‘M igrants’ rights after apartheid: South
African responses to the ICRMW’ in Cholewinski, R; de Guchteneire, P &Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human rights: The United Nations Convention on
Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2009)
De Guchteneire, P & Pécoud, A ‘Introduction  : The UN Convention on Migrant
Workers’ Rights’ in Cholewinski, R; De  Guchteneire, P & Pécoud, A (eds)
Migration and human rights: The United Nations Conven tion on Migrant Workers’
Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2009)
Diani, M ‘Social movements, contentiou s actions, and social networks: From
metaphor to substance?’ in  M Diani & D McAdam (eds) Social movements and
networks: Relational approa ches to collective action  (Oxford University Press 2003)
Díaz, G & Kuhner, G ‘Mexico’s role in promoting an implementing the ICRMW’
in Cholewinski, R; De Guchte neire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human
Rights: The United Nati ons Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 2009)
Edelenbos, C ‘Committee on Migrant Workers and implementation of the
ICRMW’ in De Guchteneire, et al (eds) Migration and Human Rights: The United
Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (CUP: Cambridge 2009)
Goodwin-Gill, GS ‘Migrant rights and managed migration’ in Chetail, V (ed)
Mondialisation, migration et droits de l’ho mme: le droit internat ional en question /
Globalisation, migration and human rights: international law under review  (Bruxelles:
Bruylant 2007) 
Grange, M & D’Auchamp, M ‘Role of civil society in campaigning for and using
the ICRMW’ in Cholewinski, R; De Guchteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds)
Migration and human rights: The United Nations Conven tion on Migrant Workers’
Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2009)
Grange, M & Majcher, I ‘Immigration dete ntion under international human rights
law: The legal framework and the litmus  test of human rights treaty bodies
monitoring’ in Flynn, MJ & Flynn, MB (eds) Challenging immigration detention -
Academics, activists and policy-makers (Elgar Publishing 2017)
Grant, S ‘The recognition of migrants’ rights within the UN human rights system:
The first sixty years’ in Dembour, M & Kelly, T (eds) Are human rights for
migrants?  (Abingdon: Routledge 2011)
Hansen, R ‘Migration to Euro pe since 1945: Its history and its lessons’ in Spencer,
S (ed) The Politics of migration: Managing  opportunity, conflict and change (Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing/The Political Quarterly 2003)
Henkin, L ‘The Covenant on Civil and Po litical Rights’ in Lillick, RB (ed) US
ratification of the huma n rights treaties: With or without reservations? (University of
Virginia Presss: Ch arlottesville, 1981)328    Bibliography
Hillman, F & Klekowski von Koppenfe ls ‘Migration and human rights in
Germany’ in Cholewinski, R; De Gu chteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration
and human rights: The United Nations Co nvention on Migran t Workers’ Rights
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2009)
Lloyd, C ‘Anti-racism, social movements an d civil society’ in F Anthias & C Lloyd
(eds) Rethinking anti-racisms  (London: Routledge 2002)
Lorente, D & Morales G ‘Introducción a lo s capítulos sobre niños en el contexto
de la migración en México –dos fronteras: una sola niñez’ in Musalo, K &Ceriani, P (eds) Niñez y migración en Centro y Nortea mérica: causas, po líticas, práctica
y desafíos (Buenos Aires: Center for Gender and Refugee Studies & Universidad
Nacional de Lanus 2015)
MacDonald, E & Cholewinski, R ‘The ICRMW and the European Union’ in
Cholewinski, R; De Guchtene ire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human
rights: The United Nations Conven tion on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 2009)
Nessel, LA ‘Human dignity or state sovereig nty? The roadblocks to full realization
of the UN Migrant Workers Convention ’ in Chetail, V & Bauloz, C (eds)
Research handbook on inte rnational law and migration  (Edward Elgar: Cheltenham
2014)
Oger, H ‘The French politi cal refusal on Europe’ beha lf’ in Cholewinski, R; De
Guchteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human rights: The United
Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press 2009)
Peris-Mancheta Barrio, J ‘La nueva política  migratoria integral del Ecuador en la
encrucijada’ in Pérez Ruales , N & Valle Franco, A (eds) Los Derechos en la
movilidad humana: Del control a la protección (Ministerio de Justicia y Derechos
Humanos, Quito 2009)
Piché, V; Eugénie Depatie-Pelletier, E & Ep ale, D ‘Obstacles to ratification of the
ICRMW in Canada’ in Cholewinski, R; De  Guchteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds)
Migration and human rights: The United Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’
Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2009)
Piper, N ‘Obstacles to, and opportunities for, ratification of the ICRMW in Asia’
in Cholewinski, R; De Guchte neire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human
rights: The United Nations Conven tion on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 2009)
Redgwell, C ‘US reservations to human rights treaties: All for one and none for
All?’ in Byers, M & Nolte, G (eds) United States hegemony  and the foundations of
international law  (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 2003)
Rojas Wiesner, ML & Ángele s Cruz, H ‘La situación de las mujeres migrantes en
la frontera de México con Guatemala’  in Tuñón Pablos, E & Rojas Wiesner,
ML (eds) Género y migración  (Tapachula: El Colegio de la Frontera Sur 2012)
Ryan, B ‘In defence of the Migrant Work ers Convention: Standard setting for
contemporary migration’ in SS Juss (ed) The Ashgate Research Companion to
migration law, theory and policy  (Ashgate: Surrey 2013)
Ryan, B ‘Policy on the ICRMW in the United Kingdom’ in Cholewinski, R; De
Guchteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human rights: The United
Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press 2009)
Slinckx, I ‘Migrants’ rights in UN huma n rights conventions’ in Cholewinski, R;
De Guchteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human rights: The United
Nations Convention on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press 2009)  Bibliography     329
Stephens, D 'Establishing a positive right to migrate as a solution to food scarcity'
(2014) 29 Emory International Law Review  179
Taran, P ‘The need for a rights-based  approach to migration in the age of
globalization’ in Cholewinski, R; De  Guchteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds)
Migration and human rights: The United Nations Conven tion on Migrant Workers’
Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2009)
Tistounet, E ‘The Problem of Overlapp ing among Different Treaty Bodies’ in
Alston, P & Crawford, J (eds) The future of UN human ri ghts treaty monitoring
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000)
Touzenis, K ‘Migration and human rights in Italy: prospects for the ICRMW’ in
Cholewinski, R; De Guchteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human
rights: The United Nations Conven tion on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 2009)
Vohra, S ‘Detention of irregular migrants  and asylum weekers’  in Cholewinski, R;
De Guchteneire, P; & Pécoud, A (eds) Migration and human rights: The United
Nations Conventi on on Migrant Workers’ Rights  (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press 2009)
Weissbrodt, D & Rhodes, J ‘United Nations treaty bodies and migrant workers’ in
Vincent, C & Bauloz, C (eds) Research handbook on international law and migration
(Edward Elgar Publishi ng: Cheltenam 2014)
Journal articles
Acosta Arcarazo, D & Geddes, A ‘The de velopment, application and implications
of an EU rule of law in the area of migration policy’ (2013) 51 Journal of Common
Market Studies 179
Alba, F ‘Martin Ruhs’ The Price of Rights : Flexible accommodation vs all-
encompassing norms?’ (2015) 3 Migration Studies  2
Amoore, L ‘Biometric borders: Governing mobilities in the wa r on terror’ (2006)
25 Political Geography  336
Arrighi, G; Silver BJ & Brewer BD ‘Indus trial Convergence, globalization, and the
persistence of the north-south divide’ (2003) 38 Studies in Comparative
International Development  3
Bakewell, O ‘Keeping them in their place: The ambivalent relationship between
development and migration in Africa’ (2008) 29 Third World Quarterly  7
Baldaccini, A ‘The return and removal of  irregular migrants under EU law: An
analysis of the Returns Directive’ (2009) 11 European Journal of Migration and
Law 1
Basok, T ‘Counter-hegemonic human rights  discourses and migrant rights activism
in the US and Canada’ (2009) 50 International Journal of  Comparative Sociology
179
Berg, L 'At the border and between the crac ks: The precarious position of irregular
migrant workers under internationa l human rights law' (2007) 8 Melbourne
Journal of International Law  1
Böhning, R ‘The ILO and the new UN Co nvention on Migrant Workers: The past
and future’ (1991) 25 International Migration Review 4
Böhning, R ‘The protection of migrant wo rkers and international labour standards’
(1988) 26 International Migration  133
Bosniak, B ‘Citizenship denationalized’ (2000) 7 Indiana Journal of Global Legal
Studies  447
Bosniak, L ‘Human rights, state sovereig nty, and the protection of undocumented
migrants under the International Migrant Workers Convention’ (1991) 25International Migration Review  737 330    Bibliography
Boyd, W ‘Ways of seeing in environmental law’ (2010) 37 Ecology Law Quarterly
843
Bradley, CA ‘Our dualist Co nstitution, and the internat ionalist conception’ (1999)
51 Stanford Law Review  529 
Bustamante, JA ‘Immigrants’ vulnerability as subjects of human rights’ (2002) 36
International Migration Review  333
Carte, L ‘Everyday restriction: Centra l American women and the state in the
Mexico-Guatemala Border City of Tapachula’ (2014) 48 1 International
Migration Review  113
Castles, S ‘Guestworkers in Euro pe: A resurrection?’ (2006) 40 International
Migration Review  4
Cmiel, K ‘The recent history of human rights’ (2004) 109 American Historical Review
117
Cole, D ‘The idea of humanity: Human ri ghts and immigrants’ rights’ (2006) 37
Columbia Human Ri ghts Law Review  627
Cole, WM ‘Sovereignty relinquished? Expl aining commitment to the International
Human Rights Covenants, 1966-1999’ (2005) 70 American Sociological Review
472
Crépeau, F & Hastie, B ‘The case for ‘fir ewall’ protections for irregular migrants:
Safeguarding fundamental rights’ (2015) 17 European Journal of Migration and
Law 157
Crush, J ‘The dark side of democracy: Migration, xenophobia and human rights in
South Africa’ (2001) 38 International Migration  103
Cruz Salazar, T ‘Racismo cultural y representaciones de inmigrantes
centroamericanas en Chiapas’ (2011) 6 Migraciones Internacionales 133 
Culliton-González, K ‘Born in the Amer icas: Birthright citizenship and human
rights’  (2012) 25 Harvard Human Rights Journal  127
Cummins, M & Rodriguez, F ‘Is ther e a numbers versus rights trade ‐off in
immigration policy? What the data say’ (2010) 11 Journal of Human Development
and Capabilities 2
Dauvergne, C ‘Sovereignty, migration and the rule of law in global times’ (2004)
67 The Modern Law Review 588
Desmond, A ‘The development of a comm on EU migration policy and the rights
of irregular migrants: A prog ress narrative?’ (2016) 16 Human Rights Law Review
247 
Desmond, A ‘The Triangle that could sq uare the circle? The UN International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers andMembers of Their Families, the EU and the Universal Periodic Review’ (2015)17 European Journal of Migration and Law  39
De Senarclens, C & Majcher, I ‘Discipline and punish? Analysis of the purposes of
immigration detention in  Europe’ (2014) 11 AmeriQuests  1
Engle Merry, S ‘Transnational human rights and local activism: Mapping the
middle’ (2006) 108 American Anthropologist 38
Finnemore, M & Sikkink, K ‘International  norm dynamics and political change’
(1998) 52 International Organization  887
Flaherty, MS ‘History right?  Historical scholarship, or iginal understanding, and
treaties as “supreme law of the land”’ (1999) 99 Columbia Law Review  2095
Fudge, J & Herzfeld Olsson, P ‘The EU Seasonal Workers Directive: When
immigration controls meet labour rights’ (2014) 16 European Journal of Migration
and Law 439  Bibliography     331
Gencianos, G ‘International civil soci ety cooperation on migrants’ rights:
Perspectives from an NGO network’ (2004) 6 European Journal of Migration and
Law 147
Goodale, M ‘Ethical theory as social practice’ (2006) 108 American Anthropologist  25
Grant, S ‘GCIM Report: Defining an “ethical compass” for international
migration policy’ (2006) 44 International Migration  1
Grugel, JB & Piper, N ‘Global governance , economic migration and the difficulties
of social activism’ (2011) 26 International Sociology  435
Gutiérrez, DG ‘Migration, emergent ethni city, and the ‘third space’: The shifting
politics of nationalism in greater Mexico’ (1999) 86 Journal of American History
481 
Hafner-Burton, EM; Tsutsui, K & Meyer JW ‘International human rights law and
the politics of legitimation: Repressive states and human rights treaties’ (2008)
23 International Sociology  115
Hainsfurther, J ‘A Right- based approach: Using CEDAW to protect the human
rights of migrant workers’ (2008-2009) 24 American University International Law
Review 844
Hannum, H ‘The status of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in national
and international Law’ (1995-1996) 25 Georgia Journal of International and
Comparative Law  287
Hasenau, M ‘Setting norms in the Unit ed Nations system: The Draft Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of A ll Migrant Workers and Their Families in
relation to ILO in standards on migrant workers’ (1990) 28 International
Migration Review  133
Hathaway, OA ‘Do human rights treati es make a difference?’ (2002) 111 Yale Law
Journal  1935
Hatton, TJ ‘Should we have a WTO fo r international migr ation?’ (2007) 22
Economic Policy  339
Hatton, T ‘The rise and fall of asyl um: What happened and why?’ (2009) 119 The
Economic Journal 183
Hoover, J ‘Towards a politics for hum an rights: Ambiguous humanity and
democratizing rights’ (2013) 39 Philosophy and Social Criticism 935
Hune, S & Niessen, J ‘The First UN Co nvention on Migrant Workers’ (1991) 9
Netherlands Quarterly of Human Rights  130
Jiménez, MA ‘Potencialidades de la medición cotidiana a través de los censos’
(2009) XXXVI 88 Notas de Población  163 Santiago de Chile: Comisión
Económica para América Latina y el Caribe 
Kamat, S ‘The privatization of public interest: Theorizing NGO discourse in a
neoliberal era’ (2004) 11 Review of International Political Economy  170
Karatani, R ‘How history sepa rated refugee and migrant regimes: In search of their
institutional origins’ (2005) 17 International Journal of Refugee Law  517
Kaur, A ‘Labor crossings in Southeast As ia: Linking historical and contemporary
labor migration’ (2009) 11 New Zealand Journal of Asian Studies  276
Kirkup, A & Evans, T ‘The myth of West ern opposition to economic, social, and
cultural rights? A reply to Whelan and Donnelly’ (2009) 31 Human Rights
Quarterly  221
LaViolette, N ‘The principa l international human righ ts instruments to which
Canada has not yet adhered’ (2006) 24 Windsor Yearbook of Access to Justice  267
Lederman, D; Loayza, N & Soares, R ‘Accountability and corruption: Political
institutions matter’ (2005) 17 1 Economics and Politics  1332    Bibliography
Lesser, T ‘The role of United Nations sp ecial procedures in protecting the human
rights of migrants’ (2009) 28 Refugee Survey Quarterly  139
Long, K ‘When refugees stopped bein g migrants: Movement, labour and
humanitarian protection’ (2013) 1 Migration Studies  11
Lonnroth, J ‘The Internatio nal Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families in the context of international migrationpolicies: An analysis of ten years of negotiation’ (1991) 25 The International
Migration Review  724
Lyon, B ‘The unsigned United Nations Migrant Workers Convention : An
overlooked opportunity to change the Brown Collar migration paradigm’ (2010)
42 New York University Journal of International Law and Politics  2
Lyon, B ‘When more “security” equals less workplace safety : Reconsidering laws
that disadvantage unauthorized workers’ (Spring 2004) 6 University of
Pennsylvania Journal of Business Law 578
Mahmud, T ‘Colonial cartographies, postcolo nial borders, and enduring failures of
international law: The unending wars along the Afghanistan-Pakistan frontier’(2011) 36 Brooklyn Journal of International Law  1
Malkki, L ‘Citizens of humanity: Internat ionalism and the imagined community of
nations’ (1994) 3 Diaspora  41
Margheritis, A ‘Todos somos migrantes (we are all migrants): The paradoxes of
innovative state-led transnat ionalism in Ec uador’ (2011) 5 International Political
Sociology  198
Márque Covarrubias, H & Delgado Wise, R ‘Una perspectiva del sur sobre capital
global, migración forzada y desarrollo alternativo’ (2011) 9 Migración y
Desarrollo  4
Mertus, J ‘The state and the post-C old War refugee re gime: Models, new
questions’ (1998) 10 International Journal of Refugee Law  321
McGuinness, ME ‘Sanchez-L lamas, American human rights exceptionalism and
the VCCR norm portal’ (2007) 11 Lewis & Clark Law Review  47
McKeown, A ‘Global migration, 1846-1940’ (2004) 15 Journal of World History  155
Morris-Suzuki, T ‘The wilder shores of power: Migration, border controls and
democracy in postwar Japan’ (2006) 86 Thesis Eleven  6
Musila, GM ‘The right to an effective re medy under the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights’ (2006) 6 African Human Rights Law Journal 441
Nafziger, JAR & Bartel, BC ‘The Migr ant Worker s Convention: Its place in
human rights law’ (1991) 25 International Mi gration Review  771
Neuman, GL ‘The Lost century of Am erican immigration law’ (1993) 93 Columbia
Law Review  1833
Neumayer, E ‘Qualified ratification: Expl aining reservations to international
human rights treaties’ (2007) 36 Journal of Legal Studies  397
Niessen, J & Taran, PA ‘Using the ne w Migrant Workers’ Rights Convention’
(1991) 25 International Migration Review  859
Ongley, P & Pearson, D ‘Post-1945 in ternational migration: New Zealand,
Australia and Canada compared’ (1995) 29 International Migration Review 765
Pécoud, A ‘The UN Convention on Migr ant Workers’ Rights and international
migration management’ (2009) 23 Global Society: Journa l of Interdisciplinary
International Relations 3
Pécoud, A & De Guchteneire, P ‘Migration , human rights and the United Nations:
An investigation into the obstacles to the UN convention on migrant workers’
rights ’ (2006) 24 Windsor Yearbook of Access to Justice  2  Bibliography     333
Piper, N ‘Rights of foreign workers and the politics of migration in South-East and
East Asia ’ (2004)  42 International Migration  71
Piper, N ‘Democratising migration from  the bottom up: The Rise of the global
migrant rights movement’ (2015) 12 Globalizations  78
Piper, N & Rother, S ‘Let's argue about migration: Advancing a right(s) discourse
via communicative opportunities’ (2012) 33 Third World Quarterly  9
Ravenstein, EG ‘The laws of migration’ (1889) 52 Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society  241
Rodio, EB & Schmitz, HP ‘Beyond no rms and interests: Understanding the
evolution of transnational huma n rights activism’ (2010) 14 The International
Journal of Human Rights  442
Romero Gudiño, A ‘Inspección federa l del trabajo en México’ (2008) 6 Revista
Latinoamericana de  Derecho Social  113
Sanjek, R ‘Rethinking migration,  ancient to future’ (2003) 3 Global Networks  315
Sassen, S ‘Bordering capabilities versus bo rders: Implications for national borders’
(2009) 30 Michigan Journal of International Law  567
Satterthwaite, ML ‘Cro ssing borders, claiming rights: Using human rights law to
empower women migrant workers’ (2005) 8 Yale Human Rights and Development
Law Journal  1
Shachar, A ‘Citizenship  and the ‘right to have rights’’ (2014) 18 Citizenship Studies
114
Shamir, R ‘Without borders? Notes on glob alization as a mobility regime’ (2005)
23 Sociological Theory  197
Schiff Berman, P ‘The globalizat ion of jurisdiction’ (2002) 151 University of
Pennsylvania Law Review  311
Smith, R ‘Dilemas y perspectivas del si stema migratorio de América del Norte’
(2000) 50 4 Comercio internacional  289
Stork, J ‘International Criminal Court’ (1998) 4 Foreign Policy in Focus 1
Strikwerda, C ‘Tides of migration, currents of history: The state, economy, and the
transatlantic movement of labor in th e nineteenth and twentieth Centuries’
(1999) 44 International Review of Social History  367
Taran, P ‘Human rights of migrants: Challenges of the new decade’ (2001) 38
International Migration  7
Taylor, PJ ‘The state as container: Te rritoriality in the modern world-system’
(1994) 18 Progress in Human Geography  151
Trauner, F & Deimel, S ‘The impact of EU migration policies on African countries:
The case of mali’ (2013) 51 International Migration 20
Tsutsui, K & Wotipka, CM ‘Global civil so ciety and the international human rights
movement: Participation in human ri ghts international nongovernmental
organizations’ (2004) 83 Social Forces  587
Van der Linden, M ‘The promise and challeng es of global labor history’ (2013) 82
International Labor and Working-Class History  57
Vanheule, D; Foblets, M-C; Loones, S & Bo uckaert, S ‘The significance of the UN
Migrant Workers’ Convention of 18 Dece mber 1990 in the event of ratification
by Belgium’ (2005) 6 European Journal of Migration and Law  4
Van Krieken, P ‘Migrants’ rights and the law of the sea: Further efforts to ensure
universal participat ion’ (2007) 45 International Migration  1
Vázquez, CM ‘Judicial en forcement of treaties: se lf-execution and related
doctrines’ (2006) 100 American Society of International Law Proceedings  439
Vázquez, CM ‘Laughing at treaties’ (1999) 99 Columbia Law Review  2154334    Bibliography
Vázquez, CM ‘Treaties as law of the la nd: the supremacy clause and the judicial
enforcement of treaties’ (2008) 122 Harvard Law Review  600
Venters, H; Dasch-Goldberg, D; Rasmussen, A & Keller AS ‘Into the abyss:
Mortality and morbidity among de tained immigran ts’ (2009) 31 Human Rights
Quarterly  474
Vucetic, S ‘Democracies and international human rights: Why is there no place for
migrant workers?’ (2007) 11 International Journal of Human Rights  403
Wickramasekara, P ‘South Asian migration to the Gulf: A safety valve or a
development strategy?’ (2015) Migration and Development  1
Wilson, F ‘International migration in Southern Africa’ (1976) 10 International
Migration Review  451
Yoo, JC ‘Treaties and public lawmaking: a textual and Structural defense of non-
self-execution’ (1999) 99 Columbia Law Review  2218
Case law
A v Australia , HRC (30 April 1997), UN Doc CCPR/C/59/D/560/1993 (1997)
Abboud v INS 140 F 3d 843, 849 (9th Cir 1998)
A M H  E l  H o j o u j  J u m ’ a  e t  a l  v  L i b y a ,  Communication 1958/2010, HCR (21 July
2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/111/D/1958/2010 (2014)
Biao v Denmark  ECHR (24 May 2016) Applic no 38590/10
Butt v Norway  ECHR (4 December 2012) Applic no 47017/09
C v Australia  HRC (13 November 2002) UN Doc CCPR/C/76/D/900/1999
(2002)
Case of Expelled Dominicans and Haitians v Dominican Republic  IACHR (28 Aug 2014)
Ser C 282(1) Official Summary
Chahal v The United Kingdom ECHR [GC] (15 November 1996) Applic no 22414/
93 
Chavez-Ramirez v INS 792 F 2d 932 (9th Cir 1986)
Criminal Complaint filed De cember 14, 2010 in Fiscal ia Distrital del Ministerio
Publico del Departamento de Escu intla. MV Escuintla: 7720 2000 
Cruz Varas & Others v Sweden ECHR [GC] (20 March 1991) Applic No 15576/89
De Souza Ribeiro v France  ECHR (13 December 2012) Applic no 22689/07 
Dodig v INS  9 F 3d 1418 (9th Cir 1993)
European Parliament v Council  [2006] ECR I-5769 C-540/03
Filartiga v Pena-Irala  630 F 2d 876, 879 (2d Cir 1980)
Hirsi Jamaa and Others v Italy ECHR [GC] (23 February 2012) Applic no 27765/09 
Igartúa-De La Rosa v United States  417 F 3d 145, 150 (1st Cir 2005)
International Federation for Hu man Rights (FIDH) v France Complaint No 14/2003,
European Committee on Social Righ ts, https://www.esc r-net.org/docs/i/
400976 (accessed 30 June 2015) 
Ivcher-Bronstein v Peru IACHR (6 February 2001)
Jenny L Flores et al v Jeh Johnson et al 2015 CD Cal CV 85-4544 DMG (AGRx)
Jeunesse v the Netherlands ECHR [GC] (3 October 2014) Applic  no 12738/10 
JHA v Spain  (Marine I) (3-21 November 2008) UN Doc CAT/C/41/D/323/2007
(2008)
Kaplan & Others v Norway ECHR (24 July 2014)  Applic no 32504/11
MAMA et al v Sweden, Communication 391/2009, CAT Committee (23 May 2012),
UN Doc CAT/C/48/D/391/2009  Bibliography     335
Maritza Urrutia v Guatemala IACHR (27 November 2003) Ser C/No 103
Medellin v Texas 552 US 491, 505 (2008)
MSS v Belgium and Greece  ECHR (21 January 2011) Applic no 30696/09
Opinion 2/91 of the ECJ of 19 March 1993 rela ting to the Chemicals Convention No 170 ,
ECR 1993-I
Opinion of the CJEU that the agreement on the accession of the EU to the ECHR is not
compatible with Article 6(2) TEU or with Prot ocol 8 relating to Article 6(2) of the Treaty
on European Union on the accession of the Union to the European  Convention on the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms Opinion 2/13 of the Court  18
December 2014
Plyler v Doe  457 US 202 (1982)
Rodrigues da Silva & Hoogkamer v the Netherlands  ECHR (31 January 2006) Applic no
50435/99
C-47/15 Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber) of 7 June 2016 Sélina Affum v
Préfet du Pas-de-Calais and Procureur général de la Cour d'appel de Douai
Singarasa v Attorney General (SC Spl (LA)  SCM (15 September 2006) No 182/99
Yilmaz-Dogan v the Netherlands , Communication 1/1984, CERD Committee (29
September 1988) UN Doc CERD/C/36/D/1/1984 (1988)
YW v Denmark, Communication 51/2013, CEDAW Committee (2 March 2015) UN
Doc CEDAW/C/60/D/51/2013
International treaties and resolutions
American Convention on Hu man Rights (OAS Treaty Series No. 36) 1144 UNTS
123
Convention for the Protection of Huma n Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ETS
No. 5) 213 UNTS 222
Convention on the Participation of Foreig ners in Public Life at Local Level (ETS
No. 144) 2044 UNTS 737
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 189 UNTS 150Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, GA (21 January 2014), UN Doc A/Res./68/4 15 (2014)
European Convention on Establishment (ETS No 19) 529 UNTS 141European Convention on Social Se curity (ETS No 78) 1710 UNTS 6
European Convention on the Legal Status  of Migrant Workers (ETS No 93) 1496
UNTS 3
European Parliament, Resolution on the situation of fundamental rights in the
European Union 2004-2008 P6_TA(2009)0019, 14 January 2009
H Res 738 (96th): A resolution relati ng to the United Nations Mid-Decade
Conference for Women
High Commissioner for the Promotion an d Protection of All Human Rights, GA
(20 December 1993), UN Doc A/RES/48/141 (1993)
ILO Convention concerning Migration for Employment (Revised) 1949 (No 97)ILO Convention concerning Migrations in  Abusive Conditions and the Promotion
of Equality of Opportunity and Treatm ent of Migrant Workers, 1975 (No 143)
ILO Convention on Domestic Workers (No 189)Mandate of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, Human Rights Council (17 July 2014), UN Doc A/HRC/RES/26/8
(2014)336    Bibliography
Measures to Improve the Situation and Ensure the Human ri ghts and Dignity of
All Migrant Workers, GA (17 December 1979), UN Doc A/RES/34/172(1979)
Resolution on the EU’s Rights, Priori ties and Recommendations for the 58th
Session of the UN Commission  on Human Rights in Geneva
Resolution 60/251 on the Human Rights Council, GA (15 March 2006), UN Doc
A/RES/60/251 (2006)
Resolution 70/1: Transforming our world: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, GA (25 September 2015), UN Doc A/RES/70/1 (2015)
Rome Statute of the Inte rnational Criminal Court
The Human Rights of All Migrant Worke rs And Their Families, AG/RES 1898
(XXXII-O/02)
Transforming our world: The 2030 Agenda  for Sustainable Development, GA (21
October 2015), UN Doc A/RES/70/1 (2015)
UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment 1465 UNTS 85
UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women 1249 UNTS 13
UN Convention on the Rights of Pers ons with Disabilities 2515 UNTS 3
UN Convention on the Rights  of the Child 1577 UNTS 3
UN International Convention for the Pr otection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance 2716 UNTS 3
UN International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination 660 UNTS 195
UN International Convention on the Prot ection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families 1990, 2220 UNTS 3
UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 999 UNTS 171
UN International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 993 UNTS 3
UN Optional Protocol to the Conven tion against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 2375 UNTS 237
Universal Declaration of Human Rights , GA Res 217A (12 December 1948), UN
Doc A/810 (1948)
Concluding Observations (chronological order)
Concluding Observations on Lebanon, CERD Committee (30 March 1998), UN
Doc A/53/18
Concluding Observations on Kuwait, Comm ittee on ESCR (7 June 2004), UN Doc
E/C.12/1/Add.98
Concluding Observations on Thailand, HRC (8 July 2005), UN Doc CCPR/CO/
84/THA
Concluding Observations on the Republic of Korea, HRC (28 November 2006),
UN Doc CCPR/C/KOR/CO/3 (2006)
Concluding observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families – EGYPT, CMW (25 May2007), UN Doc CMW/C/EGY/CO/1 (2007)
Concluding Observations on Italy, CE RD Committee (16 May 2008), UN Doc
CERD/C/ITA/CO/15 (2008)
Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Sri Lanka, CMW (14 December
2009), UN Doc CMW/C/LKA/1 (2009)  Bibliography     337
Concluding Observations of the Commit tee against Torture: Ecuador, CAT (7
December 2010), UN Doc CAT/C/ECU/CO/4-6 (2010)
Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families – Tajikistan, CMW (16 May2012), UN Doc CMW/C/TJK/CO/1 (2012) 
Concluding Observations of the Committe e on the third periodic report of Ecuador
as approved by the Committee at its fo rty-ninth session (14-30 November 2012),
CESCR (13 December 2012), UN Doc E/C.12/ECU/CO/3 (2012)
Concluding Observations on the Combined Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of
Cyprus, CEDAW Committee (1 March 2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/CYP/CO/6-7 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Seventh and Eighth Periodic Reports of Austria,
CEDAW Committee (22 March 2013),  UN Doc CEDAW/C/AUT/CO/7-8
(2013)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Seventh and Eight Periodic Reports of
Hungary, CEDAW Committee (26 March 2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/HUN/CO/7-8 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Sevent h Periodic Report of Greece Adopted by
the Committee at its Fifty Fourth Session, CEDAW Committee (26 March
2013), UN Doc CEDAW/ C/GRC/CO/7 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Twen tieth to the Twenty-Second Periodic
Reports of the Russian Federation, CERD  Committee (17 April 2013), UN Doc
CERD/C/RUS/CO/20-22 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Angola, CCPR Committee (29
April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/AGO/CO/1 (2013)
Concluding Observations on Belize in the Absence of a Report, CCPR Committee
(26 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/BLZ/CO/1 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Init ial Report of Macao, China, CCPR
Committee (29 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/CHN-MAC/CO/1 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Hong Kong, China,
CCPR Committee (29 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/CHN-HKG/CO/3(2013)
Concluding Observations on the Thir d Periodic Report of Paraguay, CCPR
Committee (29 April 2013), UN  Doc CCPR/C/PR Y/CO/3 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Fifth Pe riodic Report of Peru, CCPR Committee
(29 April 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/PER/CO/5 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Init ial Report of Togo, Adopted by the
Committee at its Fiftieth Session, CE SCR Committee (3 June 2013), UN Doc
E/C.12/TGO/CO/1 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Azerbaijan, CESCR
Committee (5 June 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/AZE/CO/3 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Fift h Periodic Report of Denmark, CESCR
Committee (6 June 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/DNK/CO/5 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, CESCR Committee (10 June  2013), UN Doc E/C.12/IRN/CO/2
(2013)
Concluding Observations on the Thir d Periodic Report of Japan, CESCR
Committee (10 June 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/JPN/CO/3 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Second Pe riodic Report of Malta, Adopted by the
Committee at its Sixty-Second Session, CRC (18 June 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/MLT/CO/2 (2013)338    Bibliography
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, CEDAW Committee (30 July 2013),UN Doc CEDAW/C/COD/CO/6-7 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of
the Dominican Republic, CEDAW Committee (30 July 2013), UN DocCEDAW/C/DOM/CO/6-7 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Seventh Periodic Report of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Irelan d, CEDAW Committee (30 July 2013) UN
Doc CEDAW/C/GBR/CO/7 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Initial Re port of Indonesia (21 August 2013), UN
Doc CCPR/C/IDN/CO/1 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Sevent eenth to Twenty-Second Periodic Reports
of Cyprus, CERD Committee 10 (23 September 2013), UN Doc CERD/C/
CYP/CO/17-22 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Combined  Nineteenth to Twenty-First Periodic
Reports of Sweden, CERD Committee (23 September 2013), UN Doc CERD/
C/SWE/CO/19-21 (2013)
Observations finales concernant le rapport initial du Maroc, adoptées par le Comité
à sa dix-neuvième session, CMW (8  October 2013), UN Doc CMW/C/MAR/
CO/1 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Initial Re port of Paraguay Submitted by Portugal
under Article 8, Paragraph 1, of the Opti onal Protocol to th e Convention on the
Rights of the Child on th e Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, CRC
Committee (25 October 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/OPAC/PRY /CO/1 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Second and Third Periodic Reports of
Andorra, CEDAW Committee (27 October 2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/AND/CO/2-3 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Combined  Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Cambodia, CEDAW Committee (28 October 2013), UN Doc CEDAW/C/
KHM/CO/4-5 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Initial Re port of China submitted under article 8
of the Optional Protocol to the Conventi on on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conf lict, CRC Committee (29 October 2013),
UN Doc CRC/C/OPAC/CHN/CO/1 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Third and Fourth Periodic Reports of
China, CRC Committee (29 Octobe r 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/CHN/CO-3-4
(2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Seco nd Periodic Report of Kuwait, CRC
Committee (29 October 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/KWT/CO/2 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Third and Fourth Periodic Reports of
Luxembourg, CRC Committee (29 Oc tober 2013), UN Doc CRC/C/LUX/
CO/3-4 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Initia l Report of Mozambique, CCPR Committee
(19 November 2013), UN Do c CCPR/C/MOZ/CO /1 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on  the Initial Report of Mauritania, CCPR Committee
(21 November 2013), UN Do c CCPR/C/MRT/ CO/1 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Third Pe riodic Report of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, CCPR Committee (6 De cember 2013), UN Doc CCPR/C/BOL/
CO/3 (2013) 
Concluding Observations on the Report  Submitted by Spain under Article 29,
Paragraph 1, of the Convention, CE D Convention (12 December 2013), UN
Doc CED/C/ESP/CO/1 (2013)  Bibliography     339
Concluding Observations on the Fourth Periodic Report of Austria, CESCR
Committee (13 December 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/AUT/CO/4 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Fourth to Sixth Periodic Reports of
Belarus, CESCR Committee (13 Decemb er 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/BLR/CO/
4-6 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Kuwait, CESCR
Committee (19 December 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/KWT/CO/2 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Combined Fifth and Sixth Periodic Reports of
Poland, CAT Committee (23 December  2013), UN Doc CAT/C/POL/CO/5-
6 (2013)
Concluding Observations Concerning th e Fourth Periodic Report of Belgium,
CESCR Committee (23 December 2013), UN Doc E/C.12/BEL/CO/4 (2013)
Concluding Observations on the Report Submitted by Portu gal under Article 8,
Paragraph 1, of the Optional Protocol to  the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the Involvement of Children  in Armed Conflict, CRC Committee (24
February 2014), UN Doc CRC/C/OPAC/PRT/CO/1 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Report  Submitted by the Russian Federation
under Article 8, Para graph 1, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvemen t of Children in Armed Conflict, CRC
Committee (25 February 2014), UN Doc CRC/C/OPAC/RUS/CO/1 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Sevent h Periodic Report of Finland, CEDAW
Committee (9 March 2014), UN Doc CEDAW/C/FIN/CO/7 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Cameroon, CEDAW Committee (9 March 2014), UN Doc CEDAW/C/
CMR/CO/4-5 (2014) 
Concluding Observations on the Initia l Report of Qatar,  CEDAW Committee (9
March 2014), UN Doc CEDAW/C/ QAT/CO/1 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Fourteenth and Seventeenth Periodic Reports of
Luxembourg, CERD Committee (13 March 2014), CERD/C/LUX/CO/14-17
(2014)
Concluding Observations on the Sixtee nth to Nineteenth Periodic Reports of
Belgium, CERD Committee (14 Marc h 2014), UN Doc CERD/C/BEL/CO/
16-19 (2014) 
Concluding Observations on the Combined Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of
Kazakhstan, CERD Committee (14 Ma rch 2014), UN Doc CERD/C/KAZ/
CO/6-7 (2014) 
Concluding Observations on the Combined  Eighth and Ninth Periodic Reports of
Uzbekistan, CERD Committee (14 Ma rch 2014), UN Doc CERD/ C/UZB/
CO/8-9 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Twentieth and Twenty-First Periodic
Reports of Poland, CERD Committee (19 March 2014), UN Doc CERD/ C/
POL/CO/20-21 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Repo rt Submitted by the Netherlands under
Article 29, Paragraph 1, of the Conven tion, CED Convention (10 April 2014),
UN Doc CED/C/NLD/CO/1 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Thir d Periodic Report of Latvia, CCPR
Committee (11 April 2014), UN  Doc CCPR/C/LV A/CO/3 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Second  Periodic Report of Kyrgyzstan, CCPR
Committee (23 April 2014), UN  Doc CCPR/C/KGZ/CO/2 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Fourth Pe riodic Report of the United States of
America, CCPR Committee (23 April 2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/USA/CO/4(2014)340    Bibliography
Concluding Observations of the Committee on the second periodic report of Mali,
CMW (1 May 2014), UN Doc CMW/C/MLI/CO/2 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the second periodic report of the Philippines, CMW
(2 May 2014), UN Doc CMW/C/PHL/CO/2 (2014) 
Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Uzbekistan, CESCR
Committee (13 June 2014) UN), UN Doc E/C.12/UZB/CO/2 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Fourth  Report of Cyprus, CAT Committee (16
June 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/CYP/CO/4 (2014)
Concluding Observations on  the Initial Report of the Holy See, CAT Committee
(17 June 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/VAT/CO/1 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Third Periodic Report of Lithuania, CAT
Committee (17 June 2014) CAT/C/LTU/CO/3 (2014)
Concluding Observations Concerning th e Second and Third Periodic Reports of
Monaco, submitted as a single documen t, CESCR Committee (19 June 2014),
UN Doc E/C.12/MCO/CO/2-3 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Thailand , CAT Committee (20
June 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/THA/CO/1 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of the Czech Republic,
CESCR Committee (23 June 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/CZE/CO/2 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Reports of Lithuania, CESCR
Committee (24 June 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/LTU/CO/2 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combined  Second to Fourth Periodic Reports of
Saint Lucia, CRC Committee (8 Ju ly 2014), UN Doc CRC/C/LCA/CO/2-4
(2014)
Concluding Observations on the Seco nd Periodic Report of Serbia, CESCR
Committee (10 July 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/SRB/CO/2 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of Lithuania, CEDAW
Committee (24 July 2014), UN Doc CEDAW/C/LTU/CO/5 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Sixth Pe riodic Report of Chile, CCPR Committee
(13 August 2014), UN Do c CCPR/C/CHL/CO/6 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Japan, CCPR
Committee (20 August 2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/JPN/CO/6 (2014)
Concluding Observations on Belize in th e absence of a report, CMW (9 September
2014), UN Doc CMW/C/BLZ/CO/1 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Seventh to Ninth Periodic Reports of
the United States of America, CERD Committee (25 September 2014), UN Doc
CERD/C/USA/CO/7-9 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Nineteen th to Twenty-First Periodic Reports of
Cameroon, CERD Committee (26 Se ptember 2014), UN Doc CERD/C/
CMR/CO/19-21 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Seventh to Ninth Periodic Reports of
Japan, CERD Committee (26 September 2014), UN Doc CERD/C/JPN/CO/7-9 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the second periodic report of El Salvador, CMW
Committee (8 October 2014), UN Doc CMW/C/SLV/CO/2 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of the Republic of Korea, CRPD
Committee (29 October 2014), UN Doc CRPD/C/KOR/CO/1 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combined  Seventh and Eighth Periodic Report of
Poland, CEDAW Committee (14 November 2014), UN Doc CEDAW/C/POL/CO/7-8 (2014)   Bibliography     341
Concluding Observations on the Seco nd Periodic Report of Malta, CCPR
Committee (21 November 2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/MLT/CO/2 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Third to Fifth Periodic Reports of
Romania, CESCR Committee (9 Dece mber 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/ROU/
CO/3-5 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Thir d Periodic Report of Nepal, CESCR
Committee (12 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/NPL/CO/3 (2014) 
Concluding Observations on the Sixt h Periodic Report of Ukraine, CRC
Committee (12 December 2014) UN Doc CAT/C/UK R/CO/6 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the In itial Report of Montenegro, CESCR
Committee (15 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/MNE/CO/1 (2014) 
Concluding Observations on the Second  Periodic Report of Slovenia, CESCR
Committee (15 December 2014) UN), UN Doc E/C.12/SVN/CO/2 (2014) 
Concluding Observations on the Second to Fourth Periodic Report of Viet Nam,
CESCR Committee (15 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/VNM/CO/2-4(2014)
Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Finland, CESCR
Committee (17 December 2014), UN Doc E/C.12/FIN/CO/6 (2014) 
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Croatia, CAT Committee (18 December  2014), UN Doc CAT/C/HRV/CO/4-
5 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combined Third to Fifth Periodic Reports of the
United States of America, CAT Committee (19 December 2014), UN DocCAT/C/USA/CO/3-5 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Australia, CAT Committee (23 Dece mber 2014) UN Do c CAT/C/AUS/CO/
4-5 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Combin ed Fourth and Fifth Periodic Reports of
Australia, CAT Committee (23 Decemb er 2014), UN Doc CAT/C/AUS/CO/
4-5 (2014)
Concluding Observations on the Eighth  Periodic Report of Denmark, CEDAW
Committee (10 March 2015), UN Doc CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/8 (2015)
Concluding Observations on the combined  eighth and ninth periodic reports of
Ecuador, CEDAW (10 March 2015), UN Doc CEDAW/C/ECU/CO/8-9(2015)
Concluding Observations on the Combined  Second and Third Periodic Reports of
Tajikistan, CESCR Committee (25 Ma rch 2015), UN Doc E/C.12/TJK/CO/
2-3 (2015)
UN Documents and reports (chronological order)
Sub-Commission on Preventi on of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
28th Session, Exploitation of Labour  Through Illicit and Clandestine
Trafficking (Draft Recommendations submitted by Mrs Halima Embarek
Warzazi, Rapporteur), ECOSOC (9 Se ptember 1975), UN Doc E/CN.4.Sub.2/
L.636
Measures to Improve the Situation and Ensure the Human Rights and Dignity of
all Migrant Workers: Report of the Op en-Ended Working Group, ECOSOC (25
November 1980), UN Doc A/C.3/35/13 (1980)
Measures to Improve the Situation and Ensure the Human Rights and Dignity of
all Migrant Workers: Report of the Op en-Ended Working Group, ECOSOC (23
November 1981), UN Doc A/C.3/36/10 (1981)342    Bibliography
Report of the Open-Ended Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Ri ghts of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (15 October 1985), UN Doc A/C.3/40/6 (1985)
General Comment 15: The position of aliens under the Covenant, HRC (11 April
1986)
Report of the Open-Ended Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Ri ghts of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (10 October 1986), UN Doc A/C.3/41/3 (1986)
Report of the Open-Ended Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Ri ghts of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (22 June 1987), UN Doc A/C.3/42/1 (1987)
Report of the Open-Ended Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Ri ghts of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (19 June 1989), UN Doc A/C.3/44/1 (1989) 
Report of the Open-ended Working Group on the Drafting of an International
Convention on the Protection of the Ri ghts of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families, ECOSOC (21 June 1990), UN Doc A/C.3/45/1 (1990)
General Recommendation 11 on Non-Ci tizens, CERD Committee (Sixty-Second
Session, 1994), UN Doc A/48/18 at 112 (1994)
Reports of the Inter Governmental Wo rking Group of Experts on the Human
Rights of Migrants, UNCHR (10 March 1998), UN Doc E/CN.4/1998/76(1998) 
Report of the Working Group of Interg overnmental Experts on the Human Rights
of Migrants (9 March 1999) UN Doc E/CN.4/1999/80 (1999)
General Comment 14: The Right to the High est Attainable Standa rd of Health (Art
12 of the Covenant), ECOSOC (11 August 2000), E/C.12/2000/4 (2000)
Report to the Human Rights Commission in pursuance of resolution 2001/52:
Addendum Mission to Ecuador UN Specia l Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants Gabriela Rodri?guez Pizarro (18 February 2002), UN Doc E/CN.4/2002/94/Add.1 (2002)
General Comment 3: HIV/AIDS and the Rights of the Child, CRC (17 March
2003), UN Doc CRC/GC/2003/3 (2003)
General Comment 5: General Measures of  Implementation of  the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, CRC (3 October 2003), CRC/GC/2003/5 (2003)
General Recommendation on Discrimina tion against Non Citizens, CERD (1
October 2002)
General Recommendation 30, Discrimi nation against Non-citizens, CERD
Committee (Sixty-Fourth Session, 20 04), UN Doc CERDC/64/Misc.11/rev.3
(2004)
General Comment 31: The Nature of the General Legal Obligation on States
Parties to the Covenant, CCPR Commit tee (29 March 2004), UN Doc CCPR/
C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004)
Provisional Rules of Procedure, CMW (7 May 2004), HRI/GEN/3/Rev.1/add.1
(2004) 
Specific Groups and Individuals, Mi grant Workers, Report of the Special
Rapporteur, Ms. Gabriela Rodri?guez  Pizarro, UNCHR (27 December 2004),
UN Doc E/CN.4/2005/85 (2004)
Report of the Global Commission on In ternational Migration ‘Migration in an
Interconnected World: New Direct ions for Action’ (Geneva, 2005)
General Comment 16: The Equal Right of  Men and Women to the Enjoyment of
All Economic, Social and Cultural Ri ghts, CESCR Committee (13 May 2005),
UN Doc E/C.12/2005/3 (2005)  Bibliography     343
 Committee on Migrant Wor kers Second Session Summary Record of the 15th
Meeting (7 July 2005), UN Doc CMW/C/SR.15 (2005)
General Comment 6: Treatment of Un accompanied and Separated Children
Outside Their Country of Origin CRC Co mmittee (1 September 2005), UN Doc
CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005)
General Comment 18: The Right to Work,  CESCR Committee (6 February 2006),
UN Doc E/C.12/GC/18 (2006) 
Concept Paper on the High Commission er’s Proposal for a Unified Standing
Treaty Body, Report by the Secret ariat, International Human Rights
Instruments (22 March 2006), UN Doc HRI/MC/2006/2 (2006)
International Migration and Development, GA (18 May 2006), UN Doc A/60/
871 (2006)
General Comment 7: Implementing Chil d Rights in Early Childhood, CRC (20
September 2006), UN Doc CRC/C/GC/7/Rev.1 (2006)
Global Forum on Migration and Development, First Meeting, Brussels, July 9-11,
2007: Summary Report
Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, HRC (10 January 2008),
UN Doc A/HRC/7/4 (2008)
General Comment 19: The Right to So cial Security, CESCR Committee (4
February 2008), UN Doc E/C.12/GC/19 (2008)
Consideration of reports submitted by St ates parties under article 73 of the
Convention: Initial reports of states pa rties due in 2004 - Sri Lanka, CMW (23
April 2008), UN Doc CMW/C/LKA/1 (2008)
Report of the Human Rights  Council on its Eighth Session, Vice-President and
Rapporteur: Mr. Alejandro Artucio, HRC Council (1 September 2008), UNDoc A/HRC/8/52 (2008) 
General Recommendation 26 on Women  Migrant Workers, CEDAW Committee
(5 December 2008), UN Doc CEDAW/C/2009/WP.1/R (2008)
General Comment 20: Non-Discrimination  in Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, CESCR Committee (2 July 2009), UN Doc E/C.12/GC/20 (2009) 
List of issues to be taken up in connect ion with the consideration of the initial
report of Sri Lanka, CMW (20 August 2009), UN Doc CMW/C/LKA/Q/1(2009)
Written replies by the Government of Sr i Lanka to the list of issues (CMW/C/
LKA/Q/1) to be taken up in connection with the consideration of the initial
report of Sri Lanka, CMW (20 Au gust 2009), UN Doc CMW/C/LKA/Q/1/
Add.1 (2009) 
Global Forum on Migration and Develo pment, Third Meeting, Athens 2-5
November 2009: Integrating Migration Poli cies into Development Strategies for
the Benefit of All: Report of the Proceedings
General Comment 21: The Right of Everyo ne to Take Part in Cultural Life,
CESCR Committee (21 December 2009), UN Doc E/C.12/GC/21 (2009)
Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, HRC (18 January 2010),
UN Doc A/HRC/13/30 (2010)
Report of the Special Rapporteur on tra fficking in persons, especially women and
children, Joy Ngozi Ezeilo, GA (9 August 2010), UN Doc A/65/288 (2010) 
Fourth Meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD):
Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, 8-11 November  2010: Partnerships for Migration and
Human Development: Shared Prosperity – Shared Responsibility Report of the
Proceedings344    Bibliography
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Andorra:
Addendum, Secretariat of the Human Ri ghts Council (Sixteenth Session, 2011)
UN Doc A/HRC/16/8/Add.1 (2011) 
Report of the Working Group on the Univ ersal Periodic Review: United States of
America, HRC (4 January 2011), UN Doc A/HRC/16/11 (2011)
General Comment 1 on migrant domestic workers, CMW (23 February 2011), UN
Doc CMW/C/GC/1 (2011)
Report of the Working Group on the Univ ersal Periodic Review United States of
America Addendum Views on conc lusions and/or recommendations,
voluntary commitments and replies pres ented by the State under review, HRC
(8 March 2011), UN Doc A/HRC/16/11/Add.1 (2011) 
Guiding principles on business and human rights: Implementing the United
Nations ‘protect, respect and remedy’ framework, HRC (21 March 2011), UN
Doc A/HRC/17/31 (2011)
Committee on Migrant Workers ‘Day of General Discussion on the rights of
migrant workers in an irregular situation and members of their families’ (19September 2011)
Consideration of Reports Submitted by St ates Parties under article 74 of the
Convention, CMW Commit tee (19 October 2011), UN Doc CMW/C/CHL/
CO/1 (2011)
Fifth Meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD):
GFMD 2011 Concluding Debate, Geneva, Switzerland: 1-2 December 2011:Taking Action on Migration and Development – Coherence, Capacity andCooperation: Report of the Proceedings
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, François
Crépeau Detention of migrants in an i rregular situation United Nations, HRC
(2 April 2012), UN Doc A/HRC/20/24 (2012)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Guidelines on International
Protection No 9: Claims to Refugee Status based on Sexual Orientation and/orGender Identity within the context of  Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention
and/or its 1967 Protocol relating to  the Status of Refugees, UNHCR (23
October 2012), UN Doc HCR/GIP/12/09 (2012)
Geneva Academy of International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights, ‘The
Independence of UN Human Rights Treaty Body Members’ (December 2012)
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention Deliberation No 9 concerning the
definition and scope of arbitrary de privation of liberty under customary
international law, HRC (24 December 2012), UN Doc A/HRC/22/44 (2012)
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, François
Crépeau Regional Study: management of  the external borders of the European
Union and its impact on th e human rights of migrants United Nations, HRC (24
April 2013), A/HRC/23/46 (2013)
List of issues prior to the submission of  the second periodic report of Sri Lanka’
CMW (29 July 2013), UN Doc CMW/C/LKA/QPR/2 (2013)
Report by the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, François
Crépeau: Global migration governance, GA (5 August 2013), UN doc A/68/283 (2013)
General Comment 2 on the rights of migran t workers in an irregular situation and
members of their families, CMW (28 August 2013), UN Doc CMW/C/CG/2(2013)
Report of the Working Group on the Un iversal Periodic Review Saudi Arabia,
HRC (26 December 2013), UN Doc A/HRC/25/3 (2013)  Bibliography     345
Report of the Swedish Chairmanship of  the Global Forum on Migration and
Development 2013-2014:  Unlocking the Potential of Migration for Inclusive
Development
United States Department of State (2014)  Trafficking in Person s Report 2014: Ecuador
Washington, D.C
United States Department of Homeland Se curity, Office of Immigration Statistics
(2014) 2013 Yearbook of Immigration Statistics  Washington, DC
OHCHR ‘The Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of Migrants in an Irregular
Status’ (2014)
Report of the Special Rapporteur on tra fficking in persons, especially women and
children, Joy Ngozi Ezeilo, Addendum, Mi ssion to Italy, HRC Council (1 April
2014), UN Doc A/HRC/26/37/Add. 4 (2014) 
Consideration of Reports Submitted by St ates Parties under Article 29, Paragraph
1, of the Convention, CED Convention (17 April 2014), UN Doc CED/C/MEX/1 (2014)
General Assembly Official Records Sixt y-ninth session Supplement No 48 (A/69/
48) ‘Annex III - Joint statement to mark International Migrants Day, 18December 2013, issued by François Crépeau, Special Rapporteur on the humanrights of migrants; Abdelhamid El Jamri, Chair of the Committee; and FelipeGonzález, Rapporteur on the Rights of Migrants of the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights’ in Report  of the Committee on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
Nineteenth session (9–13 September 2013) Twentieth session(31–11 April 2014)(2014)
Report of the Secretary General, Prom otion and Protection of Human Rights,
Including Ways and Means to Promote the Human Rights of Migrants, GA (7
August 2014), UN Doc A/69/277 (2014)
General Comment 35 Article 9 (Liberty and security of person), HRC (16
December 2014), UN Doc CCPR/C/GC/35 (2014)
United Nations High Commissioner on  Refugees ‘Global Trends Report’  Geneva,
Switzerland, 2015
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2015)  UNHCR Subregional
Operations Profile – Ecuador  
UN DESA ‘Population facts: Trends in international migrat ion 2015’ (Factsheet
No. 2015/4 of the Population Division of the DESA of the UN Secretariat)
Annual Report of the United Nations Hi gh Commissioner fo r Human Rights and
Reports of the Office of the High Co mmissioner and the Secretary-General
Human Rights Bodies an d Mechanisms, HRC Council (29 January 2015), UN
Doc A/HRC/28/41 (2015)
Crépeau, F ‘Report of the Special Rappor teur on the human rights of migrants:
Addendum - Mission to Sri Lanka’ (2  April 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/29/36/
Add.1 Human Rights Council, Twenty-ninth session (2015) 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants: François
Crépeau: Follow-up mission to Italy (2-6 December 2014), HRC Council (1
May 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/29/36/Add.2 (2015) 
Report of the Special Rappor teur on the hu man rights of  migrants, François
Crépeau, HRC Council (8 May 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/29/36 (2015) paras 58and 118 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, François
Crépeau: Addendum: Mission to Malta (6–10 December 2014), HRC Council(12 May 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/29/36/Add. 3 (2015) 346    Bibliography
Report of the Working Group on the Univ ersal Periodic Review United States of
America, HRC (20 July 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/30/12 (2015)
Report of the Working Group on the Univ ersal Periodic Review: United States of
America: Addendum: Views on conc lusions and/or recommendations,
voluntary commitments and replies pres ented by the State under review, HRC
(14 September 2015), UN Doc A/HRC/30/12/Add.1 (2015) 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on th e human rights of migrants, GA (20 July
2016), UN Doc A/71/40767 (2016) 
Draft Resolution submitted by the Pres ident of the General Assembly: Draft
Outcome Document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the GeneralAssembly on Addressing Large Movement s of Refugees and Migrants, GA (30
August 2016), UN Doc A/70/L.61 (2016)
Draft resolution referred to  the high-level plenary meeting on addressing large
movements of refugees and migrants, GA (13 September 2016), UN Doc A/71/L.1 (2016)
Newspaper/magazine articl es (chronological order)
‘Obama Pledge on Treaties a Complex Undertaking’ San Francisco Chronicle  1
December 2008
‘Denuncian fraude contra inmigrantes’ El norte 12 April 2011
‘Detectan a migrantes por su olor a hierbita’  Reforma  26 November 2013
‘UK human rights researchers held in Qatar freed’ The Guardian  9 September 2014
‘Migrant workers’ voting rights’  Sri Lanka Daily Mirror 6 January 2015
‘Mexico’s migration crackdown escala tes dangers for Central Americans’ The
Guardian  13 October 2015
‘Reforms soon to Foreign Employment  Act to meet present day needs’ Ceylon Daily
News 12 November 2015
‘The March of Euro pe’s Little Trumps’ The Economist 12 December 2015
‘In exile’ New York Times Magazine  13 January 2016
‘Human rights in Thailand: Andy Hall’s legal battle to defend migrant workers’ The
Guardian  22 January 2016 
‘Florida bills would give state power to block refugees’ Naples Daily News  22
January 2016
‘High court finds offshore detention lawful’ The Sydney Morning Herald  3 February
2016
‘NYU professor is barred by  United Arab Emirates’ New York Times  16 March 2016
Doherty, B ‘Asylum seekers deported from Cocos Islands arrested by Sri Lankan
police’ The Guardian  7 May 2016 
Internet sources
Accession by the European Union to the European Conv ention on Human Rights:
Answers to Frequently Asked Question s 30 April 2013 http://www.coe.int/t/
dghl/standardsetting/hrpolicy/acce ssion/Accession_documents/EU_acces
sion-QA_updated_2013_E.pdf.
Ahmed, A & Malkin, E ‘Otto Pérez Molina  of Guatemala Is Jailed Hours After
Resigning Presidency’ New York Times 3 September 2015 http://www.
nytimes.com/2015/09/04/world/americas/otto-perez-molina-guatemalan-president-resigns-amid-scandal.html? _r=0 (accessed 6 November 2015)
Alba, F & Castillo, MA (2012) New Approaches to Migration Management in Mexico
and Central America  Washington DC: Migration Policy Institute http://  Bibliography     347
www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/RMSG- MexCentAm-Migration.pdf (accessed
22 February 2016)
Álvarez Velasco, S (2015) Confronting Violence and Bord er Control along the Ecuador-
Mexico-US Zone of Transit  Blog Available at: https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/
research-subject-groups/ce ntre-criminology/centrebor der-criminol ogies/blog/
2015/10/confronting
American Immigration Lawyers Association ‘AILA: the time is now to move away
from the negative rhetoric and commit to real immigration reform’ 9 November
2016 http://www.aila.org/a dvo-media/press-releases /2016/aila-move-away-
from-the-negative-rhetoric
 American Immigration Lawyers Associatio n ‘Featured issue: earned legalization’
2 April 2014 http://www.aila.org/adv o-media/issues/immigration-reform/
earned-legalization 
Amnesty International (2015) Mexico must investigate shocking spike of attacks and
killings of migrants https://www.amnesty.org/en/l atest/news/2 015/06/mexico
-must-investigate-shocking -spike-of-attacks-and-kill ings-of-migrants/ (accessed
22 February 2016)
Amnistía Intern acional (2011) Informe sobre víctimas invisibles: migrantes en
movimiento en México  http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/ _layouts/treatybodyexternal/
Download.aspx?symbolno=INT%2 fCMW%2fNGO%2fMEX%2f14%2f9620
&Lang=en (accessed 22 February 2016)
Animal Político  28 April 2015 ‘Programa Frontera Sur: Una cacería de migrantes’
http://www.animalpolitico.com/caceria demigrantes/index. html (accessed 22
February 2016)
Animal Político  19 June 2015 ‘México recibe 67% más solicitudes de refugio, pero
sólo tiene 15 oficiales para atender 2 mil casos’ http://www.animal politico.
com/2015/06/mexico-recibe-67-mas-de-sol icitudes-de-refugio-pero-solo-tiene-
15-oficiales-de-comar-para-atender-2-mil-casos/ (accessed 22 February 2016)
Australian Government Depa rtment of Immigration and Border Protection ‘About
immigration detention’ http://www .immi.gov.au/About/ Pages/detention/
about-immigration-detention.as px (accessed 25 June 2015)
Belén, Posada del Migrante (2010) Informe testimonios de migrantes víctimas de
secuestro  http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_lay outs/treatybodyex ternal/Download.
aspx?symbolno=INT%2fCMW%2fNGO%2fMEX%2f14%2f9618&Lang=en(accessed 22 February 2016)
Belén, Posada del Migrante et al (2011) Informe sobre secuestros a personas migrantes
en tránsito por México  http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CMW/Shared%20
Documents/MEX/INT_CMW_NGO_MEX_14_9619_E.pdf (accessed 22February 2016)
Bustamante, J Special Rappor teur on the human rights of migrants ‘Mission to
Guatemala’ (18 March 2009) http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Migration/SRMigrants/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx (accessed 30 October 2015)
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ‘M igrant Workers: who they are, where
they’re coming from’ CBC News 7 February 2012 ht tp://www.cbc.ca/news/
canada/migrant-workers-who-they-are-where-they-re-coming-from-1.1137930(accessed June 2015)
Caron, C ‘Global Workers Require Global  Justice: The Portability of Justice
Challenge for Migrants in the USA’ 30 October 2005 http://
www.globalworkers.org/sites/default/ files/GWJA_Portability.pdf (accessed
13 October 2015)
C e n t r o  d e  E s t u d i o s  M i g r a t o r i o s  d e  l a  S e c r e t a r í a  d e  G o b e r n a c i ó n  Extranjeros
presentados y devueltos  (2013; 2014 & 2015) http ://www.politicamigratoria.348    Bibliography
gob.mx/es_mx/SEGOB/Extranjeros_pre sentados_y_devueltos (accessed 22
February 2016)
Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de  Demografía – Investigación de la
Migración Internacional en América Latina y el Caribe ‘Población censalnacida en América Latina y el Caribe por país de residencia, según país denacimiento’ 1990 http:/ /www.cepal.org/celade/pub lica/bol65/planilla.xls
(accessed 30 October 2015)
Cervantes González, JA ‘El Perfil de la  población de origen guatemalteco en
Estados Unidos’ June 2014 4 http:// www.cemla-remesas.or g/principios/pdf/
PrincipiosRemesas-Guatemala-2014.pdf (accessed 30 October 2015)
Christi, M & Hipsman, F ‘Unaccompanied minors crisis has receded from
headlines but major is sues remain’ (2014) Migration Information Source  http://
www.migrationpolicy.org/article/unacco mpanied-minors-crisis-has-receded-
headlines-major-issues-remain (accessed 22 February 2016)
Clancy, ‘EU rejects single permit draft as  potentially violatin g fundamental rights’
(22 December 2010), Expatforum.com http://www.ex patforum.com/articles/eu-
rejects-single-permit-draft-as-potentially-violating-fundamental-rights.html . 
CMW ‘Second periodic reports of states pa rties due in 2011: Sri Lanka’ CMW (31
May 2016), UN Doc CMW/C/LKA/2 (2016) http://daccess-ods.un.org/access.nsf/Get?Open&DS=CMW/C/LKA/2&Lang=E 
Colectivo Plan Nacional de Desarrollo-Migración (2013) PND 2013-2018 y
lineamientos de la Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público Mexico City: IMUMI
http://www.imumi.or g/pnd/recursos/
propuestas_colectivo_pnd_migracion .pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Comité de Derechos Humanos de Tabasco et al (2011) Informe para el Comité de
Protección de los Derechos de Todos los Tr abajadores Migratorio s y de sus Familiares
sobre diversas cuestiones rela tivas a los derechos humanos personas migrantes en tránsito
por México  http://tbinternet.ohchr.or g/Treaties/CMW/Shared%20Docu
ments/MEX/INT_CMW_NGO_MEX_14_9616_S.pdf (accessed 22 February2016)
Consejo Nacional de Población ‘Poblaci ón inmigrante en México, 1990 – 2010’
Series sobre Migración en México  (2012) www.conapo.gob .mx/index.php?option=
com_content&view=article&id=322&Itemid=251 (accessed 22 February 2016)
Constanza,C; Pagaza, A; & Bonnici, G ‘Q uo Vadis? Reclutamiento y Contratación
de Trabajadores Migrantes y Su Acceso a La Seguridad Social’ 102 Instituto deEstudios y Divulgación Sobre Migrac ión, A.C. February 2013 http://www.
inedim.org/documentosypu b/publicaciones/reclutamientoconportada.pdf
(accessed July 2015) 
Contreras, G & Escobar, I ‘Renun cia el presidente Otto Pérez’ Prensa Libre 3
September 2015 http://www.prensalibre.com/guatemala/politica/renuncia-el-presidente-otto-perez (accessed 6 November 2015)
Colegio de la Frontera Norte ‘Encuestras sobre migración en las fronteras norte y
sur de México (EMIF-Sur)’ http://www.colef.mx/emif/ 
Comisión Mexicana de Ayuda a Refugiados - Mexican Refugee Commission
(COMAR) ‘Estadisticas 2013 - 2017’  14 http://www.comar.gob.mx/work/
models/COMAR/Resource/267/6/im ages/ESTADISTICAS_2013_A_1er_
semestre_2017.pdf 
Comisión Nacional de los De rechos Humanos (CNDH) (2006) Recomendación
General número 13/2006 sobre la práctica  de verificaciones migratorias ilegales  Mexico:
CNDH http://www.cndh.org.mx/site s/all/fuentes/documentos/Recomen
daciones/Generales/REC_Gral_013.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Committee on Migrant Workers List of issu es to be taken up in connection with
the consideration of the initial report of Mexico (CMW/C/MEX/1) UN Doc  Bibliography     349
CMW/C/MEX/Q/1, 2006  http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybody
external/Download.aspx?symboln o=CMW%2fC%2fMEX%2fQ%2f1&Lang
=en (accessed 22 February 2016)
Committee on Migrant Workers Concluding observations of th e Committee on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migran t Workers and Member s of Their Families
to Mexico UN Doc (CMW/C/MEX/CO/1),  2006 http://tbinternet.
ohchr.org/_layouts/tre atybodyexternal/Downloa d.aspx?symbolno=CMW%2
fC%2fMEX%2fCO%2f1&Lang=en (accessed 22 February 2016)
Committee on Migrant Workers List of issu es to be taken up in connection with
the consideration of the second period ic report of Mexico (CMW/C/MEX/2)
UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/Q/2, 2010 http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.as px?symbolno=CMW%2fC%2fMEX%2fQ%
2f2&Lang=en (accessed 22 February 2016)
Committee on Migrant Workers Concluding observations of th e Committee on the
Protection of the Rights of All Mi grant Workers and Memebers of Their
Families to Mexico UN Doc CMW/ C/MEX/CO/2, 2011 http://tbinternet.
ohchr.org/_layouts/tre atybodyexternal/Downloa d.aspx?symbolno=CMW%
2fC%2fMEX%2fCO%2f2&Lang=en (accessed 22 February 2016)
CONAMIGUA ‘Folleto de Información Instituciona l’ (2013) http://www.
conamigua.gob.gt/download/FOLLETO%20DISTRIBUIDO%20EN%20FERIA%20CHAPINA%202013.pdf (accessed 30 October 2015)
Congreso de la República de Guatemala ‘Diputado Jean Paul Briere Propone Ley
De Apoyo A Extranjeros En Guatemala’  9 June 2014 ht tp://www.congreso.
gob.gt/noticias.php?id=5617 (accessed 9 November 2015)
Consejo Nacional para Prevenir la Discriminación (CONAPRED) (2012) Proteger
los derechos humanos de las personas migran tes: reto múltiple del Estado mexicano,
Mexico: CONAPRED http://www.cona pred.org.mx/docu mentos_cedoc/
Dossier_Migr_2012_INACC.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Contradicción de Tesis 293/2011 SCJN de termina que las normas sobre derechos
humanos contenidas en Tratados Internac ionales tienen rango constitucional de
la Suprema Corte de Justic ia de la Nación de 2013  http://www2.scjn.gob.mx/
asuntosrelevantes/pagina/seguimientoasuntosrelevantespub.aspx?id=129659&seguimientoid=556 (accessed 22 February 2016)
D’Auchamp, M ‘Rights of Migrant Workers  in Europe’ The Regional Office for
Europe of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights 25 May 2011. https:/
/ec.europa.eu/migrant-integration/li brarydoc/migrant-workers-rights-in-
europe (accessed 12 November 2015)
Democrats ‘Immigration Reform’ https://www.democrats.org/issues/
immigration
Dissanayake, C ‘Ministry to abolish FBR from female migrant workers’ The Ceylon
Daily News  25 December 2015. http://www.dailynews.lk/?q=2015%2F12%
2F25%2Flocal%2Fministry-abolish -fbr-female-migrant-workers 
Dominguez Villegas, R & Rietig, V (2015) Migrants Deported from the United States
and México to the Northern Triangle. A Statistical and Socioeconomic Profile
Washington DC: Migration Policy Inst itute http://www.mig rationpolicy.org/
research/migrants- deported-united-states-and -México-northe rn-triangle-
statistical-and-socioeconomic (accessed 20 September 2015) 
Employment and Social Development Ca nada ‘Labour Market  Opinions: Annual
Statistics. Top countries of citizenship according to the number of temporary
foreign worker positions on positive Labour Market Opinions, by province/
territory’ http://www.esdc.gc.ca/eng/j obs/foreign_workers/lmo_statistics/
annual-top-country.shtml#tab1 (accessed June 2015)350    Bibliography
EU Neighbourhood Info Centre ‘The European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP)’
http://www.enpi-info.eu/main.php?id =344&id_type=2 (a ccessed 25 June
2015)
Federation for American Immigration Refo rm ‘Immigration priorities for the 2017
presidential transition: a special repo rt from the Federation for American
Immigration Reform’ h ttp://www.fairus.org/Doc Server/research-pub/
FAIR_2017PresidentialTransitionDocument.pdf 
Foro Migraciones (2005) Informe alternativo. Aplicación de la Convención Internacional
sobre la protección de los Derechos de Todos los Trabajadores  Migratorios y sus
Familiares www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/c mw/docs/fmigraciones_sp.pdf
(accessed 22 February 2016)
Georgetown Law Human Rights Institute Fact-Finding Project (2015) The Cost of
Stemming the Tide: How Immigration Enforcem ent Practices in Sout hern Mexico Limit
Migrant Children’s Access to  International Protection Washington DC: Georgetown
University Law Center http://www.la w.georgetown.edu/academics/centers-
institutes/human-rights-institute/fact -finding/upload/HRI-Fact-Finding-Rep
ort-Stemming-the-Tide-Web-PDF_Englis h.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Global Detention Project http://www.g lobaldetentionproject.org/de/home.html
(accessed 26 June 2015) 
Global Workers Justice Alliance et al (2010) Informe para el Comi té de Protección de
los Derechos de Todos los Trabajadores Migratorios y de sus Familiares de las NacionesUnidas http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CMW/Shared%20Documents/
MEX/INT_CMW_NGO_MEX_14_9614_E.pdf  (accessed 22 February 2016)
Government of Canada ‘1 .5. Temporary Foreign Wor ker Program work permit
holders with a valid permit on December 31st by top 50 countries of citizenship,Footnote 6 2004 to 2013’ http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/statistics/facts2013/temporary/1-5.asp (accessed June 2015)
Government of Canada ‘Hiring Agricu ltural Workers’ http://www.esdc.gc.ca/
eng/jobs/foreign_workers/agriculture/i ndex.shtml (accessed 9 October 2015)
Government of México Initial Report of Mexico UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/1,
2005 http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_lay outs/treatybodyexternal/Download.as
px?symbolno=CMW%2fC%2fMEX%2f1&Lang=en (accessed 22 February2016) 
Government of México Written replies by  the Government of Mexico to the List
of Issues (CMW/C/MEX/Q/1) raised by the Committee on the Protection ofthe Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their  Families in
connection with the consideration of the Initial Report of Mexico (CMW/C/
MEX/1) UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/Q/1/Add.1, 2006 http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexter nal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CMW%2
fC%2fMEX%2fQ%2f1%2fAdd.1&Lang=e n (accessed 22 February 2016)
Government of México Information su pplied by the Government of Mexico
concerning the implementation of the Concluidng Observations of theCommittee on the protec tion of the Rights of All Migr ant Workers and Members of Their
Families  UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/CO/1/Add.1, 2008 http://tbinternet.ohchr.
org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/D ownload.aspx?sym bolno=CMW%2fC%2f
MEX%2fCO%2f1%2fAdd.1&Lang=en (accessed 22 February 2016)
Government of Mexico Second period ic report Mexico UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/
2, 2010 http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CMW%2fC%2fMEX%2f2&Lang=en (accessed 22 February2016)
Gobierno de México Respuestas presentadas por escrito por el gobierno de la
República de México a la lista de cu estiones (CMW/C/MEX/Q/2)) recibidas
por el Comité para la protección de los derechos de todos los trabajadores
migratorios y de sus familiares en rela ción con el examen del segundo informe  Bibliography     351
periódico de México (CMW/C/M EX/2) UN Doc CMW/C/MEX/Q/2/
Add.1, 2011 http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CMW%2fC%2 fMEX%2fQ%2f2%2fADD.1&Lang=en
(accessed 22 February 2016)
Grupo de Trabajo sobre Política Migratoria (2011) Aportes al debate sobre la Ley de
Migración: Posicionamiento del Grupo de Trabajo Mexico City: INEDIM  http://
www.estudiosdemigracion.org/ (accessed 22 February 2016)
Grupo de Trabajo sobre Política Migratoria (2014) Promover el desarrollo de un marco
normativo y de política migratoria con perspectiva de Derechos Humanos  Mexico City:
INEDIM  http://www.estudiosdemigracio n.org/inedim2013/documentosy
pub/otros/gtpm/presentacion/p_GTPM_reformas_ley_migracion(feb14).pdf(accessed 22 February 2016)
Grupo de Trabajo sobre Política Migratoria (2015) Comunicado de prensa: Programa
Temporal de Regularización Migratoria  (PTRM), poco accesible para personas
migrantes irregulares Mexico City: REDTDT http://redtdt.org.mx/2015/01/
programa-temporal-de-reg ularizacion-migratoria-ptrm-poco-accesible-para-
personas-migrantes-i rregulares/ (a ccessed 5 February 2015)
Index Mundi ‘Country Co mparison – GDP – Per Capita (PPP)’ http://
www.indexmundi.com /g/r.aspx?v=67 
Instituto Estatal de las Mujeres de Chiapas (2008) Estudio diagnóstico de la situación
de violencia y vulnerabilidad de las mujere s migrantes en Chiapas. Reporte final del
Estudio Tapachula: Instituto Estatal de las Mujeres de Chiapas http://
cedoc.inmujeres.gob.mx/lgamvlv/chiapas/Chis01.pdf (accessed 22 February2016)
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geog rafía (INEGI) ‘Población nacida en otro
país residente en México, 2000 y 2010’ Censos de población y vivienda (2010)  http:/
/www.inegi.gob.mx/prod_s erv/contenidos/espanol/bvinegi/productos/
censos/poblacion/2010/princi_resul t/cpv2010_principales_resultadosIV
(accessed 22 February 2016)
Instituto para la Seguridad y la Democracia (Insyde) (2013) Diagnóstico del Instituto
Nacional de Migración. Hacia un sistema de rendición de cuentas en pro de los derechos
de las personas migrantes en México Mexico City: Insyde http://insyde.org.mx/
wp-content/uploads/2013/09/R_E_D iagn%C3%B3stico_INM_final.pdf
(accessed 22 February 2016)
International Catholic Migr ation Commission (2011) Input for the review of the
periodic report by Mexico to th e UN Committee on Migrant Workers  http://
tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treat ybodyexternal/Downl oad.aspx?symbolno
=INT%2fCMW%2fNGO%2fMEX%2f14%2f9615&Lang=en (accessed 22February 2016)
ILO ‘Migration for Employment Convention  (Revised), 1949 (No. 97)’ http://
www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:11300:0::NO:11300:P11300_INSTRUMENT_ID:312242
ILO ‘Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143)’
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:11300:0::NO:11300:P11300_INSTRUMENT_ID:312288
ILO The ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour  Migration: Non-binding principles and
guidelines for a rights-based approach to labour migration  (ILO: Geneva 2006). http:/
/www.ilo.org/public/engli sh/protection/migrant/download/multilat_fwk
_en.pdf 
‘Informe alternativo de Guatemala so bre la aplicación de la Convención
Internacional sobre la Protección de los Derechos de t odos los Trabajadores
Migratorios y de sus Familiares’ Oc tober 2010 http://www2.ohchr.org/
english/bodies/cmw/ docs/ngos/MENAMIG_Guatemala_CMW14.pdf
(accessed 23 September 2015) 352    Bibliography
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ‘IACHR Expresses Deep Concern
on the Situation of Children Migrants Arriving to the United States’ 20 June2014 http://www.oas.org /en/iachr/media_center/PReleases/2014/067.asp
(accessed 30 October 2015)
Inter-American Commis sion on Human Rights , ‘Informe Anual de la Comisión
Interamericana de Derechos Humanos 2002, Capítulo VI: Estudios  Especiales; Cuarto
Informe de Progreso de la Relatoría sobre Trabajadores Migratorios y Miembros de sus
Familias en el  Hemisferio’ 7 March 2003
The International and Ibero-American Foundation for Administration and Public
Policies (FIIAPP) ‘NEWS: 03/11/2014: Orderly and Safe Labour Migration inGuatemala’ http://www.fiiapp.org/en/ noticias/migracion-laboral-ordenada-
y-segura-en-guatemala/ (accessed July 2015).
International Center for Migrant Huma n Rights (CIDEHUM) and the Agency of
the United Nations for Refugees  (UNHCR/ACNUR), ‘Desplazamiento
forzado y necesidades de protección, ge nerado por nuevas formas de violencia
y criminalidad en Centroamérica’  May 2012 http://www.acnur.org/t3/
fileadmin/Documentos/BDL/2012/8932.pdf?view=1 (accessed September2015)
International Organization for Migrat ion –IOM ‘Perfil Migratorio 2012,
Guatemala’ http://costa rica.iom.int/public/pdf/Perfil_Migratorio_Guate
mala_2012.pdf (accessed 4 May 2016)
IOM ‘IOM Becomes a Related Organizatio n to the UN’ 25 July 2016 http://
www.iom.int/news/iom-becomes -related-organization-un
Jayasundere, Ramani, Abeyasekera, Asha  L., & Idemegama, Kumari ‘Sri Lankan
migrant domestic workers: The impact of Sri Lankan policies on workers' rightto freely access employment: A Study for the United Nations Country Team inSri Lanka’ (2015). http:/ /un.lk/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Study-on-Sri-
Lankan-Migrant-Domesti c-Workers-Final.pdf
Jolly, S & Reeves, H (2005) Gender and migration. Overview report United Kingdom:
Institute for Development Studies Bridge  Cutting Edge Pack Series http://
www.bridge.ids.ac.uk/report s/cep-mig-or.pdf (access ed 22 February 2016)
Jonas, S ‘Guatemalan Migration in Times of Civil War and Post-War Challenges’
Migration Policy Institut e March 27, 2013 http:/ /www.migrationpolicy.org/
article/guatemalan-migration-times-civil-war-and-post-war-challenges(accessed 30 October 2015)
Justice in Motion ‘Confiscación de título s de propiedad en Guatemala por parte de
reclutadores en programas de trabajad ores temporales con visas H-2B’ 2013
http://justiceinmotion.o rg/s/Confiscacion-de-Tit ulos_Informe_Final.pdf
(accessed June 2017)
Justice in Motion ‘Confiscación de título s de propieded en Guatemala por parte de
reclutadores en programas de trabajador es temporales con visas H-2B. Resumen
Ejecutivo’ (July 2013) 7 http://jus ticeinmotion.org/s /ResumenEjecutivo
_ConfiscaciondeTitulos.pdf  (accessed June 2017) 
Justice in Motion ‘The De fender Network’ http://jus ticeinmotion.org/the-work/
(accessed June 2017)
Justice in Motion ‘Reglas de Reclut amiento: Paises de  Origen. Análisis
Comparativo de Leyes de Reclutamiento Para Trabajadores en El Exterior enMéxico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, y Guatemala’ (2015) 11-13 http://justiceinmotion.org/s/RR-COO-28SP29 _FINAL.pdf (acces sed June 2017)
Justice in Motion training to Guatemala  government  agencies, ‘US temporary
work visas system: process, legal framework; and international recruitment’(2015) http://www.glob alworkers.org/guatemal a-guatemala-june-3-2015
(accessed June 2017)  Bibliography     353
Kathleen Newland ‘Migration ’s Unrealised Potential: The Report of the Global
Commission on International Migrat ion’ 1 November 2005 http://www.
migrationpolicy.org/article/migrations -unrealized-potential-report-global-
commission-international-migration
Library of Congress ‘Points-Based Immigration Systems: Canada’ http://
www.loc.gov/law/help/points-based-im migration/canada.php (accessed June
2015)
List of OECD Member Countries – Ratifi cation of the Convention on the OECD
http://www.oecd.org/about/membersandpartners/list-oecd-member-countries.htm 
Litigio Estratégico en Derechos  Humanos [i(dh)eas] (2013) Víctimas entre fronteras.
La ausencia del Estado en la defensa de los derechos de las personas migrantes en México
Mexico City: i(dh)eas http://observatoriocolef.org/_admin/documentos/
migraciones.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Marquez, P ‘Upholding the Rights of Migrant Workers’ Catholic Bishops Conference of
the Phillipines (CBCP) News  http://www.cbcpnews.com/cbcpnews/?p=22269
(accessed 28 September 2015) 
Mazza, J & Sohnen, E ‘On the other side of the fence: changing dynamics of
migration in the Americas’ (2010) Migration Information Source  Migration Policy
Institute 27 May http://www.migratio ninformation.org/f eature/display.
cfm?ID=784 (accessed 22 February 2016)
Mendis, DL ‘An Analysis of the Singarasa Case’ The Island  27 October 2006 http:/
/www.island.lk/2006/10/27/features1.html 
MFEPW National Labour Migration Policy for Sri Lanka  (Ministry of Foreign
Employment Promotion and Welfare:  Colombo 2008) http://www.ilo.org/
public/english/protection/migrant/ download/mpolicy_srilanka_en.pdf
Migrant Forum Lanka (MFL) Submission to the UN Committee on Migrant
Workers (CMW) by Migrant Forum Lanka on the situation of international
outbound labour migration in Sri Lank a, submitted on 30 March 2013 for
consideration at the 18th Session of the Committee on Migrant Workers, 15-26
April 2013 in Geneva, Switzerland. http://www2.ohchr.o rg/english/bodies/
cmw/docs/ngos/CHRD_LST_SUM_WH_SriLanka18.pdf 
Migrants Matter www.migrantsmatter.orgMinisterio de Relaciones Exteriores ‘Est adísticas de personas beneficiadas con el
Estatuto de Refugiado’  (2014) http://www.mi nex.gob.gt/Uploads/ER
2014.csv (accessed 27 June 2015)
Ministerio Público de Guatemala ‘Juzgado envía a prisión preventiva a Otto Pérez
Molina’ 8 September 2015 https: //www.mp.gob.gt/20 15/09/08/juzgado-
envia-a-prision-preventiva-a-otto-pere z-molina/ (accessed 6 November 2015)
MSC-NWC ‘Migrant News Le tter’ (Migrant Services Centre, National Workers'
Congress: Colombo 2010 ) http://www.eureka.l k/migrant/test/news
letter10.htm
Mudugamuwa, I ‘Voting rights for Sri Lankan migrant workers’ Daily News  8
October 2015 http://www.dailynews.lk /?q=2015/10/0 8/local/voting-rights-
sri-lankan-mig rant-workers
National Immigration Law Center ‘The  POWER Act: protect our workers from
Exploitation and Retaliation Act’ October 2015 https://www.nilc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/power-act-2015-10-26.pdf 
 ‘Obama’s $845 Billion UN Plan Forwar ded to US Senate Floor: ‘Global Poverty
Act’ to Cost Each Citizen $2,500 or More’ WorldNetDaily  28 July 2008 http://
www.wnd.com/index.php?pageId=70308354    Bibliography
Objectives of the General Directorat e of Migration (Dirección General de
Migración) http://www.migracion.gob. gt/index.php/migracion/objetivos.
html (accessed 30 October 2015)
OECD (2014) International migration outlook  2014 Paris: OECD Publishing http://
dx.doi.org/10.1787/migr_outlook-2014-en (accessed 22 February 2016)
Office of the high commissioner for hu man rights Late and non-reporting States
http://tbinternet.ohchr. org/_layouts/TreatyBodyExternal/LateReporting.
aspx (accessed 21 June 2015)
Office of the United Nations High Comissioner for Human Rights ‘Travaux
Préparatoires: Rights of All Migrant Workers (Part III of the Convention)’
http://www2.ohchr.org/eng lish/issues/migration/taskforce/docs/drafting
historyrev1.doc 
OHCHR Management Plan 2012-2013 – Wor king For Results, ‘Migration’ http:/
/www2.ohchr.org/englis h/ohchrreport2011/web _version/media/pdf/9_
Migration.pdf
OHCHR, ‘Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants’ http://
www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Migratio n/SRMigrants/Pages/SRMigrants
Index.aspx 
Organizaciones de la socied ad civil de México (2011) Informe sobre la situación
general de los derechos de los migrantes y sus familias elaborado en ocasión de la visita aMéxico del Comisionado Felipe González, Relator Especial de la ComisiónInteramericana de Derechos Humanos Mexico City http://imumi.org/images/
articulos/AgregadosDic/Proyectos/0 2.02a%20informe%20de%20oscs%20al
%20relator%20cidh%20final%20jul%202011.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Palacios, C ‘Migración: Trece años con una intervención fracasada’ La Hora 13
November 2014 http://lahora.gt/migraci on-trece-anos-con- una-intervencion-
fracasada/ (accessed 27 June 2015)
Parliament of Australia ‘Offshore processi ng: lessons from the “pacific Solution”’
(2014) http://www.aph.gov.au/About _Parliament/Parliamentary_Depart
ments/Parliamentary_Library/FlagPo st/2014/April/Offs hore_processing
(accessed 26 June 2015)
Passel, JS & Cohn, D ‘Unauthorized immi grant population stable for half a
decade’ (July 2015) Pew Research Cent er http://www.pewr esearch.org/fact-
tank/2015/07/22/unauthorized-immigr ant-population-stable-for-half-a-
decade/ (accessed October 2015)
Pastoral De La Movilidad Humana - Co nferencia Episcopal de Guatemala ‘El
Fenomeno Migratorio En Guatemala, Desde El Corazon De La IglesiaCatolica’ 1 September 2000 http://www .iglesiacatolica.o rg.gt/20000901.pdf
(accessed 4 November 2015)
Peers, S ‘Jailing migrant families togeth er with convicted cr iminals: A desperate
EU policy to deter irregular migratio n’(Statewatch 23 June 2015) http://
www.statewatch.org/news/2015/jun/e u-jailing-migrant-families.htm
(accessed 26 June 2015)
Petrozziello, A (2013) Género en marcha. Trabajando el  nexo migración- desarrollo desde
una perspectiva de género  Santo Domingo: UN Women http://www.un
women.org/~/media/Headquarters/Attachments/Sections/Library/Publications/2013/12/GeneroenMarcha_low%20pdf.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Pinto-Jayawardena, K ‘Will international treaties protect human rights in Sri
Lanka?’ (2013) 2(2) Advancing Together  http://www.lexisnexis.com.au/en-au/
pdf/corporate/2013-12-06-rule-of-law-newsletter.pdf 
Prensa Libre ‘Iglesia solicita reforma a Ley Migratoria’ 28 August 2012 (accessed 6
November 2015)  Bibliography     355
Prensa Libre  ‘Estafas y abusos afectan a migrantes’ July 2013 (accessed December
2013)
Programa Estado de la Nación – Región  ‘Estado de la Región, Estadísticas de
Centroamérica 2014’ http://estadonac ion.or.cr/images/s tories/biblioteca
_virtual/otras_publicaciones/ECA -2014.pdf (accessed June 2017) 
Provera, M ‘The Criminalisation of Irre gular Migration in the European Union’
Centre for European Poli cy Studies CEPS Paper in Liberty and Security in
Europe. No 80/February 2015 ht tps://www.ceps.eu/publications/
criminalisation-irregular-migration-european-union (accessed 12 November2015)
Ra'ad Al Hussein, Z United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Opening Statement at the Human Righ ts Council 27th Session (OHCHR 8
September 2014) http://www.ohchr. org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/Display
News.aspx?NewsID=14998 (accessed 12 November 2015)
'Ratifications of C097 - Migration for Em ployment Convention (Revised)', No. 97
(1949) , http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:11300:0::
NO::P11300_INSTRUMENT_ID:312242 (accessed 26 June 2015)
Red Nacional de Organismos Civiles de  Derechos Humanos Todos los Derechos
Para Todas y Todos et al (2010) Informe para el Comité de Protección de los Derechos
de Todos los Trabajadores Migratorios y de  sus Familiares (CMW) en el marco de su
evaluación del segundo informe periódico del Estado mexicano http://
tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CM W/Shared%20Documents/MEX/INT_C
MW_NGO_MEX_14_9621_E.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Republican Platform 2016 18 July 2016 https://prod-cdn static.gop.com/media/
documents/DRAFT_12_FINAL[1]-ben_1468872234.pdf 
Rodriguez, JA, Director of Migration A ffairs, Guatemala Ministry of Foreign
Affairs ‘The role of the State of Guatemala in regard to Temporary MigrantWorkers’ https://prezi.com /s5fmopdrxncv/desafios-d e-la-proteccion-ingles/
?utm_campaign=share&utm_medium =copy (accessed July 2015)
Secretaría de Gobernación of Mexico ‘E stadisticas migratorias: síntesis 2015’
http://www.politicamigratoria.gob .mx/work/models/SEGOB/CEM/PDF/
Estadisticas/Sintesis_Graficas/Sintesi s_2015.pdf 4 (accessed 4 May 2016)
Seelke, CR  Mexico’s Recent Immigr ation Enforcement Efforts  Report IF10215
(Congressional Research Service:  Washington DC 2015) http://
pennyhill.com/jmsfileseller/docs//IF102 15.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Seelke, CR & Finklea, K (2015) US Mexican Security Co operation: The Mérida
Initiative and Beyond  Washington DC: Congressional Research Service https://
www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R41349.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Scalabrini International Migration Network et al (2010) Consideraciones ante el
Comité de Protección de los Derechos de Todos los Trabajadores Migratorios y de susFamiliares de las Naciones Unidas sobre el Informe presentado por el Gobierno de México
e n  e l  c o n t e x t o  d e l  1 3 °  p e r í o d o  d e  s e s i o n e s  d e l  C o m i t é  http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/
Treaties/CMW/Shared%20Docume nts/MEX/INT_CMW_NGO_MEX_14_
9617_E.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Sin Fronteras (2013) Protocolo de actuación para quiene s imparten justicia en casos que
afectan a personas migrantes y suje tas de protección internacional  Mexico City:
Suprema Corte de la Justicia de la Nación http://www.amij.org.mx/
protocolos/Protocolo%20Migrantes.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Sin Fronteras (2014) Guía práctica para identificar a personas con necesidades de
protección especial Mexico City: Sin Fronteras  http://www.sinfronteras.org.mx/
attachments/Cartilla_SolicitantesPI_WEB.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
SLBFE ‘Annual Statistical Report of  Foreign Employment 2013’ (SLBFE:
Colombo 2015). http://www.slb fe.lk/page.php ?LID=1&MID=54 356    Bibliography
Socios de la Red de Documentación de las Organizaciones Defensoras de
Migrantes (REDODEM) (2015) Migrantes invisibles, violencia tangible. Informe
2014 Mexico City: Servicio Jesuit a al Migrante http://www.sjm
mexico.org.mx/migrantes-invisibles-vio lencia-tangible-presentacion-del-infor
me-2014-redodem/ (accessed 22 February 2016)
Southern Poverty Law Center ‘Close to Slavery: Guest Worker Programs in the
United States’ 18  February 2013 10, 15, 19, 27, 30, 33 https://www.
splcenter.org/20130218/close-slavery-guestworker-programs-united-states(accessed September 2015)
Southern Poverty Law Center ‘Injustice  on our Plates’ (2010) 4, 7 https://
www.splcenter.org/20101108/ injustice-our-plates (a ccessed September 2015)
State of Guatemala ‘Initial Repo rt - Guatemala’ 4 August 2010  http://tbinter
net.ohchr.org/_layouts /treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CM
W%2fC%2fGTM%2f1&Lang=en (accessed 7 March 2016)
Step It Up http://cmw25.org/Tesis P. LXXVII/99  de la Suprema Corte de Justicia de la Nación de 1999 http://
www.equidad.scjn.gob.mx/ biblioteca_virtual/juri sprudencia/nacional/
jurisprudencia/27.pdf (accessed 15 March 2015)
The New York Times  10 October 2015 ‘The Refugees at Our Door’ SR1http://
www.nytimes.com/2015/ 10/11/opinion/sunday/ the-refugees-at-our-
door.html (accessed 22 February 2016)
The White House Office of the Press Se cretary ‘Remarks by the President on
Signing of UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with DisabilitiesProclamation’ 24 July 2009 http:// www.whitehouse.gov /the_press_office/
Remarks-by-the-President-on-Rights-o f-Persons-with-Dis abilities-Proclama
tion-Signing/ 
The World Bank ‘High Income’ http://d ata.worldbank.org/income-level/high-
income?view=chart 
Touzenis, K & Sironi, A ‘Current challe nges in the implementation of The Un
International Convention On The Protec tion Of The Rights Of All Migrant
Workers And Members Of Their Families ’ European Parliament. Directorate-
General for External Policies of the Unio n. Directorate B. Policy Department (5
July 2013) EXPO/B/DROI/2013/.. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document.html?refer ence=EXPO-DROI_ET%282013%29433
715
Transparency International, Corruption perceptions index 2014: Results  http://
www.transparency.org/cpi2014/re sults (accesse d October 2015)
UNHCR (2014) Arrancados de Raíz  Mexico City: UNHCR http://www.acnur.org/
t3/fileadmin/scripts/doc.php?file=t3 /fileadmin/Documentos/Publicaciones/
2014/9828 (accessed 22 February 2016) 
UNIFEM & Gobierno de México (2010) Nota conceptual . La promoción y protección
de los derechos de las mujeres trabajador as migrantes del mundo. Alianzas para la
migración y el desarrollo humano: Prosperidad compartida – responsabilidad compartidaMexico City: Global Forum on  Migration and Development  IV http://
www.cinu.mx/minisitio/mujeresmigrant es/docs/nota-conce pt.pdf (accessed
22 February 2016)
United Nations Bibliographic Informatio n System ‘Voting Record for A/RES/34/
172’ http://unbisnet.un. org:8080/ipac20/ipac.jsp?session=147W47X4410Q2.
139573&menu=search&aspect=power&npp=50&ipp=20&spp=20&profile=voting&ri=&index=.VM&term=res+34%2F172&matchoptbox=0%7C0&oper=AND&x=0&y=0&aspect=power&index=.VW&term=&matchoptbox=0%7C0&oper=AND&index=.AD&term=&matchoptbox=0%7C0&oper=AND&index=BIB&term=&matchoptbox=0%7C0&ultype=&uloper=%3D&ullimit=&ultype=&uloper=% 3D&ullimit=&sort  Bibliography     357
United Nations Department of Econom ic and Social Affairs ‘International
migration 2015’ http://www.un.org/ en/development/desa/population/
migration/publications/wallchart/docs/MigrationWallChart2015.pdf 
UN DESA ‘Population facts: Trends in  international migration 2015’ http://
www.un.org/en/development/desa/po pulation/migration/publications/
populationfacts/docs/MigrationPopFacts20154.pdf (accessed 15 June 2017)
UN Office at Geneva ‘Current challenges in protecting the human rights of migrant
workers, irregular migration flows in th e Mediterranean, migr ant workers in the
Gulf, and undocumented ch ildren in the Americas’ http://www.ohchr.org/
EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=16398&LangID=E(accessed 15 June 2017(accessed 15 June 2017)
UNHCR ‘UNHCR monitoring visit to Manu s Island, Papua New Guinea 23 to 25
October 2013’ http://www. refworld.org/docid/5294 aa8b0.html (accessed 12
November 2015)
United Nations Treaty Collection Chap ter IV Human Rights 4. International
Covenant on Civil and Political Ri ghts https://treaties.un.org/pages/
ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mt dsg_no=IV-4&chapter=4&lang=en#
EndDec (accessed 9 November 2015)
United Nations Treaty Collection Status of  Treaties https://treaties.un.org/pages/
ParticipationStatus.aspx (accessed 25 June 2015)
United Nations Treaty Handbook  (Treaty Section of the Offi ce of Legal Affairs: New
York 2012) https://treaties.un. org/doc/source/publications/THB/
English.pdf
UN Human Rights, Office of the High Commissioner, ‘Human rights are not a
matter of charity’ 20 December 2011  http://www.ohchr.org/EN/
NewsEvents/Pages/HRAreNo tMatterOfCharity.aspx  
United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner ‘The Core
International Hu man Rights Instruments and thei r monitoring bodies’ http://
www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInt erest/Pages/CoreInstruments.aspx
United Nations Office of the High  Commissioner for Human Rights, Status of
Ratification Inte ractive Dashboard , http://indicators.ohchr.org/ 
UN Meeting Coverage and Press Releases, ‘Secretary-General, in Lecture on
International Flows of Humanity, says Human Rights must be at the Heart of
Migration Policies’ (21 November 2003), UN Doc SG/SM/9027 (2003).
UN Information Service, ‘W in-Win Outcomes Possible if Approach to Migration
is Rationale, Compassionate, Secretary-General Annan tells New GlobalCommission’ (10 December 2003), UN Doc SG/SM/9064 SOC/4632 (2003).
UPR Info Database of UP R Recommendations (2015) http://www.upr-info.org/
database/
UE-ALC / EU-LAC. ‘Presentación del Proyecto Piloto “Fortalecimiento
Interinstitucional para la Migración Laboral Ordenada y Segura”’ http://
www.migracion-ue-alc.eu/index.php/es- ES/component/content/article/106-
categorias-en-espanol/483-tallerpp-guatemala (accessed July 2015)
United Food and Commercial Workers Canada ‘The Status of Migrant Farm
Workers in Canada 2011’ (2011) 5, 9, 13, 17 http://www.ufcw.ca/templates/ufcwcanada/images/awa/publicatio ns/UFCW-Status_of_MF_Workers_
2010-2011_EN.pdf (accessed September 2015)
UNHCR ‘Children on the Run: Unaccompanied Children Leaving Central
America and Mexico and the Need for In ternational Protecti on’ (2014) http://
www.unhcrwashington.org/sites/defau lt/files/1_UAC_Children%20on%20
the%20Run_Full%20Report.pd f (accessed September 2015)358    Bibliography
United Nations Humans Rights ‘R eporting Status for Guatemala’  http://
tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/Treaty BodyExternal/Count ries.aspx (accessed
1 October 2015)
United States Census Bureau ‘The Hisp anic Population: 2010’ May 2011 3 http:/
/www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-04.pdf (accessed 30 October2015) 
UN Web TV ‘USA UPR Adoption - 22nd Session of Universal Periodic Review’
(15 May 2015) http://webtv.un.org/se arch/usa-upr-adoption-22nd-session-of-
universal-periodic-review/4238252840 001?term=upr&languages=&sort=date
US Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs ‘Non-Immigrant Visa
Issuances By Visa Class and By Nation ality: FY 1997-2014 NIV Detail Table’
http://travel.state.gov/co ntent/visas/english/law-an d-policy/statistics/non-
immigrant-visas.html (accessed July 2015)
U.S. Department of State ‘Trafficking in Persons Report 2014’ 271 http://
www.state.gov/documents/ organization/226847.pdf  (accessed September
2015)
U.S. Department of Homeland Securi ty ‘Unauthorized Immigrant Population
Living in the United States: Januar y 2012’ U.S. Department of Homeland
Security Population Estimates, March 2013 http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/ois_ill_pe_2012_2.pdf (accessed June 2015)
United Food and Commercial Workers  Canada and the Agriculture Workers
Alliance ‘Report on the Status of Migrant Workers in Canada 2010-2011 ’ 15, 23
http://www.ufcw.ca/temp lates/ufcwcanada/image s/awa/publications/
UFCW-Status_of_MF_Workers_2010- 2011_EN.pdf (accessed September
2015)
United Nations Committee on the Protecti on of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families (CMW)  ‘General Comment 1 on migrant
domestic workers  23 February 2011’  CMW/C/GC/1  http://www.ref
world.org/docid/4ed3553e2.html  (accessed 6 November 2015) 11-12
UN Committee on the Protection of th e Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families (CMW)  ‘General Comment 2 on the rights of
migrant workers in an irregular situat ion and members of their families’ 28
August 2013 CMW/C/GC/2 15
UN DESA ‘International Migration Report 2015: Highlights’ (2016) 30United Nations International Convention on  the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, 1990 
United Nations ‘UN Treaty Collection’  https://treaties.un.org/Pages/View
Details.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no= IV-13&chapter=4& lang=en#EndDec
(accessed 4 March 2016)
United States Border Patrol U.S. Border Patrol fiscal year 2013 sector profile (2013)
http://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/ files/documents/U .S.%20Border%20
Patrol%20Fiscal%20Year%202013%20Profile.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016) 
United States Border Patrol U.S. Border Patrol fiscal year 2014 sector profile (2014)
http://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/ files/documents/U SBP%20Stats%20FY
2014%20sector%20profile.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
United States Customs and Border Protection Southwest Border unaccompanied alien
children (2015) http://www.cb p.gov/newsroom/stats /southwest-border-
unaccompanied-children (acce ssed 22 February 2016)
United States Department  on Homeland Security 2013 Yearbook on Immigration
Statistics (2014) http://www.dhs.gov/sites/ default/files/pu blications/ois_
yb_2013_0.pdf (accessed 22 February 2016)
Vaughan, J  ‘Border Patrol: Illegal surge is mo stly families, not unaccompanied
kids’ (2014) USA: Center for Immigrat ion Studies http://cis.org/vaughan/  Bibliography     359
border-patrol-illegal-surge-mostly-families-not-unaccompanied-kids (accessed
22 February 2016)
Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) (2015) Mexico now detains more
Central American migrants than the United States  Washington DC: WOLA http://
www.wola.org/news/mexico_now_detai ns_more_central_american_migrants
_than_the_united_states (accessed 22 February 2016)
Wickramasekara, P Labour migration in South Asia: A review of issues, policies and
practices  International Migration Papers No 108, International Migration
Programme (ILO: Geneva 2011) http:/ /www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/
---ed_protect/---protrav/---migrant/do cuments/publication/wcms_179642.pdf
Wickramasekara, P ‘B ilateral Agreements and Me moranda of Understanding on
Migration of Low Skilled Workers: A Review’ Report prepared foir the LabourMigration Branch, International Labour  Office, Geneva, Ju ly 2015. http://
www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/- --ed_protect/---protrav/---migrant/
documents/publication/wcms_385582.pdf 
Emails, interviews and lette rs (chronological order)
E-mail from J Sherer on 24 January 2008
E-mail from A Pécoud on 1 October 2008Interview with René Leyva, Research pr ofessor at Instituto Nacional de Salud
Pública on 8 July 2013
Letter Sent by E-mail to Mr Herman Va n Rompuy, President, European Council
1 October 2013, Ref: Comments on the Council’s Conclusions on the 2013 UN
High-Level Dialogue on Migration development and on broadening the
development-migration ne xus adopted in Brusse ls on 19 July 2013
Interview with a public officer of th e Tapachula’s Labour Conciliation and
Arbitration 2nd Special Court on 21 October 2014
C Giron, Project Manager, Scalabrini Mi ssionaries of San Carlos - Guatemala
interview with S Missionaries 14 August 2015 
Attorney Erick Maldonado, Advising Atto rney of the Office of International
Treaties of the Ministry on Foreign Re lations of the Republic of Guatemala
2004 – 2006; Director of International Treaties of the Ministry on ForeignRelations of the Republic of Guatem ala 2006 – 2007; General Director of
Consular and Migratory Matters 2007 – 2010; Director of CONAMIGUA 2009– 2011; Vice Chancellor of the Foreign Affairs Ministry 2011 – present.Interviewed 5 August 2015Letter from  the Committee on Migrant Workers to
the Permanent Delegation of the European  Union to the United Nations Office
and other international organisati ons in Geneva, 22 August 2013
Question for written answer to the Commission, 10 April 2014. Reply 4 July 2014.
12.11.2014, OJ C 399/1
Email from A Palacios to C Caron on 4 February 2015Question for written answer to the Commis sion, 18 June 2015. Reply 28 September
2015
U Villatoro, Asociación de Apoyo Integral; member of the board of directors of
MENAMIG in 2003; Executive Coordi nator of MENAMIG 2006 – 2010;
currently advisor to the Executive Se cretary of CONAMIGU A. Interviewed 23
September 2015.
Email from M  Ramirez to C Caron on 30 September 2015
R Yax, Directora de Proyectos, Pastor al de Movilidad Humana, interview with
Ursula Roldán 1 September 2015360    Bibliography
Other
ACTFORM & WMC ‘Sri Lanka NGO Sha dow Report: On the International
Convention on the Protection of the Ri ghts of All Migrant Workers’ and their
Families’ (2008)
ACTFORM & WMC ‘Sri Lanka NGO Shad ow Report: Submitted by Action
Network for Migrant Workers (ACT FORM) and the Women and Media
Collective (WMC)’ (1 August 2016)
Americas Watch Committee ‘Guatemalan Refugees in Mexico 1980-1984’ (1984)  
Amnesty International ‘EU- Turkey summit: EU and Tu rkish leaders deal death
blow to the right to seek asylum’ 8 March 2016
Ancheita, A & Bonnici, GL (2013) Quo Vadis? Reclutamiento y contratación de
trabajadores migrantes y su acceso a la se guridad social: dinámicas de los sistemas de
trabajo temporal migratorio  en Norte y Centroamérica  México: Instituto de Estudios
y Divulgación sobre Migración
Avramopoulos, D ‘Letter to Ministers’ Brussels, 1st June 2015 Ares (2015)
2397724 n 4. http://www.sta tewatch.org/whatsnew.htm.
Baker, B & Rytina, N ‘Estimates of the Unauthorized Immigrant Population
Residing in the United States: Januar y 2012’ (2013): Department of Homeland
Security, Office of Immigratio n Statistics, Washington, DC 
Banco Central del Ecuador (2012) Evolución de las remesas, Evolución Anual , Quito
Bendell, J & A Ellersiek ‘Noble network:  Advocacy for global justice and the
‘network effect’ Civil Society and Social Movements Programme Paper 31
Geneva: United Nations Research In stitute for Social Development 2009
Bicocchi, L ‘Rights of all migrant workers (Part III of the Convention) Travaux
Préparatoires’
Casillas, R ‘La Migración de Algunos y la Inseguridad de todos, Análisis y
recomendaciones para pasa r de la Ficción al trato humanitario’ (2014)
Documentos de Trabajo N.2 ITAM & So cios de la Red de documentación de
las Organizaciones defensor as de Migrantes (REDODEM) 
Cecilia Malmström EU Home Affairs Co mmissioner, Unlocking the potential of
migration for inclusive development 15 May 2014
Central Bank of Sri Lanka ‘Economic and Social Statistics of Sri Lanka 2015’
(Central Bank of Sri Lanka: Colombo 2015)
Centro de Derechos Humanos Fray Matías de Córdova A.C. (2012) Por el
reconocimiento a la contribu ción significativa de las trabajadoras del hogar en la
economía global. Situación de las y los trabaj adores del hogar en la ciudad de Tapachula,
Chiapas  Tapachula: Centro de Derechos Humanos Fray Matías de Córdova
Charter Committee on Povert y Issues ‘Right to effective remedies. Review of
Canada’s Fourth and Fifth Periodic Re ports under the IC ESCR’ (May 2006)
Coalición por las Migraciones y el Refugio (2007) Informe Alternativo a la Convención
de Trabajadores Migratorios y sus familias , Quito
Coalición por las Migracio nes y el Refugio (2009) II Informe Alternativo a la
Convención de Trabajadores Migratorios y sus familias , Quito
Coalición por las Migraciones y el Refugio (2012) Informe sobre Movilidad Humana
de Ecuador, Quito
Coalición por las Migracio nes y el Refugio (2015) Análisis del Proyecto de Ley de
Movilidad Humana , Quito
Coalición por las Migraciones y el Refu gio, Defensori?a de l Pueblo, Casa de
Movilidad Humana, INREDH & SJRM (2010) Informe de verifi cación sobre las
condiciones de detención de pers onas privadas de la libertad en el marco de operativos de
identificación de irregulare s, en la ciudad de Quito , Quito  Bibliography     361
Colombo Process (2015) Concluding Statement- 3rd Senior Officials Meeting (SOM) :
Regional Consultative Process on Overseas Employment and ContractualLabour for Countries of Origin in Asia  (Colombo Process), 4th -5th November
2015, Colombo, Sri Lanka
Congressional Research Service 106th Congress Treaties and Other International
Agreements: The Role of the United States Senate: A Study Prepared for the Committeeon Foreign Relations, United States Senate  (2001) 
Council of the European Union, Interins titutional File: 2010/0210 (COD), 15033/
13, 25 October 2013
D’Auchamp, M Rights of Migrant Workers in Europe  (OHCHR Regional Office for
Europe: Brussels 2011)
December 18, The UN Migrant Workers Convention: St eps towards ratifi cation in Europe
(European Platform for Migrant Workers’ Rights: Brussels 2007).
 Dirección Nacional de Promoción de la Defensoría del Pueblo de Ecuador (2010)
Informe temático: Migración cubana: retos para un Ecuador incluyente , Quito
EESC Opinion on the International Conv ention on Migrants (Own-initiative
opinion), Brussels, 30 June 2004, Doc SOC/173, 7
Esufally, S ‘Sri Lanka: Domestic Workers : An Analysis of the Legal and Policy
Framework, Decent Work for Domest ic Workers Report No 1’ (Verite
Research: Colombo 2015)
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment CPT Standa rds CPT/Inf/E (2002) 1 - Rev. 2015
European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights ‘Criminalisation of migrants in
an irregular situation and of persons engaging with them’ (March 2014)
Feline Freier, L ‘Migración contempora?nea  de A?frica, Asia y el Caribe hacia
Ecuador’ (2013) Cuadernos Migratorios N° 5. Mi grantes extracontinentales en
Ame?rica del Sur: estudio de casos Organización Internacional para las
Migraciones, Buenos Aires
Flynn M ‘An introduction to data construc tion on Immigration-related detention’
(Global Detention Project Working Paper) July 2011
Flynn, M ‘How and Why Immigration De tention Crossed the Globe’ detention’
(Global Detention Project Working Paper April 2014
Global Commission on International Migr ation ‘Migration in an interconnected
world: New directions for acti on’ Geneva, Swit zerland, 2005
GMPA GMPA Observations on the Second  Periodic Report of Sri Lanka to the
UN Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW): Submited by the Global
M i g r a t i o n  P o l i c y  A s s o c i a t e s  ( G M P A ) ,  C M W ,  2 5 t h  S e s s i o n ,  2 9  A u g u s t  -7 September 2016
Grange, M Importancia e Impacto de la  Convención Internaciona l para la Protección de
Todos los Trabajadores Migratorios y de sus Familiares  (2005) Biblioteca Jurídica
Virtual del Instituto de Investigacione s Jurídicas de la UNAM, México D.F.
Grange, M ‘Strengthening protection of migrant workers and their families with
international human rights treaties – A do-it-yourself kit’ (ICMC 2006)
Grange, M ‘Smoke Screens: Is There a Correlation between Migration
Euphemisms and the Language of Detention?’ (Global Detention ProjectWorking Paper No. 5 2013)
Guild, E The European Union after the Treaty of Lisbon: Fundamen tal rights and EU
citizenship (CEPS: Brussels 2010)
Guild, E & Grant, S ‘Migration governance in the UN: What is the global compact
and what does it mean?’ (2017) 252 Qu een Mary University of London, School
of Law Legal Studies Research Paper362    Bibliography
Gunawardana, SJ ‘Labor Movement Responses to International Labor Migration
in Sri Lanka’ (School of Management and Labor Relations,  Rutgers University
and the Solidarity Center: Colombo 2014)
Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales, San José de Costa Rica
‘Migraciones y Derechos La borales en Centroamérica:  Características de las
personas migrantes y de los mercados de trabajo’ (2012) 
Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA) ‘Severe labour exploitation. Workers moving
within or into the EU’ (Publicati ons Office of the European Union:
Luxembourg 2015)
HELVETAS ‘Safe and beneficial labour migration for Sri Lankan migrant
workers’ (HELVETAS Swiss Intercooperation: Colombo 2014)
HRCSL ‘Sri Lanka National Action Plan  for the Protection and Promotion of
Human Rights, 2011-2016’ (Human Rights  Commission of Sri Lanka: Colombo
2011)
ICMC ‘The UN Treaty monitoring bodies and migrant workers: A Samizdat’ (18
December 2004)
Instituto Nacional de Esta dísticas y Censos (2015) Anuario de Entradas y Salidas
Internacionales 2014, Quito
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Ge ografía (INEGI) ‘Conociendo … nos todos’
1 Informativo Oportuno (2011) 
Instituto Nacional de Migración (INM) Delegación Federal de Chiapas Solicitud de
Acceso a la Información 0411100058114  Mexico (2014)
Instituto Nacional de Migración (INM);  Consejo Nacional de Población, El
Colegio de la Frontera Norte; Secretaría  de Relaciones Exteriores & Secretaría
del Trabajo y Previsión Social (2012) Encuesta sobre Migración en la Frontera Sur de
México, 2009  (EMIF SUR) Serie histórica 200 4-2009 Mexico: INM; CONAPO;
EL COLEF; SRE & STPS
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) Hearing on the Situation of
asylum seekers and refugees in Ecuador  146 Period of Sessions (02 November 2012)
Information presented by the petitioners, Washington, DC
Inter American Court of Hu man Rights, Advisory Opinio n on Juridical Condition
and Rights of the Undocumented Migr ants, 17 September 2003, OC-18/03,
http://www.refworld.org/ docid/425cd8eb4.html (a ccessed 30 June 2015)
International Labour Organisation ILO Multilateral framework on labour migration:
Non-binding principles and guidelines for a rights-based approach to labour migration
(Geneva: ILO 2006) 
International Labour Office Towards a fair deal for mi grant workers in the global
economy (Geneva: ILO, 2004)
International Catholic Migr ation Commission ‘Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Member s of their Families 25- 29 April 2005
- 2nd session: Update on Advocacy activities for the promotion of the
Convention’ (ICMC 2005)
International Commission of Jurists IC J submission to the Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention (ICJ 20 April 2012)
International Detention Coalition ‘The re are Alternatives : A handbook for
preventing unnecessary immigration dete ntion’ (revised edition) (IDC 2014)
International Labour Confer ence, 99th Session (2010) Decent work for domestic
workers , Report IV(1), Geneva: International Labour Office
International Labour Conference, 101st Session (2012) Giving globalization a human
face, General Survey on the fundamental Conventions concerning rights at work
in light of the ILO Declaration on So cial Justice for a Fair Globalization,
Geneva: International Labour Office  Bibliography     363
International Labour Conference, 105th Session (2016) Promoting fair migration ,
General Survey concerning the migr ant workers instruments, Geneva:
International Labour Office
International Labour Office (2006) ILO Multilateral Framewor k on Labour Migration:
Non-binding principles and guidelines for a rights-based approach to labour migration ,
Geneva
International Labour Office (2014) Rules of the Game: A brief introduction to
International Labour Standards , rev ed, Geneva.
International Labour Office (2015) ILO Global estimates on  migrant workers and
migrant domestic workers. Results and methodology , Geneva
International Labour Organisation ‘Interna tional labour migration: A rights-based
approach’ Geneva, Switzerland, 2010
Iredale, R & Piper, N Identification of the Obstacles to the Signing and Ratification of the
UN Convention on th e Protection of the Rights of Al l Migrant Workers: The Asia-Pacific
Perspective  (UNESCO: Paris 2003)
Iredale, R, Piper, N & Ancog, A Impact of ratifying the 1990 the UN Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Work ers and members of their family: Case studies
of the Philippines and Sri Lanka  (Working paper No 15 Asia-Pacific Migration
Research Network: Canberra 2005)
Jesuit Conference of the United States & the Washington Office on Latin America
‘U.S. Support and Assistance for Inte rdictions, Interceptions, and Border
Security Measures in Mexico, Honduras, and Guatemala Undermine Access toInternational Protection’ Human rights  situation of Migrant and refugee
children and families in the united states Materials Submitted in Support ofHearing before the Inte r-American Commission on Human Rights 153rd
Ordinary Period of Sessions October 27, 2014
Joint Communication from Presidents Co sta and Skouris, press release no 75
issued by the Registrar of the ECtHR on 27 January 2011
Jokisch, BD ‘Ecuador: From Mass Emig ration to Return Migration?’ (2014)
Migration Policy Institute , Washington, DC
MacDonald, E & Cholewinski, R The Migrant Workers Convention in Europe:
Obstacles to the Ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Member s of their Families: EU/EEA Perspectives
(UNESCO: Paris 2007)
MFE, ‘Sri Lanka: Sub-policy and national action plan on return and reintegration
of migrant workers’ (Ministry of Foreign Employment: Colombo 2015)
MFEPW A bill entitled an act for the establishment of an auth ority to be called the Sri
Lanka Employment Migration Au thority and to regulate its powers and duties, to repeal
the Sri Lanka Bureau Of Foreign Employment  Act, no 21 of 1985 as amended by Act No
04 Of 1994 And Act No 56 Of 2009 and to pr ovide for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto : Revised Draft – 21.03.2012: Ministry of Foreign Employment
Promotion and Welfare, draft (confidential), Colombo.
MFEPW ‘Operational manual for Labour Sections of Sri Lankan diplomatic
missions in destination countries’ (2nd  ed) (Ministry of Foreign Employment
Promotion and Welfare: Colombo 2013)
MFEPW Performance Report 2014  (Ministry of Foreign Employment Promotion
and Welfare, Colombo 2014).
Morales Díaz, AR ‘Aplicación De La Ley De Migración En Guatemala En El
Marco De La Convención Internacional Sobre La Protección De Los Derechos
De Los Trabajadores Migratorios Y De Sus Familiares’ unpublished PhDthesis, Universidad de San Ca rlos Guatemala, 2007 43-50364    Bibliography
Nájera, J (2014) Movilidad laboral transfronteriza y vida familiar de  los trabajadores
guatemaltecos en Chiapas unpublished PhD thesis Mexico City: El Colegio de
México 
NCC in collaboration with Intervention Movement Ag ainst Discrimination and
Racism (IMADR) and Migrant News Lanka (MNL) ‘A response to the SecondPeriodic Report (SPR) of Sri Lanka’ (2016)
Office of the High Commissioner for Hu man Rights (OHCHR), ‘The International
Convention on Migrant Workers and its Committee. Fact Sheet No. 24 (2005)
Opinion on the International Conventi on of Migrants, EESE (30 June 2004),
SOC/173 (2004)
Organización Internacional para las Migraciones (2012) Perfil Migratorio del Ecuador
2011, Quito
Pécoud, A & de Guchteneire, P ‘An inve stigation of the obstacles to the UN
Convention on Migrant Worker’s Rights’  Global Migration Perspectives No 3
Geneva: Global Commission on International Migration, 2004
Philippines Mission to the United Nation s and other International Organisations
No. f) 2 6 2/CJ2,fL- .20\tf- (2014)
Press Release, American Civil Libertie s Union and Human Rights Watch Report
on US Violations of International Hu man Rights Covenant ‘Groups Call on
Clinton Administration to Correct Abuses, Ensure Th at International
Standards Can Be Invoked in US Courts’ (undated)
Ranaraja, S Review of national legislation and regulations on migration for foreign
employment and their implementation : Paper prepard for project on Road map on
the development of a national labour migration policy in Sri Lanka (ILO Office:Colombo 2010) unpublished
Robyn, I Piper, N & Ancog, A ‘Impact of Ratifying the 1990 UN Convention on
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Family: Case Studiesof the Philippines and Sri Lanka’ Working  Paper No 15 (Asia Pacific Migration
Research Network  2005)
Rojas Wiesner, M & Ángeles, H ‘Tra bajadores Agrícola s de Guatemala en
Chiapas’  La Jornada del Campo  (suplemento Informativo de La Jornada ) 18 July
2015 
Ruhunage, LK  ‘Consolidated Report on Assessing Labour Migration related Bilateral
Agreements(BLAs), Memorandum of Unde rstandings (MOUs) and other similar
arrangements in the Asian region ’ Draft report prepared for the ILO-KNOMAD
Thematic Working Group on Low Skille d Migration, International Migration
porgramme, Geneva, 16 July 2014 (upublished)
Secretaría de Gobernación (2014) Programa Especial de Migración 2014-2018  Mexico:
Secretaría de Gobernación 
Secretaría de Gobernación (2014b) Programa Nacional pa ra la Igualdad y No
Discriminación , PRONAIND 2014-2018 Mexico: Secretaría de Gobernación 
Secretaría de Gobernación (2014c) Programa Nacional para Prevenir, Sancionar y
Erradicar los Delitos en Materia de Trata de Personas y para la Protección y Asistencia a
las Víctimas de estos Delitos 2014-2018  Mexico: Secretaría de Gobernación 
Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público (2013) Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 2013-
2018 Mexico: Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público
Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público (2013b) Programa Nacional para la
Igualdad de Oportunidades y no Discrimi nación contra las Mujeres. PROIGUALDAD
2013-2018  Mexico: Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público
Secretaría de Trabajo y Previsión Social (2013) Programa Sectorial de Trabajo y
Previsión Social 2013-2018  Mexico: Secretaría de Trabajo y Previsión Social  Bibliography     365
Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores (2013) Programa de la Secretaría de Relaciones
Exteriores, PSRE 2013-2018  Mexico: Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores 
Shadow Report on Sri Lanka jointly su bmitted by 20 CSOs for consideration
during the 25th Session (29 August 2 016 – 7 September 2016) of the CMW
SLBFE ‘Code of Ethical Conduct for Li censed Foreign Employment Agencies/
Licensees’ (Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment: Colombo 2013)
Soysa, David (Undated) Early days of SLBFE : Paper prepared for the ILO Regional
Office for Asia and the Pacific, unpubl ishedThe Council called on the Court to
apply the urgent preliminary ruling procedure in situations involving
deprivation of liberty, Statement [2008] OJ L24/44
Touzenis, K & Sironi, A ‘Current challe nges in the implementation of the UN
International Convention on the Protec tion of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families’ (European Parliament: Brussels 2013)
UN DESA ‘Population facts: Trends in international migrat ion 2015’ (Factsheet
No. 2015/4 of the Population Division of the DESA of the UN Secretariat)
UN Women; Instituto para las Mujere s en la Migración (IMUMI) & European
Union (2014)  Legislación mexicana y derechos de las trabajadoras migrantes.  Un
análisis del cumplimiento de la Convención sobre la Eliminación de todas las formas deDiscriminación Contra la Mujer (CEDAW) y su Recomendación General no 26 en lalegislación  Mexico City: UN Women
UN Women; Instituto para las Mujere s en la Migración (IMUMI) & European
Union (2015) Guía breve para desarrollar legislac ión migratoria con perspectiva de
género Mexico City: UN Women
UN Women; Instituto para las Mujere s en la Migración (IMUMI) & European
Union  (2016) Compromisos de México con los dere chos humanos de las trabajadoras
migrantes  Mexico City: UN Women 
UN Women & Instituto para las Mujeres en la Migración (IMUMI) (2015)   Las
trabajadoras migrantes cent roamericanas en Chiapas. Re comendaciones de política
pública para garantizar el ejercicio de sus derechos  Mexico City: UN Women 
US Senate Committee on the Judiciary ‘The Law of  the Land: US Implementation
of Human Rights Treaties’ 
Venet, F (1999) La Convención para la protección de todos los trabajadores migrantes y sus
familiares: posibilidades y límites en su aplicación  San José: Inter American Institute
of Human Rights
Weis, P The Refugee Convention, 1951: The Trav aux Preparatoires analyzed with a
commentary by Dr Paul Weis  United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees,
1951 Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Status of Refugees and Stateless
Persons’, Geneva, Switzerland, 1990
Wickramasekara, P ‘Much ado about nothin g: Reflections on irregular migration’
(GMPA: Geneva 2013)
Wijeratne, N.M. (2013 ). Statement by Mr. Nissanka N. Wijeratne , Secretary, Ministry
of Foreign Employment Promotion and Welfare, Democratic SocialistRepublic of Sri Lanka: UN High Level Dialogue on International Migrationand Development, New York, 3 September 2013.
Table of legislative proposals and enactments (international)
Action Plan of the Council and the Comm ission on how best to implement the
provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam on an area of freedom, security and
justice, adopted by the JHA Council on 3 Dec. 1998, OJ 1999 C 19/1
Commission Staff Working Document on th e fulfilment of the 29 measures for
reinforcing the protection of the ex ternal borders and combating illegal
immigration adopted at the Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting, held on
Brussels on 25 and 26 February 2010, SEC (2010) 1480 final, 26.11.2010366    Bibliography
Communication from the Commission  to the Council and the European
Parliament on a Common Policy on Illegal Immigration, COM (2001) 672 final
Communication from the Commission  to the Council and the European
Parliament on Immigration and Asylum Policies, COM(1994) 23, 23 February1994
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council,
the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions:
Communication on Migration COM (2011) 248 final, 4.5.2011
Communication on Maximising the Development Impact of Migration: The EU
contribution for the UN High-level Dial ogue and next steps towards broadening
the development-migration nexus COM(2013) 292 final, 21 May 2013
Consolidated versions of the Treaty on  European Union and the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union OJ C 202, 7.6.2016, 1–388
European Parliament Draft Recommenda tion on the draft Council decision
authorising Member States to ratify the Convention concerning decent work for
domestic workers
Council Conclusions on EU priorities at UN Human Rights Fora ’ Press release 56/
16 available at http://www.consiliu m.europa.eu/en/pre ss/press-releases/
2016/02/15-fac-un-human-rights-fora/ 
Council Decision of 20 December 2007 am ending the Protocol on the Statute of
the Court of Justice, [2008] OJ L24/42, and amendments to the Rules ofProcedure of the Court of Justice adopted by the Court on 15 January 2008,[2008] OJ L24/39
Council Decision of 28 January 2014 auth orising Member States to ratify, in the
interests of the European Union, the Convention concerning decent work for
domestic workers, 2011, of the Internat ional Labour Organisation (Convention
No 189) (2014/51/EU) OJ L 32/32, 1 February 2014
Council Directive 2003/86/EC  reunification of 22 September 2003 on the right to
family reunification, OJ L 251, 3 October 2003
Council Directive 2003/109/EC of 25 November 2003 concerning the status of
third-country nationals who are long-ter m residents, OJ L 16, 23 January 2004
Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings
(CETS No. 197) 2569 UNTS 33
Council of the European Union, EU St rategic Framework and Action Plan on
Human Rights and Democracy (25 June 2012) 11855/12, 1-2
Council of the European Union, Council Conclusions on the Action Plan on
Human Rights and Democracy 2015 – 2019, 20 July 2015, 10897/15
Council of the European Union, Conc lusions of the Council and of the
Representatives of Governments of the Member States meeting within theCouncil on the 2013 UN High-Level Dialogue on Migration and Developmentand on broadening the de velopment-migration nexus, Brussels, 19 July 2013
Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April
2004 on the right of citizens of the Un ion and their family members to move and
reside freely within the territory of the member states amending Regulation
(EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC, 90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC. OJ L158/77, OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, 77–123
Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16
December 2008 on common standards an d procedures in member states for
returning illegally staying third-country nationals [2008] OJ L348/98  Bibliography     367
Directive 2014/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26
February 2014 on the conditions of entr y and stay of third-country nationals for
the purpose of employment as seasonal workers [2014] OJ L94/375
European Council, Conclusions of the Me eting on 26/27 June 2014 in Ypres, doc
EUCO 79/14
European Council in Copenhagen 21-22 June 1993 Conclusions of the Presidency
SN 180/1/93 REV 1
European Parliament Draft Recommenda tion on the draft Council decision
authorising Member States to ratify, in the interests of the European Union, the
Convention concerning decent work for domestic workers, 2011, of the
International Labour Organisation (Convention No 189) (11462/2013 – C7-0234/2013 – 2013/0085(NLE)) 16 October 2013
Presidency Conclusions, Tampere European Council, 15 – 16 Oct. 1999, Bulletin
EU 10 – 1999
Proposal for a Council Decision authoris ing Member States to ratify, in the
interests of the European Union, the Co nvention concerning decent work for
domestic workers, 2011, of the Internat ional Labour Organisation (Convention
No 189) Brussels, 21.3.2013 COM(2013) 152 final
Protocol No. 2 integrating the Schengen acquis into the framework of the European
Union, [1997] OJ C340/93
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and P unish Trafficking in Persons Especially
Women and Children, supple menting the United Nati ons Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime 15 November 2000, 2237 UNTS 319
Recommendation No. 1737 of 17 March 2006 of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe
The Hague Programme Strengthening Freedom, Security and Justice in the
European Union (OJ 2005 C 19/1)
The Stockholm Programme: An Open and Secure Europe Serving and Protecting
the Citizens (OJ 2010 C 115/1)
Table of enactm ents (national)
Ecuador
Andean Council of Foreign Ministers. Decision 504. 22 June 2001
Andean Council of Foreign Ministers. Decision 545. 25 June 2003Consejo Consultivo de Política Migrat oria. Resolution No 001-2009. Official
Registry 38. 1 October 2009
Codificación de la Ley de Migración. Official Registry No. 563. 12 April 2005Executive Decree No 150. Official Registry No 39. 12 March 2007Executive Decree 248. Official Registry No 136. 24 February 2010 Executive Decree 667. Official Registry 397. 3 March 2011The Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador of 2008Law 0. Official Registry (S) 544. 9 March 2009Ministerial Agreement 105. 3 September 2010National Assembly Draft Organic Act on Human Mobili ty (Proyecto de Ley Orgánica de
Movilidad Humana)  Presented on 16 July 2015
Real Decreto 2393/2004 (Spain) 30 December 2004United Nations International Convention on  the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (ICRMW) New York, 18December 1990 Entry into force: 1 July 2003. Doc A/RES/45/158368    Bibliography
Guatemala
Comisión del Migrante del Congreso de la  República de Guatemala, Iniciativa de
Ley 4851: Ley de apoyo a la regularización migratoria de extranjeros enGuatemala 9 Junio 2014 http://old.congreso.gob.gt/archivos/iniciativas/registro4851.pdf (accessed 27 June 2015)
Congress of the Republic of Guatemal a, Ley contra la Violencia Sexual,
Explotación y Trata de Personas Decreto 9 de 2009 arts. 16 & 17
Migration Act contained in Congressio nal Decree No. 95-98 and the related
Regulation adopted by Government Decision No. 529 – 99 of 20 July 1999 
Ley y reglamentos del CONAMIGUA , Decree No. 46-2007 Chapter I, Article No
2 (2009)
President of the Republic of Guatemal a, Reglamento para la protección y
determinación del Estatuto de Refu giado en el Territorio del Estado de
Guatemala; Government Decision 328-2001
Reglamento de Autorización del Trabaj o de Personas Extr anjeras a Empleadores
del Sector Privado
President of the Republic of Guatem ala, Government Decision 529 de 99
Reglamento de la Ley de Migración  Article 88
Mexico
Ley de Migración de 2011
Reglamento de la Ley de Migración de 2012Lineamientos para los Trámites y Procedimientos Migratorios de 2012
Ley Federal del Trabajo de 2012Reglamento General de Inspección del Trabajo y Aplicación de Sanciones de 2014 Ley del Seguro Social de 2014Ley General Para Prevenir, Sancionar y Er radicar los Delitos en Materia de Trata
de Personas y para la Protección y Asis tencia a las Víctimas de estos Delitos de
2012
Reglamento de la Ley General Para Prev enir, Sancionar y Erradicar los Delitos en
Materia de Trata de Personas y para la Protección y Asistencia a las Víctimas de
estos Delitos de 2013 
Ley Federal para Prevenir y Eliminar la Discriminación de 2003  Ley General de Acceso de las Mujeres a una Vida Libre de Violencia de 2007
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka Bureau of foreign Employment Act 21 of 1985 
US
Restatement (Third) of the Foreign Rela tions Law of the United States (1987)369INDEX
A
abuse of migrants 21, 49, 50, 89, 143, 157, 166, 217, 222, 234, 246, 253, 254
administrative detention (see also detention ) 74, 76, 82, 83, 88, 95, 96, 99
Amnesty International 26, 49, 67apartheid 34Arendt 45-49, 53, 62, 68asylum seekers 29, 49, 58, 75, 76, 80, 87, 90, 91, 111, 138, 139, 141, 147, 177, 190-
192, 229, 235, 273, 295
C
CEDAW Committee 17, 113-115, 123, 127, 139, 147
CERD Committee 112, 113, 123, 139, 147, 148CESCR Committee 111, 112, 122, 123, 138, 139, 147child migrants (see also unaccompanied minors ) 48, 83, 85, 99, 115, 116, 123, 127,
140, 164, 166, 199, 208, 236, 239, 242, 243, 246, 288, 289  
child migration 106, 168children in detention 85children of migrants (see also child migrants ) 49, 116, 141, 166, 168, 191, 235 
children of returnees 247civil society organisations (see also NGOs ) 9, 27, 47, 91, 151, 180, 198, 230, 239,
243, 244, 265, 268, 269, 272, 275, 321 
clandestine migration (see also unauthorised migration ; undocumented migrants ;
irregular migration ) 7, 156, 158, 183, 192, 194, 218
CMW (Committee on Migrant Workers) 4, 10-15, 17, 19, 20, 22, 72-75, 82, 83, 86-
92, 94-99, 103, 108, 110, 113, 118, 122, 126-128, 135-138, 142-144, 146, 148,160-162, 169, 170, 177-181, 184, 186-189,  191, 192, 194, 197-201, 204, 214, 215,
225, 227, 228, 230, 231, 235, 238-241, 244-247, 249, 252-256, 258, 260, 263-271,
274, 275, 298
Commission on Human Rights (see also Human Rights Council ) 16, 75, 77, 97, 105,
107, 108, 118, 120, 143, 208, 280, 295
country of destination (see destination country )
country of employment (see employment country ) 
country of origin (see origin country ) 
country of transit (see transit country ) 
CRC Committee 96, 115-117, 123, 140, 142criminalisation of migrants and migr ation 46, 75, 76, 89, 191-193, 202, 241
D
day of general discussion 22, 89, 154, 160, 163, 169, 170
deportation (see also expulsion ; removal ) 6, 18, 53, 58, 62, 68, 69, 74, 75, 77, 109,
116, 117, 142, 143, 144, 183, 184, 188, 191-194, 196, 210-212, 214-216, 225,232, 233, 239, 243, 273, 278, 317370    Index
destination country (see also host country ) 6, 7, 8, 21, 24, 25, 28, 33, 34, 36, 37, 40,
41, 42, 43, 62, 66, 84, 108, 168, 170, 171, 196, 205, 210, 234, 238, 245, 264, 265,272, 274, 280, 298
destination state (see destination country )
detention (see also administrative detention ) 6, 9, 10, 14, 17, 29, 48, 49, 58, 68, 72-92,
94-100, 109, 117, 188, 189, 191-193, 211, 215, 216, 218, 220, 232, 233, 236, 238,239, 242, 243, 273
development-migration nexus 299, 307, 308domestic workers 97, 109, 136, 142-144, 154, 161-164, 169, 173, 184, 225, 234, 236,
240, 241, 245, 246, 250, 251, 253, 264, 265, 266, 270, 272, 292, 309, 310, 320
E
ECOSOC (UN Economic and Social Council)  9, 55, 63, 110, 158, 283, 284, 285,
293
employment country 6, 7, 92, 130, 132, 136, 137, 142, 146, 158, 166, 168, 171, 183,
195, 206, 220, 221, 224, 225, 226, 227, 270, 280, 289, 305
entry into force of ICRMW 9, 12, 13, 64, 157, 169, 180, 306entry into force of Article 77 ICRMW 91, 148exploitation of migrants 21, 52, 80, 89, 106, 124, 133, 142, 146, 153, 154, 157, 158,
169, 170, 187, 193, 217-220, 223, 229, 234, 236, 240, 242, 245, 253, 254, 265,268, 279, 315
expulsion (see also deportation ; removal ) 6, 7, 29, 49, 79, 82, 91, 98, 109, 131, 134,
165, 191, 192, 196, 215-217, 220, 226, 230, 231, 289, 303, 319
F
family 7, 46, 48, 54, 62, 83-85, 88, 105, 113, 131, 132, 148, 149, 165, 179, 190, 196,
208, 221, 224, 226, 234, 236, 242, 246, 247, 251, 253, 254, 275, 289, 290, 297,317, 318
family members of migrant workers 83, 85, 105, 131, 132, 165, 179, 247, 289, 290,
297
family reunification 7, 46, 62, 182, 208, 289, 318firewalls 18, 167, 168 
G
gender 14, 51, 61, 72, 88, 99, 105, 113, 140, 169, 235, 238, 241, 244, 245, 247GFMD (Global Forum on Migration and De velopment) 10, 32, 39, 65, 67, 68, 104,
124, 125, 171, 174, 245, 304
Global Commission on Internat ional Migration (GCIM) 65, 107
Global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration 3, 5, 101, 151, 304
H
health care 17, 18, 109, 114, 136, 137, 139-141, 142, 235, 246, 319High-Level Dialogue on Migration and Development 32, 65, 106, 124-126, 170-
172, 299, 307
host country (see also destination country ) 170, 221, 257, 300, 302
host state (see host country )
Human Rights Committee (HRC) 9, 10, 74, 86, 90, 91, 92, 95, 96 103, 108, 110,
122, 127, 147, 148, 267
Human Rights Council (HRC) 66, 76, 97, 98, 100, 102, 104, 105, 108, 118, 120-
122, 124, 170, 295, 311  Index     371
human trafficking (see trafficking in persons ) 
I
illegal migration (see irregular migration ) 
ILO multilateral framework on labour migration 15, 26, 168, 253, 261ILO supervisory system 12, 19, 154, 156, 159, 160, 162, 165, 167, 173immigration detention (see detention )
implementation of the ICRMW 4, 5, 7, 10 , 12, 14, 21, 25, 28, 32, 33, 41, 94, 99,
119, 127, 154, 158, 161, 169, 177, 198, 199, 200, 202, 204, 213, 227, 229, 230,234, 240, 244, 247, 249, 268, 298
IOM (International Organisation for Migrat ion) 21, 38, 56, 105, 119, 126, 160, 169,
184, 205, 210, 218
irregular migrants 7, 18, 26, 29, 37, 63, 74, 77, 91, 97, 98, 105, 108, 112, 132, 133,
134, 135, 142, 186, 188, 191, 206, 208, 215, 217, 225, 229, 239, 295, 302, 307,313, 315, 317, 319
irregular migration (see also clandestine migration ; unauthorised migration ;
undocumented migrants ) 3, 4, 16, 28, 37, 74-76, 78, 89, 156, 157, 172, 183, 194,
199, 232, 239, 257, 264, 272, 273, 278, 279, 293, 297, 299, 302, 307, 313-315
irregular status 17, 120, 142, 156, 157, 166,  168, 171, 173, 185, 193, 206, 220, 272,
273, 302
K
kidnapping of migrants 183, 246
L
labour migration 4, 15, 16, 26, 34, 35, 36, 46, 58, 59, 66, 132, 134, 135, 142, 148,
155, 156, 160, 161, 165, 168, 170, 173, 185, 186, 206, 207, 220, 224, 227, 249,251-253, 256-258, 260-262, 264, 269-271, 27 4, 275, 278, 293, 294, 302, 303, 314
labour rights 3, 27, 50, 106, 143, 147, 152,  153, 155, 174, 176, 182, 184, 187, 219,
220, 222, 241, 315
labour standards 11, 12, 17, 25, 27, 153-155, 158-160, 163, 164, 169, 172-174, 297,
303, 309
lack of awareness of ICRMW 3, 13, 201, 299legalisation (see regularisation ) 
long-term residence (see also permanent residence) 58, 141, 202, 244, 289, 314, 318
M
mandatory detention (see also detention ) 10, 76, 90, 91
medical care 6, 17, 18, 54, 87, 111, 137, 141, 146, 190, 319MESCA-countries 28, 29, 62, 297migrant children (see child migrants ) 
migrant domestic workers (see domestic workers )
migrant women (see women migrants )
migration flows 2, 7, 12, 31, 33, 55, 56, 73, 76, 86, 97, 106, 134, 172, 232, 240, 274,
318
migration governance 3, 32, 39, 63, 106, 151, 295migration management 39, 59, 68, 78, 93, 235migration statistics 113, 154, 169, 199, 210, 264372    Index
migration status 72, 93, 97, 115, 137, 148, 164, 167, 171, 187, 190, 235, 240, 241,
243
minors (see child migrants )
N
NGOs (see also civil society organisations) 5, 9, 15, 27, 30, 39, 60, 61, 63-65, 67,
69, 72, 97, 174, 198, 204, 254, 255, 265, 267-271, 275
O
obstacles to ratification of ICRMW (see also ratification record of ICRMW ) 4, 6, 39,
149, 172, 254, 299, 300, 309
OHCHR (Office of the High Commissioner  for Human Rights) 1, 87, 120, 160,
173, 296
origin country 2, 6, 7, 11-12, 14, 25, 28 , 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39,  41, 58, 59, 64, 69,
82, 83, 86, 88, 92, 97, 98, 115, 130, 131, 132, 138, 150, 152, 165, 168, 170-172,178, 179, 182, 183, 195, 200, 202, 205, 212, 220-221, 224-225, 227, 234, 238,245, 247, 249, 270, 274, 280, 297-298, 301
origin state (see origin country )
P
permanent residence (see also long-term residence ) 62, 157, 186, 189, 207, 233, 289
pre-departure 6, 33, 221, 257, 274
R
racial profiling 113, 191ratification record of ICRMW (see also obstacles to ratification of ICRMW ) 8, 16, 20,
24, 25, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 43, 51, 126, 291, 311
readmission 75, 273, 313recruitment of migrant workers 52, 63, 147, 157, 161, 171, 220, 221, 222, 223-225,
250-252, 257, 258, 264, 265, 269, 274
refugees 3, 27, 43, 46, 47, 49-51, 53, 55-58, 61, 80, 85, 87, 102, 105, 106, 111, 126,
138, 139, 141, 147, 151, 160, 172, 183, 187, 191, 192, 208-211, 219, 235, 238,239, 243, 246, 295, 301, 304
regional consultative processes 151, 273, 274regularisation 14, 62, 133, 135, 136, 179, 182, 185-187, 210, 215-218, 220, 238, 243,
279, 289, 317, 319
remittances 28, 46, 62, 180, 197, 247, 249, 251removal of migrants (see also deportation ; expulsion ) 29, 89, 91, 247, 315
reservations and ICRMW 8, 37, 81, 230, 231, 255, 283, 290, 300 return migration 178, 195, 197, 210, 232, 247, 257, 264
S
seasonal migrant workers 7, 52, 134, 137, 199, 207, 306, 315separated children (see unaccompanied minors )
smuggling of migrants (see also trafficking in persons ) 106, 126, 157, 176, 193, 202,
212, 263, 266, 273
social security 56, 111, 129, 130, 136-138, 140-142, 155, 161, 165, 166, 168, 171,
184, 221, 223, 236, 246, 258, 264, 265, 301, 316, 335, 343
Special rapporteur on the human rights of 32, 64, 75, 76, 103, 106, 108, 118, 124,
126, 138, 151, 170, 197, 215, 216, 220, 256, 259, 260, 272, 295  Index     373
Special rapporteur on trafficking 108, 124
stateless persons 85, 111, 139, 147state of destination (see destination country )
state of employment (see employment country )
state of origin (see origin country ) 
state of transit (see transit country )
state sovereignty 4, 6, 26, 28, 63, 80, 133, 137, 151, 279, 305
T
temporary work 35, 52, 68, 122, 206, 207, 224, 225, 226, 233, 279, 293 trade unions 6, 7, 17, 27, 53, 61, 68, 87, 120, 154, 155, 157, 159, 162, 166, 167, 172,
174, 220, 256, 266-269, 308
trafficking in persons (see also smuggling of migrants ) 39, 102, 108, 124, 126, 157,
176, 183, 189, 193, 194, 202, 212, 214, 218, 219, 226, 235, 246, 263, 264, 266,301, 302
transit country 6, 51, 88, 193, 194, 200, 221, 270transit state (see transit country)
U
unaccompanied minors (see also child migrants ) 99, 109, 115, 182, 183, 199, 208-
210, 246
unauthorised migration (see also clandestine migration ; undocumented migrants ;
irregular migration ) 39, 62, 76, 77, 179, 206, 208, 279
undocumented migrants (see also unauthorised migration ; clandestine migration ;
irregular migration ) 4, 6, 28, 29, 40, 63, 75, 80, 98, 104, 139, 141, 143, 232, 245,
246, 279, 288, 289, 305
UNHCR (Office of the United Nations Hi gh Commissioner for Refugees) 56, 160,
208, 243
UNICEF (United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund) 95, 126UPR (Universal Periodic Review) 10, 11, 16, 98, 100, 104, 108, 120, 121, 128, 138,
291, 292, 294, 311, 312
V
voluntary departure 142, 243
voluntary repatriation 196, 197voluntary return 195, 196, 232voting rights of migrants 8, 36, 187, 257, 264, 268, 271, 272
W
women migrants 14, 17, 26, 96, 99, 114, 115, 137, 139, 152, 199, 230, 234, 235, 237,
238, 241, 244, 245, 247, 275
women migrant workers 13, 14, 18, 17, 107, 114, 115, 127, 139, 140, 146, 147, 148,
156, 172, 229, 230, 234, 236, 238, 240, 241, 243-246, 253, 263, 264, 265
X
xenophobia 14, 45-46, 69, 106, 191, 247