Shining A 
Light on 
Summer 
Work
A First Look at the  
Employers Using the J-1  
Summer Work Travel Visa2 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
About the International Labor Recruitment Working Group
The International Labor Recruitment Working Group (ILRWG) seeks to end the systemic abuse of 
workers who are recruited to the United States. The ILRWG collaborates across labor sectors and 
visa categories to develop comprehensive policies and advocate for reforms, including increased 
enforcement of existing laws and increased transparency in the labor recruitment process.[1] 
In 2016, the ILRWG created a dedicated committee tasked with examining and addressing the 
widespread and troubling abuses of J-1 workers.
For more information about   
THE INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  
www.fairlaborrecruitment.org • info@fairlaborrecruitment.org
[1] The following organizations and individuals are members of the ILRWG: AFL-CIO; American Federation of Teachers (AFT); Janie Chuang 
and Jayesh Rathod from the American University, Washington College of Law; Centro de los Derechos del Migrante, Inc.; Coalition to Abolish 
Slavery and Trafficking (CAST); Department for Professional Employees (DPE); Economic Policy Institute (EPI); Farmworker Justice; Farm 
Labor Organizing Committee; Jennifer Gordon from Fordham University School of Law; Patricia Pittman and Susan French from George 
Washington University; Justice at Work; Justice in Motion; National Domestic Workers Alliance; National Employment Law Project; National 
Guestworker Alliance, New Orleans Workers’ Center for Racial Justice; National Immigration Law Center; Oxfam; Towards Justice; Polaris; 
Sarah Paoletti from University of Pennsylvania Law School; Safe Horizon; Service Employees International Union; Solidarity Center; South -
ern Poverty Law Center; UniteHere! International Union; Jennifer Hill from the University of Miami, School of Law; and Verité.© 2019 International Labor Recruitment Working Group Shining A 
Light on 
Summer 
Work
A First Look at the  
Employers Using the J-1  
Summer Work Travel Visa4 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
Table of  
Contents
Executive Summary 7
Background on the J-1 Exchange Visitor Program and Summer Work Travel 10
Findings 13
Recommendations 29
Appendices  32
J-1 Summer Work Travel Workers by State, 2015-2018 32
Principles for Fair Recruitment 34
Endnotes 36
Acknowledgments 386 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
PHOTOGRAPHY BY   
GERRY MELENDEZ 7
Executive  
Summary
The J-1 Exchange Visitor Program was created to enhance 
diplomacy and foster cultural exchange, but it has strayed 
far from its mission. Summer Work Travel—the largest J-1 
program category, and the focus of this report—has seeming -
ly transformed from a program designed to foster interna -
tional goodwill into a source of cheap and exploitable labor.  
As a result, hundreds of thousands of workers arrive in the 
United States on J-1 visas each year without adequate pro -
tections, and countless U.S. workers who struggle to find jobs 
in the same industries and communities are disadvantaged. 
This report presents a first-ever data-informed picture 
of employment realities in the J-1 Summer Work Travel 
(SWT) program, based on analysis of data painstakingly 
compiled through Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) re -
quests and other sources.1 In 2015, nearly 95,000 J-1 SWT 
workers came to the United States2 from 141 countries.  
Their average age was 21, and 55 percent of them were 
women. Despite the size of the program, the public has 
never had access to information about SWT employers and 
industries. Analysis of critical new data about the program 
leads to the following key findings:
SWT is a work program and needs to be regulated as one.
• In 2015, nearly 16,000 lead companies hired J-1 SWT 
workers.3 The brands that employed the most J-1 visa hold -
ers through the SWT program are large corporations such 
as McDonald’s, Disney, and Food Lion.8 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK• More than half of J-1 SWT workers were 
in the leisure and hospitality sector, includ -
ing jobs in accommodations, food services, 
amusement, gambling, and recreation.
SWT is contributing to fissured workplac -
es through subcontracting, franchising, 
and other arrangements that make work -
ers more vulnerable to abuse and dispa -
rate treatment. 
In just one example, at least 33 separate com -
panies hired J-1 SWT workers for positions 
related to the Holiday Inn brand in 2015.
Employers are using the SWT program 
to subvert the annual numerical limits on 
other work visa programs, like the H-2B 
temporary work visa program for non-  
agricultural jobs.
In 2015, at least 197 employers used both 
the SWT and H-2B programs to staff   
their workforce.
The SWT program is exposing young 
workers from around the world to unac -
ceptable risks in the United States, includ -
ing human trafficking.
• Sixty-seven J-1 visa holders self-reported 
to a hotline as victims of human trafficking 
between 2015 and 2017, according to Polar -
is.  This is likely the tip of the iceberg given 
that U.S. employers are currently not di -
rectly regulated under the program.
• Six percent of J-1 SWT workers had to 
seek jobs after arriving in the United States, 
making them even more vulnerable due to 
lack of stable employment or income.The severe lack of transparency in the 
SWT program prevents informed policy -
making and undermines efforts to better 
protect workers.
• The federal government does not publish 
information about J-1 SWT employers or 
occupations, and both the U.S. departments 
of State and Homeland Security initially re -
sisted requests to provide data required un -
der the Freedom of Information Act. 
• The data that were eventually provided 
were contained in large and difficult-to-use 
PDF files, which required at least 500 hours 
of processing, data entry, and coding in or -
der to allow them to be analyzed. 
Based on the insights gleaned from this re -
port, the ILRWG outlines a concrete set of 
policy recommendations to restore integ -
rity to the SWT program and adequately 
protect workers in affected industries and 
communities, including:
• Require that the program fulfill its origi -
nal mission of cultural exchange;
• Guarantee that J-1 workers have robust 
protections under U.S. labor and employ -
ment laws and that the program does not 
put downward pressure on wages and 
working conditions in affected industries; 
• Hold employers accountable when 
they mistreat J-1 SWT workers or bypass  
U.S. workers;
• Regulate the recruitment of J-1 SWT 
workers to protect against fraud, discrimi -
nation, fee charging, and trafficking; 
• Provide J-1 SWT workers effective mech -
anisms for legal recourse when their rights 
are violated; and
• Make detailed information about the J-1 
SWT program publicly available on an an -
nual basis and easily accessible to stake -
holders, policymakers, and the public.Almost  
16,000
lead companies have used 
the J-1 SWT program. 
They are identified for the 
first time here.INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  9
J-1 Summer Work Travel Visas By the Numbers in 2015
Total J-1 Visas 332,540
Total J-1 SWT Visas 94,983
J-1 SWT WORKERS
Women 55%
Men 45% 
Average Age 21
Countries of Origin 141
TOP 5 COUNTRIES OF ORIGIN FOR J-1 SWT WORKERS
Ireland 7,001
Bulgaria 5,974
China 5,795
Romania 5,371
Ukraine 5,348
TOP 5 STATES RECEIVING J-1 SWT WORKERS
New York 7,036
California 6,779
Massachusetts 6,532
Florida 6,394
Maryland 5,153
J-1 SWT EMPLOYERS
Lead Companies 15,899
Distinct Employers 20,639
Employers with both SWT and H-2B 197
TOP 5 EMPLOYMENT SECTORS
Leisure and Hospitality 53,237
Arts, Entertainment and Recreation 17,950
Retail 6,892
No Employer * 6,576
Real Estate 4,496
TOP 5 LEAD COMPANIES
Disney 2,355
Cedar Fair Park 2,340
McDonald's 1,735
Six Flags 1,580
Xanterra Parks and Resorts 1,257J-1 workers seeking cultural exchange 
often face difficult working and living 
conditions and sometimes encounter 
human trafficking and other dangers.
*Some J-1 SWT workers are authorized to be in the United States while not employed for periods 
of time during their stay, such as periods where they are seeking employment.PHOTOGRAPHY BY   
GERRY MELENDEZ10 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
Background on the J-1 
Exchange Visitor Program 
and Summer Work Travel
The U.S. Department of State (DOS) manages the Exchange Visitor Program, 
which DOS describes as “further[ing] foreign policy interests … by increasing mu -
tual understanding between people of the United States and the people of other 
countries by means of mutual educational and cultural exchange experiences.”4 
The J-1 nonimmigrant visa classification was created to facilitate the ability of 
participants in the program to travel to the United States, and sometimes the Ex -
change Visitor Program is simply referred to as the “J-1 program.”
PHOTOGRAPHY BY   
GERRY MELENDEZINTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  11The J-1 Exchange Visitor Program was 
created by the Fulbright-Hays Act of 1961 
for the purpose of promoting internation -
al understanding; it was not designed to 
import foreign labor and fill labor short -
ages.5 However, many of the 14 current 
J-1 program categories created via DOS 
regulations authorize employment. As a 
result, today the J-1 visa is routinely used 
and perceived as a temporary work visa, or 
“guestworker” program. Despite this prac -
tical reality, the U.S. Department of Labor 
(DOL)—the United States’ main federal 
agency charged with labor standards en -
forcement—does not evaluate the J-1 pro -
gram’s impact on the labor market or play 
an oversight role as it does with other tem -
porary work visa programs.
DOS regulations outline 14 distinct cat -
egories and subcategories within the J-1 
program: au pair, camp counselor, college 
and university students, government vis -
itors, international visitors, physicians, 
professors, research scholars, high school 
students, short-term scholars, specialists, 
summer work travel, teachers, interns, and 
trainees.6 Many of these categories cre -
ate environments where J-1 workers face 
heightened vulnerability to exploitation 
due to factors such as geographic isola -
tion, employment in private homes, work 
in dangerous industries, and lax worker 
protections and oversight. In 2015, DOS is -
sued 332,540 J-1 visas to foreign nationals7 
across the 14 J-1 programs.
Of all the J-1 program categories, the 
Summer Work Travel Program (SWT) is 
by far the largest, accounting for more than 
one quarter of all J-1 visas issued each year. 
The size of the SWT program has grown 
significantly over the last three decades. In 
1996, the first year for which data are avail -
able, there were 20,728 J-1 workers hired 
through SWT.8 In 2015, 94,983 J-1 SWT 
workers were hired, and this hiring level 
has held consistent or increased slightly 
in subsequent years, with 104,512 J-1 SWT 
workers being hired in 2018.9DOS describes SWT as an opportuni -
ty for, “College and University students 
enrolled full time and pursuing studies at 
post-secondary accredited academic insti -
tutions located outside the United States 
[to] come to the United States to share 
their culture and ideas with people of the 
United States through temporary work and 
travel opportunities.”10 As the program’s 
name implies, this experience includes 
both work and travel. The program reg -
ulations require that jobs be of “minimal 
training and are seasonal or temporary in 
order to earn funds to help defray a por -
tion of their expenses.”11 SWT regulations 
permit participants to be employed for up 
to four months.12 Participants must con -
nect with a DOS-designated “sponsor” who 
then, for a fee, places the participant with 
a U.S. employer. Sponsors can be nonprofit 
or for-profit entities. The cultural exchange 
component of the program directs spon -
sors to provide SWT participants with the 
opportunity, on and off the job, to (1) work 
and interact with U.S. citizens, and (2) en -
gage in cultural activities and events that 
provide exposure to U.S. culture.13
Advocates for labor rights and standards 
criticize a number of aspects of the SWT 
program. For example, the lack of meaning -
ful protections for victims of labor abuses 
and human trafficking leaves J-1 SWT work -
ers vulnerable. As a Southern Poverty Law 
Center report noted, there are “few places 
to turn” for J-1 workers, in part because 
“J-1 workers cannot access federally funded 
legal services to help them address work -
place violations.”14 Another concern is the 
fact that employers are exempt from paying 
certain payroll taxes for J-1 SWT workers, 
including Medicare, Social Security, and 
federal unemployment taxes. The resulting 
savings can act as an incentive for employ -
ers to hire J-1 SWT workers instead of sim -
ilarly situated U.S. workers.15 Indeed, some 
recruitment websites for J-1 SWT workers 
openly tout this benefit to employers.161996
20,728
J-1 workers 
were hired 
through the 
SWT program
2015
94,983
J-1 workers 
were hired 
through the 
SWT program
2018
104,512
J-1 workers were 
hired through the 
SWT program12 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
PHOTOGRAPHY BY   
GERRY MELENDEZINTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  13Findings
Based on analysis of 2015 SWT data painstakingly compiled from PDF files provided 
by DOS in response to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, as well as insight 
gained from worker cases and other sources, this report outlines five key findings.
1. SWT is a work program and needs to be 
regulated as one.
In 2015, 15,899 lead companies across 
many sectors of the economy hired J-1 
SWT workers. This staggering number 
presents strong evidence of the program’s 
popularity among employers. For compar -
ison, in 2015, a review of public data on the 
H-2B temporary work visa program re -
veals that just over 4,700 employers filed 
applications for those visas, which allow 
employers to hire workers from abroad for 
jobs in similar occupations to SWT.17
The public has never before known the 
names and locations of the employers that 
hire J-1 SWT workers because DOS does 
not publish that information. This report 
sheds important new light on the program. 
These data clearly show that the Summer 
Work Travel Program is indeed a “work” 
program that temporarily places large num -
bers of seasonal workers into the U.S. labor 
market each year, but whether they have a 
meaningful cultural experience as a result 
of their “travel” is an open question. For ex -
ample, we know anecdotally from news re -
ports and interviews with J-1 SWT workers 
that they often work extremely long hours 
and work multiple jobs, and sometimes 
even need to visit soup kitchens.18Leisure & Hospitality  
53,237 • 56%
No Employer  
6,576 • 7%
Other Sector  
726 • 1%
Real Estate  
4,496 • 5%
Retail  
6,892 • 7%Transport & Warehousing  
816 • 1%
Unknown  
2,732 • 3%
Arts, Entertainment & Rec  
17,950 • 19%
Admin & Support  
1,112 • 1%
Other Services Producing  
445 • 0%
FIGURE A
2015 SWT Workers by Employer’s Super 
(Aggregate) Sector in the North American 
Industry Classification System
Source:  Data are from the U.S. State Department, acquired through 
Freedom of Information Act request, in Catherine Bowman, Flexible 
Workers, Fissured Workplaces: Cultural Exchange For Hire In An Era of 
Precarious Labor , Ph.D. dissertation (2019), University of Colorado.56%7%1%5%7%1%3%
19%
1%14 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORKJ-1 SWT workers are concentrated in a 
few major industries. Figure A  shows the 
share of J-1 SWT workers employed ac -
cording to North American Industry Clas -
sification System (NAICS) codes, by broad 
(super) sector.19 More than half of the SWT 
positions were in the leisure and hospital -
ity sector, which includes a wide range of occupations. The top three NAICS sub-  
sectors in this category were accommoda -
tions; food services and drinking places; 
and amusement, gambling, and recreation. 
There were also tens of thousands of J-1 
SWT workers employed in the industries of 
arts and entertainment, real estate, retail, 
and administrative services.
The top five J-1 SWT employers in major industries
The figures below highlight the top five employers in the major industries where J-1 SWT 
workers are employed and the number of J-1 SWT workers employed by each. Many of 
these employers are prominent corporations that employed a large number of J-1 SWT 
workers for positions around the country.
FIGURE B
Top 5 Employers by Number of J-1 SWT Workers in the Amusement, Gambling, and Recreation Industry
Source:  Data are from the U.S. Department of State, acquired through Freedom of Information Act request, in Catherine Bowman, Flexible Workers, 
Fissured Workplaces: Cultural Exchange For Hire In An Era of Precarious Labor, Ph.D dissertation (2019), University of Colorado.23552340
1580
10841056
Walt Disney
Cedar Fair Parks
Six FlagsBusch Gardens
Mt. Olympus Water and 
Theme ParkINTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  15The J-1 SWT employers shown in Fig-
ure B  are household names, not just in the 
United States but internationally as well. 
The Walt Disney Company, the biggest em -
ployer in this group, hired 2,355 J-1 SWT 
workers. In 2011, Professor Kit Johnson es -
timated that Disney’s use of the J-1 program 
saves them $15 million per year because the 
international students employed there are 
not covered by the collective bargaining 
agreements that set terms and conditions 
for most of Disney’s unionized employees.20 
This estimate covers only wages—millions 
more are saved by Disney’s avoidance of 
paying into pension plans or providing 
health benefits.21 These significant financial 
savings create a clear incentive for employ -
ers to bypass local workers in order to hire 
J-1 SWT workers, and illustrate the ways 
in which the program can be used to drive 
down labor standards and weaken unions 
in the absence of appropriate regulations 
and enforcement.“In 2018, workers at Disney fought for and won a great contract with big 
wage increases. Before that, many had been homeless, having to work 
multiple jobs, or go to food pantries to survive as the cost of living went 
up and up in Orlando. So we know what it’s like for many of the visa 
workers at Disney who aren’t protected by a union contract. They live in 
our communities, and many of them are living eight to a room, paying 
outrageous fees to recruiters, and terrified of getting fired because 
they’re in debt.  At the same time, these are thousands of jobs that could 
be living wage union jobs for local workers.”
ERIC CLINTON , President, Central Florida AFL-CIO President & UNITE HERE Local 362 President
McDonald's
Dunkin Donuts
Hard Rock Cafe
Wendy's
Burger King1735
403
321291
155
FIGURE C
Top 5 Employers by Number of J-1 SWT Workers 
in the Food Services and Drinking Places Industry
Source:  Data are from the U.S. State Department, acquired through 
Freedom of Information Act request, in Catherine Bowman, Flexible 
Workers, Fissured Workplaces: Cultural Exchange For Hire In An Era of 
Precarious Labor , Ph.D. dissertation (2019), University of Colorado.16 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORKFigure C  shows the top J-1 SWT employ -
ers in the food services and drinking places 
industry. All five are national fast food or 
restaurant chains with thousands of fran -
chisees nationwide. McDonald’s was the 
top employer in this industry with 1,735 J-1 
SWT workers employed at franchises across 
167 different zip codes. Just two years earli -
er, 15 J-1 SWT workers employed by a Mc -
Donald’s franchise in Pennsylvania protest -
ed unfair working conditions like wage theft 
and long shifts that lasted as long as 25 hours, 
as well as substandard housing provided by 
their employer.22 Their situation garnered 
national attention and resulted in the Mc -
Donald’s franchisee being fined by DOL for 
minimum wage violations and forced to pay 
291 fast food workers $205,977 in back wag -
es and liquidated damages.23 However, it did 
not result in McDonald’s Corp. nor the indi -
vidual franchisee being banned from hiring J-1 SWT workers or other temporary work 
visa holders.
More recently, in May 2019, McDonald’s 
workers, supported by the Time’s Up Legal 
Defense Fund, filed 23 complaints against 
the company for repeated sexual harass -
ment, gender discrimination, and retalia -
tion.24 These filings were the third round of 
sexual harassment complaints filed against 
McDonald’s in recent years.  Four of the 
2019 complaints were lodged by teenagers 
who had suffered sexual harassment and 
other abuse at the hands of McDonald’s 
managers. A job where sexual harassment 
of young workers is allegedly pervasive is 
not an appropriate placement for J-1 SWT 
workers. DOS needs to reevaluate wheth -
er it is appropriate to allow McDonald’s to 
continue to hire so many workers through 
the SWT program.
Food Lion
Stop & Shop  
Supermarket
PublixWinn-Dixie
AlbertsonsFIGURE D
Top 5 Employers by Number of 
J-1 SWT Workers in the Food 
and Beverage Stores Industry
Source:  Data are from the U.S. State Department, 
acquired through Freedom of Information Act request, 
and discussed in Catherine Bowman, Flexible Workers, 
Fissured Workplaces: Cultural Exchange For Hire In An Era 
of Precarious Labor , Ph.D. dissertation (2019), University 
of Colorado.555
430
362
310
82INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  17Figure D  shows the top employers of 
J-1 SWT workers in the food and beverage 
stores industry, which includes major gro -
cery chains like Food Lion, Stop and Shop, 
and Albertsons. A significant share of the 
workforce in these stores is unionized. In 
April 2019, many employees of Stop and 
Shop went on strike to demand better pay 
and working conditions.25 J-1 SWT em -
ployers must not be permitted to use the 
program to undermine collective bargain -
ing agreements and collectively bargained 
wage rates.
Figure E  shows the top five J-1 SWT 
employers in the accommodation indus -
try. The YMCA is a nonprofit organization 
“whose mission is to put Christian princi -
ples into practice through programs that 
build healthy spirit, mind and body for all,”26 
and Holiday Inn is one of the largest hotel 
chains in the United States. While Xanterra 
Parks and Resorts, the top J-1 SWT employ -
er in this industry may not be well known, it 
is the largest park concessions management company in the United States. Xanterra 
provides services at internationally known 
national parks such as Yellowstone, Grand 
Canyon, and Mount Rushmore.27
In 2017, in response to reporting that the 
Trump administration was considering re -
stricting or eliminating the SWT program, 
Travel Weekly  reported that the CEO of 
Xanterra penned a letter to the Trump ad -
ministration warning that eliminating the 
SWT program “would have a devastating 
impact” because more than 20 percent of 
its summer workforce are J-1 workers.28 The 
comments made to Travel Weekly  by other 
employers of J-1 SWT workers showed little 
concern regarding a possible loss of cultural 
exchange opportunities for J-1 SWT work -
ers—instead, they cited difficulties in hiring 
“quality seasonal employees” and noted that 
businesses “would be unable to open and 
function” without them—strong evidence 
that employers view J-1 SWT as a program 
to fill labor shortages, not a way to facilitate 
cultural exchanges and foster diplomacy.
FIGURE E
Top 5 Employers by Number of J-1 SWT 
Workers in the Accommodation Industry
Source:  Data are from the U.S. State Department, acquired 
through Freedom of Information Act request, in Catherine 
Bowman, Flexible Workers, Fissured Workplaces: Cultural 
Exchange For Hire In An Era of Precarious Labor , Ph.D. 
dissertation (2019), University of Colorado.
Kalahari Resort
Holiday Inn
Vail Resorts HospitalityYMCA
Xanterra Parks and Resorts511582650695125718 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORKThe top five employers in the real es -
tate industry listed in Figure F  are less -
er-known firms in the swimming pool man -
agement or vacation rental management 
business. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 
many J-1 SWT workers employed in this in -
dustry work as lifeguards or housekeepers. 
For example, a 2018 report in the New York 
Post  detailed a number of employers in New 
York and New Jersey complaining of facing 
labor shortages at swimming pools due to 
increased scrutiny of J-1 visa applications. 
The president of American Pool in New 
Jersey noted that visa issues have “set off a 
‘bidding war’ for students as young as 15” to 
work in area swimming pools.29
Low Wages and Lax Oversight
The most common occupations for J-1 SWT 
workers—lifeguards, amusement park at -
tendants, and hotel room cleaners—also 
pay among the lowest wages in the U.S. la -
bor market, just barely above the federal minimum wage,30 and are often associated 
with high rates of labor violations. There -
fore, in order to prevent further downward 
pressure on already low wages, employers 
using the program should be required to 
pay J-1 SWT workers a fair wage according 
to local standards. However, the J-1 SWT 
regulations do not include a clear and en -
forceable rule establishing the minimum 
wage levels that J-1 SWT workers should be 
paid, unlike other temporary work visa pro -
grams like the H-2A and H-2B programs.31
Furthermore, DOL has no oversight or 
enforcement role in the J-1 program and 
no mandate to protect J-1 SWT workers, 
except in cases where they are not paid the 
state or federal minimum wage. This glar -
ing gap in the SWT regulatory framework 
is even more troubling when you consider 
the safety equipment and training needs of 
seasonal workers in such a diverse range 
of job types. Are J-1 SWT workers being 
adequately trained and prepared to avoid 
workplace injuries? The public does not 
know and DOS regulations do not require it. 
2. The SWT program is contributing to fis -
sured workplaces through subcontracting, 
franchising, and other arrangements that 
make workers more vulnerable to abuse 
and disparate treatment.
Although there were nearly 16,000 lead 
companies or brands hiring workers 
through the SWT program, the actual num -
ber of distinct employers who benefited 
from these workers is much larger. For in -
stance, as Dr. Catherine Bowman points 
out in her exploration of the relationship 
between fissuring and the SWT program, at 
least 33 separate companies hired J-1 SWT 
workers for positions related to the Holiday 
Inn brand alone. This diverse array of sub -
contractors all connected to a single hotel 
chain highlights the diffuse nature of mod -
ern corporate employment practices.FIGURE F
Top 5 Employers by Number of J-1 SWT 
Workers in the Real Estate Industry
Source:  Data are from the U.S. State Department, acquired through 
Freedom of Information Act request, and discussed in Catherine Bowman, 
Flexible Workers, Fissured Workplaces: Cultural Exchange For Hire In An 
Era of Precarious Labor,  Ph.D. dissertation (2019), University of Colorado. High Sierra Pools
Brett Robinson  
Gulf Corporation
Premier Aquatics
Winkler Pool  
Management
Continental  
Pools Inc1030
290
250 242
85INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  19COLE FACILITIES GROUP
CCS PIGEON FORGE (DBA)
EMERALD BREEZE  
RESORT GROUP (DBA)
COASTAL HOSPITALITY ASSOCIATES (DBA)
EXPRESS HOTEL, INC. (DBA)
DHILION HOTEL, INC. (DBA)
OAK CREEK, LLP
WILLIE NILLIE, INC. (DBA)
SUNSET POOL, INC.
WEST YELLOWSTONE HOTELS
PRAY HOSPITALITY
ST. IGNACE RESORTS (DBA)
PREMIER POOL MANAGEMENT
BALAJI HOSPITALITY , INC.
DECADE PROPERTIES, INC.
SLEEPY TIME, LLC (DBA)
SCH GROUP ONE (DBA)
S3 HOTEL, LLC (DBA)
PIGEON FORGE HOTEL COMPANY (DBA)
CUSTER HOSPITALITY , INC.
HOTEL EMPLOYMENT SERVICES, INC 
NORTH PLATTE LODGING LTD.
GULF SHORES  
HOSPITALITY (DBA)
NEWPORT HOTEL GROUP
MASTERCORP , INC.
LAFAYETTE PORTLAND,  
LLC. (DBA)
JAMES B. KOEHLER (DBA)
HARRISON GROUP
EXCEL HOTEL GROUP (DBA)
FRIENDLY STAFFING, INC.
BAR HARBOR REGENCY
BOZEMAN INVESTORS (DBA)
FRIENDLY SERVICESFIGURE G
Holiday Inn 
Contracting 
Arrangements in 
J-1 SWT Program:
A list of the many 
businesses contracting 
J-1 SWT workers for 
employment at Holiday 
Inn hotels in the U.S.
Source:  Data and figure 
are from the U.S. State 
Department, acquired through 
Freedom of Information 
Act request, in Catherine 
Bowman, Flexible Workers, 
Fissured Workplaces: Cultural 
Exchange For Hire In An Era 
of Precarious Labor , Ph.D. 
dissertation (2019), University 
of Colorado. Arrangements that lead to fissuring32 
allow businesses to distance themselves 
from formal employment relationships 
in order to avoid paying payroll taxes, 
providing benefits, and meeting other ob -
ligations of formal employers. The exten -
sive use of subcontracting to fissure the 
traditional employment relationship dis -
empowers workers and opens the door to 
many problematic issues such as making 
skills obsolete, enabling disparate treat -
ment, and diminishing worker protections 
and opportunities. In fact, according to 
former DOL Wage and Hour Administra -
tor David Weil, “the fissured workplace 
contributes to growing earnings inequal -
ity.”33 Our visa system should not help to 
fuel this destructive trend.
Third-party employers and subcontract -
ing companies should be prohibited from 
using temporary work visa programs like J-1 
SWT. Adding bureaucratic layers to the work 
arrangement for young foreign students 
employed in the United States only makes 
their status more precarious and the system 
more confusing. The negative consequenc -
es of allowing J-1 SWT students to work for 
subcontractors was on display in 2011 when 
hundreds of J-1 SWT workers employed by 
multiple layers of subcontractors walked 
out of a plant in Pennsylvania that packs HOLIDAY INN
The most common 
occupations for 
J-1 SWT workers 
also pay among the 
lowest wages in the 
U.S. labor market.20 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
Hershey’s chocolates to protest working 
conditions.34 At a minimum, J-1 sponsors 
should be required to disclose all details 
about any third-party or subcontracting ar -
rangements that may exist with companies 
where they place J-1 SWT workers.
Large chains such as McDonald’s and 
their franchisees are also using the SWT 
program extensively, despite sexual harass -
ment charges35 and findings of unfair labor 
practices, including failure to pay minimum 
wage and overtime.36 Franchises contribute 
to fissuring by distancing individual work -
places from the parent or lead company in 
an effort to avoid the responsibilities that 
should come from appropriate joint-em -
ployer designations. Federal agencies with 
oversight authority need to understand the 
vulnerabilities these employment relation -
ships create for J-1 SWT workers and assess proposed franchisee job placements care -
fully to prevent exploitation and the ero -
sion of labor standards. DOS should work 
with DOL to promulgate and enforce a new 
rule that prohibits companies or brands 
with a history of labor violations, whether 
direct or through subcontractors or fran -
chisees, from hiring J-1 SWT workers.
Given the prevalent use of the SWT 
program by unionized employers like Dis -
ney, Food Lion and Stop and Shop, DOS 
regulations also need to ensure that SWT 
hiring does not undercut collectively bar -
gained wage and benefits packages. J-1 
SWT workers at union facilities should be 
extended the same rights, benefits, and pro -
tections as those stipulated in the collective 
agreement, whether or not they are hired 
through third parties.
In 2011, hun -
dreds of J-1 
SWT workers 
employed by 
subcontractors 
protested work 
conditions at 
a plant that 
packs Hershey’s 
chocolates.
JOHN C. WHITEHEAD/AP IMAGESINTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  21
In 2013, the treatment of 
J-1 students working at 
a McDonald's restaurant 
sparked protest.JOHN C. WHITEHEAD/AP IMAGESRICHARD LEVINE / ALAMY STOCK PHOTO22 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
3. Employers are using the SWT program to 
subvert the numerical limits on other tem -
porary work visa programs, like H-2B.
Some of the United States’ other major 
temporary work visa programs offer some 
degree of labor protections and/or have 
Congressionally mandated annual limits 
or “caps” on the number of visas that can 
be issued in any given year. The appropri -
ate number for these caps is hotly debated 
every year, and they are set through legisla -
tion to prevent overuse and misuse of tem -
porary work visas.
However, savvy employers frustrated by 
rules in the H-2A and H-2B temporary work 
visa program, or the caps in the H-2B pro -
gram, have discovered that they can “shop” 
around for other visas instead. Indeed, the 
J-1 visa provides an attractive alternative 
because it lacks any of the basic labor pro -
tections—like minimum wage rules or a re -
quirement that employers advertise jobs to 
local workers before hiring a migrant work -
er—which employers often decry as “bur -
densome” or “overly bureaucratic.”
Our analysis found that in 2015, at least 
197 employers used both the SWT and H-2B 
programs to staff their workforces.37 Hiring 
through both visa programs further chal -
lenges the notion that the SWT program is 
a meaningful cultural exchange, and leads 
to problematic situations where employees 
at the same workplace have different visa 
statuses with different rules and wage rates 
applying to each.
One example of a company using both 
the SWT and H-2B visa programs in 2015 
was Six Flags, which filed labor certifica -
tions with DOL to hire 255 H-2B workers to 
work in food service and as amusement at -
tendants. They were also one of the biggest 
employers in the SWT program that year, 
hiring 1,580 J-1 SWT workers, likely to per -
form similar work to the H-2B employees.
In another example, 13 students partic -
ipating in the SWT program from the Do -minican Republic lodged a complaint with 
DOS in 2016 detailing their poor working 
conditions. The students were promised 
opportunities to experience American 
culture while working at resorts and ice 
cream shops. Instead, they were shuttled 
around by a labor broker to various ho -
tels to perform grueling housekeeping and 
laundry jobs that offered little opportu -
nity for cultural exchange, according to 
the complaint. This arrangement allowed 
sponsors to make money from the students 
by charging them fees before passing the 
responsibility for the students onto the 
labor broker, who then shopped the stu -
dents around to hotels for sporadic work. 
When the students were not at work, they 
lived in cramped and substandard housing 
arranged by the labor broker where they 
were each charged $90 per week in rent,  
according to the complaint. Eight work -
ers were placed in a small, bedbug-infest -
ed apartment with one bathroom. When 
a student complained about the work and 
housing conditions, an official with the la -
bor broker said “troublemakers” would be 
kicked out of the J-1 program, even though 
on paper DOS regulations bar retaliation 
against J-1 workers over complaints.
That same year, the labor broker re -
ceived authorization from DOL to hire 
H-2B workers to perform the same work 
that the J-1 SWT workers it hired were 
performing, often side-by-side in the ho -
tels. But rather than being treated equally 
and paid the same wages, the labor broker 
took advantage of the SWT program’s lack 
of a clear wage rule to pay those J-1 SWT 
workers nearly $1 less per hour than the 
government-mandated prevailing wage the 
H-2B workers were paid. The labor broker’s 
practice of using multiple visas and acting 
as a de facto staffing firm allowed it to cir -
cumvent critical protections for U.S. work -
ers, such as the H-2B program’s cap and 
prevailing wage requirements.38197
Employers hired 
workers using 
both "shortage" 
H-2B visas and 
"exchange" J-1 visasINTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  23
One recent Bloomberg Law report de -
tailed a Minnesota Supreme Court case in -
volving John Svihel, a farm owner in Min -
nesota, who employed both H-2A and J-1 
workers to work as farmworkers.39 The case 
centered around whether Svihel was required 
to pay state unemployment taxes despite not 
being required to pay federal taxes for his 
H-2A and J-1 workers. The H-2A temporary 
work visa program requires that employers 
recruit U.S. workers before hiring migrant 
workers, provide housing and transportation 
to H-2A employees, and pay migrant workers 
an adverse effect wage rate (AEWR)40 to pro -
tect local wage standards. The J-1 programs 
that authorize employment, including SWT, 
do not include such requirements. The fact 
that Svihel was employing farmworkers with 
H-2A visas and J-1 workers to do the same 
jobs is a strong indication that J-1 visas were 
being used by Svihel to fill a labor shortage, 
avoid paying the AEWR, and avoid paying for 
transportation and housing.
In addition, Svihel was hiring migrant 
workers with temporary work visas after 
blatantly violating labor and immigration 
laws for many years. In 2016, the Obama 
DOL held Svihel liable for $576,707 in back 
pay and restitution to 76 workers and de -
termined that he also owed $199,218 from 
36 workers from Mexico and Eastern Eu -
rope on H-2A and J-1 visas.41 In 2017, Svihel 
and his labor recruiter were also sentenced 
to prison for visa fraud and for charging il -
legal fees to workers.42 Svihel had to pay 
$772,000 into a fund and agreed to an “en -
hanced compliance” program, which sug -
gests Svihel continued to hire workers with 
temporary visas after these violations.
Yet another example of visa shopping 
comes from one of the largest J-1 SWT em -
ployers: Disney. Disney hired 2,355 J-1 SWT 
workers in 2015, a staggering number con -
sidering that Disney is also known to hire 
workers through a variety of other tempo -
rary work visa programs—including voca -
Thirteen J-1 SWT 
workers filed 
a complaint in 
2016 describing 
grueling work 
conditions at 
hotels with little 
cultural exchange.
Eight workers 
were placed 
in a small, 
bedbug-infested 
apartment with 
one bathroom.PHOTOGRAPHY BY   
GERRY MELENDEZ24 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
tional students on M visas, intra-company 
transferees with L-1 visas, H-2B workers in 
non-agricultural jobs, trainees with H-3 vi -
sas, and treaty investors with E-2 visas—as 
well as having successfully lobbied for the 
creation of its own temporary work visa 
program, the Q visa.43 In 2015, 1,900 Q visas 
were issued by DOS.44 Although data are not 
available to confirm if all 1,900 were hired 
by Disney companies in 2015, it is likely that 
at least a significant share—approximately 
two-thirds, according to previous years—
became Disney employees.45 According to 
an estimate by Professor Kit Johnson, Dis -
ney saves $19 million per year on labor costs 
by using the Q visa, in addition to the $15 
million they save through J-1 hires.464. The SWT program is exposing young 
workers from around the world to unac -
ceptable risks in the United States—in -
cluding human trafficking—and the State 
Department’s system for accountability is 
flawed and failing.
In 2015 alone, employers hired 94,983 J-1 
SWT workers from 141 countries, who had 
an average age of 21. Over half—55 per -
cent—of J-1 SWT workers were women. 
Unfortunately, inadequate regulations and 
virtually nonexistent enforcement in the 
SWT program exposes these eager young 
workers to unacceptable levels of risk. J-1 
SWT workers routinely report complaints 
about their treatment in the United States, 
including deplorable working and living 
conditions and frequent misrepresenta -
tions regarding the nature of the work they 
will be doing and the pay and benefits they 
will receive. In some cases, the abuses and 
exploitation of J-1 SWT workers is so prev -
alent in an area that law enforcement offi -
cials take it upon themselves to do meet -
ings and outreach to J-1 SWT workers in 
order to inform them about their rights, as 
they’ve done in South Carolina and Florida, 
for example.47
One anecdote that was submitted as tes -
timony to the Maryland Legislature helps 
illustrate the inherent vulnerability of J-1 
SWT workers: In 2015, Oliver Benzon Mar -
tinez traveled to Ocean City, Maryland, to 
work as a cook with a J-1 SWT visa. He left 
his home in the Dominican Republic with 
the dream and expectation that he would not 
only get to experience American culture, but 
also earn enough money to send some home 
to his family. The reality he faced was stark -
ly different than what he was promised. He 
arrived at the worksite only to find that the 
restaurant was not ready for business. In -
stead of cooking, he was ordered to do con -
struction work. His assignments included 
carrying and moving heavy kitchen equip -
A group of J-1 
SWT workers from 
the Dominican 
Republic, including 
this student, say 
they were shopped 
around to various 
hotels for sporadic 
and grueling work.2,355
$15 
Million
is the amount of 
money Disney 
is estimated 
to have saved 
through J-1 hires.is the number 
of J-1 SWT 
workers Disney 
hired in 2015.
PHOTOGRAPHY BY   
GERRY MELENDEZINTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  25ment, despite the fact that DOS had banned 
this type of hard labor from the SWT pro -
gram in 2012 because of safety concerns.48 
After two weeks of work, Oliver received a 
paycheck for only a small percentage of the 
hours he had worked. Oliver describes that 
summer as traumatic and hopes no future 
J-1 workers will have the same experience 
he had alone in a foreign country.49
Sadly, abuses in the SWT program some -
times escalate beyond wage theft and reach 
the level of trafficking. The Human Traf -
ficking Legal Center has documented at 
least five civil or criminal trafficking cases 
for J-1 workers in recent years. This is an 
alarming number given the practical diffi -
culty of bringing such cases to trial and the 
short duration of J-1 visas. Many cases go 
unreported or are never pursued because 
J-1 SWT workers are required to depart the 
country soon after their program ends.
From 2015 through 2017, the anti-traf -
ficking organization Polaris identified 67 
victims of trafficking who held a J-1 visa at 
the time that they reported abuse to the 
National Human Trafficking Hotline. Six 
of the 67 J-1 visa holders who reported traf -
ficking identified as potential sex traffick -
ing victims. The 67 J-1 workers who called 
the hotline did not identify what type of 
work they were doing with their visas.50
During the summer of 2011, a Miami 
Beach company recruited two young wom -
en from Kazakhstan through the SWT 
program to work at the Janardana’s Yoga 
and Wellness Studio. The business owner, 
Jeffrey Jason Cooper, told the recruitment 
agency that he needed clerical workers to 
answer his phones and help plan wellness 
retreats. Two J-1 SWT workers paid hefty 
fees and traveled to the United States, only 
to find that the yoga studio did not exist. In -
stead, they were expected to work at a mas -
sage parlor and perform illegal sex acts. On -
line advertisements for the parlor promised 
“Beautiful ladies from Kyrgyzstan, Uzbeki -stan, Belarus, and Ukraine offering Sensual 
Body rubs,” despite the fact that this type 
of work, along with work in gambling es -
tablishments and strip clubs, is prohibited 
under the SWT program. After the young 
women arrived, they were given detailed 
instructions about the commercial sex acts 
they were expected to perform at Cooper’s 
massage parlor. They managed to escape af -
ter several months of being victimized after 
neighbors complained to law enforcement. 
Cooper was sentenced to 30 years in fed -
eral prison after a jury convicted him on 11 
charges, including sex trafficking by force.51
In another case, workers recruited 
from Jamaica and other countries to work 
for hospitality businesses in Oklahoma 
through the SWT program filed a federal 
labor trafficking lawsuit in 2018, alleging 
they were induced to pay high recruitment 
fees in order to secure employment, com -
pensated less than they had been promised, 
denied the full-time hours they were told 
they would be able to work, charged high 
rent for crowded and inadequate housing, 
and threatened with financial and/or phys -
ical harm if they left their jobs. The workers 
were inspired to take legal action when they 
learned that H-2B guestworkers had filed 
suit against the same employers a year earli -
er. Defendants Walter and Carolyn Schum -55%Fifty-five percent of 
the 94,938 J-1 SWT 
workers hired in 2015 
were women.26 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORKacher are accused of getting away with 
abuses for some time because they con -
trolled both the businesses that employed 
the J-1 SWT workers and the sponsor orga -
nization, which in theory was responsible 
for protecting the safety of J-1 SWT workers 
and advocating on their behalf. The Schum -
achers, according to the lawsuit, ignored 
complaints of low pay, irregular hours, and 
inadequate housing, and convinced their 
J-1 employees that they would suffer seri -
ous harm if they did not continue to work 
for their companies. The workers earned 
so little they were barely able to pay their 
expenses in Oklahoma, much less return 
home and repay the thousands of dollars’ 
worth of loans they had taken out to pay re -
cruitment fees and travel expenses.52
The allegations in the Schumacher case 
illustrate the disastrous consequences of 
the wholly inadequate enforcement and ac -
countability system that DOS has created 
in the J-1 SWT program. Other than claims 
of occasional, voluntary audits of worksites 
where J-1 SWT workers are present, DOS 
does not undertake labor enforcement ac -
tions against employers that hire J-1 SWT 
workers or directly regulate them. In fact, 
DOS has explicitly acknowledged in regula -tions that it does not have jurisdiction over 
J-1 employers, and in any case it would not 
have the appropriate staff expertise to ade -
quately regulate them. Rather than partner 
formally with DOL to monitor employers, 
DOS makes sponsor organizations respon -
sible for the safety of J-1 SWT workers and 
for vetting employers and job opportuni -
ties. However, sponsors are not neutral 
arbiters that can adequately safeguard the 
interests of J-1 SWT workers because they 
benefit financially from placing workers 
with employers and would stand to lose 
business and profit if it came to light that 
abuses had occurred in the program under 
their watch. This glaring conflict of inter -
est—combined with the fact that sponsors 
are not labor standards enforcement ex -
perts and do not have the requisite exper -
tise to regulate employers either—creates 
an irrational enforcement regime and a 
dangerous environment permissive of wage 
theft, labor abuses, and human trafficking. 
Sadly, the few examples listed here are like -
ly just the tip of the iceberg.
Another element of the SWT program 
that contributes to the vulnerability of J-1 
SWT workers is that some arrive in the 
United States without knowing where they 
will be employed, or if they will be em -
ployed at all. Under DOS regulations, J-1 
SWT workers hailing from countries that 
participate in the U.S. Visa Waiver Program 
are permitted to find a job after arriving in 
the United States, which is also after they 
have paid thousands of dollars in fees, trav -
el, and housing costs;53 the rest must secure 
employment before arriving in the United 
States. In the SWT data reviewed for this 
report, there were 6,576 entries for J-1 
SWT workers that had no employer listed.54 
Eight hundred eighteen of those entries 
were listed as “on travel” meaning the J-1 
SWT workers were not currently employed 
and were using the time to travel, as per -
mitted by DOS regulations. The remain -Workers recruited in 2018  
for a hospitality business 
alleged they...
• paid high recruitment fees
•  were compensated less  
than promised
• were denied full-time hours
•  were charged high rent for 
crowded, inadequate housing
•  were threatened with financial 
and/or physical harm if they quitINTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  27ing 5,758 entries were listed as “seeking 
employment” or “exempt from pre-place -
ment,” accounting for approximately 6 per -
cent of all J-1 SWT workers. Those workers 
were either looking for a job or between 
jobs on the date that the SWT data was gen -
erated from the Student and Exchange Vis -
itor Information System (SEVIS) database. 
J-1 SWT workers who are seeking employ -
ment, either immediately after arriving in 
the United States or during their program, 
are inherently vulnerable by virtue of not 
having stable employment or income.
5. There is a lack of transparency in the 
SWT program, and we cannot have informed 
policymaking without it.
Data like those examined in this report are 
essential to better understand the SWT 
program and determine what types of reg -
ulations and enforcement are required in 
order to govern the program in a way that 
is fair to young foreign students and other 
workers in affected industries. The lack of 
public access to such basic information is 
another factor that allows abuses like those 
described above to persist.
The few data sources available on J-1 
SWT workers are retroactive, aggregated, 
and lacking in important details. DOS’ de 
facto temporary work visa program—bare -
ly disguised as a tool of diplomacy—fails 
to provide accurate, detailed, micro-level 
data in real time. The first real opportunity 
the public will have to know which compa -
nies use the SWT program for their staffing 
needs is this report, which was made possi -
ble only through difficult and time-consum -
ing efforts to extract information through 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) re -
quest. As the section below describing the 
process for obtaining the data for this re -
port makes clear, the FOIA process is not 
an efficient or an effective mechanism to 
gather necessary and timely insight on the 
SWT program.The time-consuming process required 
to obtain the data for this report clearly il -
lustrates the need for more transparency in 
the J-1 program. Acquiring SWT program 
data through a FOIA request was neither 
easy nor straightforward. The data used in 
this report were requested, organized, and 
analyzed by Dr. Catherine Bowman, while 
she was a Ph.D. candidate at the University 
of Colorado, Boulder, as part of her doctor -
al dissertation. The process for procuring 
these data originated with a FOIA request 
to DHS55 on April 6, 2015, for information 
on J-1 SWT workers that included a solic -
itation for demographic and employment 
placement data for SWT program partici -
pants for the years 2012-2014. That request 
was denied, with DHS contending that DOS 
is the appropriate federal agency to request 
SWT information from, since the program 
is under the purview of DOS.
Based on DHS’ denial, a FOIA request 
was submitted to DOS for the same SWT 
employment and demographic informa -
tion. Thirteen months later, on June 30, 
2016, DOS also denied the April 2015 FOIA 
request for J-1 SWT information. DOS ex -
plained that J-1 SWT data was housed in the 
Student and Exchange Visitor Information 
System (SEVIS), which was “owned and 
maintained” by DHS, and as such, recom -
mended that the request be directed back 
to DHS. Based on information from a DOS 
contact, a second request for SWT data 
from DOS was made; however, this time it 
was granted, but was restricted to data on 
2015 participants only.
On Oct. 17, 2016, 18 months after the ini -
tial request, the 2015 SWT data requested 
from DOS finally arrived on a compact disc. 
However, the format of the data proved prob -
lematic, as they were presented as a 2,639-
page scanned document in an Adobe Porta -
ble Document Format (PDF). The next year 
and a half was spent on data entry and con -28 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORKversion, transforming the information on 
the PDF into a useable spreadsheet format.
Obtaining the data via FOIA request re -
quired waiting over 18 months and more 
than 500 hours of work by the lead re -
searcher and a paid research assistant to 
code the data by industry (which required 
many meetings and discussions with la -
bor market and immigration experts) and 
to manually input the information into 
a spreadsheet. Transparency in the SWT 
program should not require this much time, 
effort, cost, and persistence. It would cost 
DOS virtually nothing to make these data—
which are already collected and stored elec -
tronically—available to the public in a use -
able format on an annual basis, perhaps on 
the “Facts and Figures” section of DOS’ J-1 
Exchange Visitor Program website.56 In order to prevent exploitation and en -
sure the integrity of a program designed at 
least in part to promote cultural exchange, 
stakeholders need access to real-time mi -
cro level data published electronically—and 
in a searchable format—on the employers 
that use the SWT program, the wages they 
offer, the occupations they will fill, and 
the locations of the worksites. DOS should 
also require employers to advertise open 
positions so that the U.S. public has an op -
portunity to apply for them. And members 
of the public and worker advocacy organi -
zations should be allowed to challenge the 
legitimacy of the required minimum or pre -
vailing wage rates and job classifications, in 
case they are misrepresented by employers.Obtaining the data required waiting  18 months . It then took 
500+ hours  of work  to make the data usable.INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  29Recommendations
The ILRWG urges that the following reforms be 
implemented in order to protect workers and bring 
integrity to the J-1 Summer Work Travel program:
Renewed Purpose 
Require that the program fulfill its original mis -
sion of cultural exchange
• Expressly define the cultural exchange require -
ments of the program.
• Prevent J-1 SWT workers from being over -
worked and preserve sufficient time for each to 
engage in meaningful cultural activities away 
from work.
• Conduct a study to assess the impact of the 
SWT program on U.S. youth employment and 
explore the prospects for shifting toward a recip -
rocal exchange model that also affords U.S. youth 
opportunities to travel and work abroad. 
Effective Oversight
Guarantee that J-1 workers have robust  
labor and employment protections and that the 
program does not adversely affect the wages 
and working conditions of U.S. workers
• Create a meaningful role for the U.S. Depart -
ment of Labor to oversee the work-related as -
pects of the J-1 SWT program.
• Require DOL to assess the impact of the program 
on the domestic workforce and implement regu -
lations to protect all workers and raise labor stan -
dards for impacted industries.
PHOTOGRAPHY BY  
GERRY MELENDEZ30 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK• Require sponsors and employers to pay J-1 
SWT workers prevailing wages and respect 
union collective bargaining agreements.
• Permit members of the public and 
worker advocacy organizations to chal -
lenge the legitimacy of posted wage rates 
and job classifications.
• Prohibit J-1 SWT workers from being 
employed in occupations that are danger -
ous or lack cultural interaction, including 
housekeeping, modeling, and janitorial 
services, occupations DOS has identified in 
regulations as being “frequently associated 
with trafficking in persons.”
• Institute a numerical limit on the num -
ber of J-1 SWT workers that any single em -
ployer or brand may hire per year.
• Fund effective oversight of sponsor and 
employer compliance with program rules.
• Clarify the process for decertifying spon -
sors and barring employers who violate la -
bor and/or employment laws.
• Require employers to certify that they 
will comply with all program regulations 
and applicable federal and state laws before 
each placement.
• Create and publish a list of employers and 
responsible business agents or represen -
tatives that are banned from the program 
for violating labor, employment, and other 
workplace laws.
• Require worker orientation programs 
upon arrival to the U.S. that include review 
of employment rights under local, state, 
and federal law.
• Create an exit interview survey tool that 
is not administered by sponsors to collect 
information from each J-1 worker to in -
form annual reporting and continuous pro -
gram improvement.
• Ban third-party employers from the pro -
gram and better regulate subcontractors.Fair Recruitment
Regulate the recruitment of J-1 workers 
to protect against fraud, discrimination, 
and human trafficking
• Prohibit recruiters and designated J-1 
sponsors from charging recruitment fees to 
J-1 SWT workers.
• Hold sponsors and employers jointly lia -
ble when they benefit from abusive recruit -
ment practices, including deceptive prom -
ises during recruitment.
• Require employers to bear the cost of 
recruiting and transporting J-1 workers to 
the United States.
• Take steps to establish a clear and en -
forceable employment contract between 
the sponsor, employer, and J-1 SWT worker.
• Include protections for J-1 workers in fu -
ture legislation that regulates international 
labor recruitment.
• Require employers to advertise open 
positions on a public database for 30 days 
before hiring J-1 SWT workers so that U.S. 
workers have an opportunity to apply.
• Require employers of J-1 SWT workers 
to pay an amount equal to the payroll taxes 
they would have been required to pay if they 
had hired a U.S. worker, and use the money 
collected to create a new fund to combat 
youth unemployment in the United States.
Access to Justice
Provide J-1 workers effective mech -
anisms for legal recourse when their 
rights are violated
• Offer temporary visa status or de -
ferred action and work authorization to 
J-1 SWT workers who assert labor or civ -
il rights claims during the pendency of  
any proceedings.
• Create mechanisms at U.S. embassies for 
J-1 SWT workers to file complaints when INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  31they return to their home countries if they 
are unable to pursue their claims in the 
United States.
• Enforce regulations explicitly prohib -
iting employer and sponsor retaliation 
against J-1 SWT workers who engage in 
protected activity or assert their rights un -
der any local, state, or federal law.
• Make J-1 SWT workers eligible for 
federally funded legal services so they 
have meaningful access to justice in the 
United States.
• Create a private right of action so that J-1 
workers can hold sponsors, employers, and 
recruiters liable in federal court when vio -
lations of program regulations or workers’ 
rights occur.Transparency
Make information about the J-1 program 
publicly available and easily accessible 
to stakeholders and the public
• Mandate that public disclosures in -
clude the promises and offers made to J-1 
SWT workers by recruiters and sponsors 
as well as fees charged to workers in the 
chain of recruitment.
• Publish J-1 SWT occupations, wages, em -
ployers, job sites and demographic data 
needed to prevent discrimination (countries 
of origin, age, and gender) in a timely and use -
able fashion on a publicly accessible website.
PHOTOGRAPHY BY   
GERRY MELENDEZ32 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORKAppendix A
J-1 Summer Work Travel workers by state, 2015-2018
  2015 2016 2017 2018
Alabama 781 812 829 754
Alaska 1,696 2,072 1,965 1,954
Arizona 849 785 776 848
Arkansas 114 172 130 149
California 6,779 5,084 5,692 5,747
Colorado 4,375 4,675 5,403 6,084
Connecticut 654 658 674 640
Delaware 1,208 1,660 1,728 1,672
District of Columbia 296 206 173 157
Florida 6,394 6,788 5,960 5,687
Georgia 410 344 374 391
Hawaii 392 326 494 484
Idaho 382 484 586 684
Illinois 1,345 1,560 1,773 1,314
Indiana 265 199 305 330
Iowa 287 346 400 453
Kansas 86 54 77 44
Kentucky 152 102 165 172
Louisiana 210 172 143 128
Maine 2,185 2,550 2,855 3,097
Maryland 5,824 5,999 5,730 5,557
Massachusetts 6,532 6,987 7,090 6,588
Michigan 1,052 1,271 1,522 1,723
Minnesota 1,163 1,625 1,743 1,728
Mississippi 52 16 19 21
Missouri† 737 904 1,222 1,264
Montana 1,660 1,911 2,021 1,929
Nebraska 97 76 94 83INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  33J-1 Summer Work Travel workers by state, 2015-2018 (cont.)
2015 2016 2017 2018
Nevada 779 1,199 1,309 1,638
New Hampshire 2,046 2,165 2,437 2,611
New Jersey 4,787 5,371 5,083 4,707
New Mexico 169 197 225 328
New York 7,036 6,684 6,986 6,950
North Carolina 1,921 2,226 2,472 2,715
North Dakota 407 242 231 236
Ohio 2,646 3,041 3,217 3,332
Oklahoma 29 36 35 76
Oregon 209 273 337 363
Pennsylvania 2,609 2,831 2,990 3,014
Puerto Rico 0  No Data  No Data 5
Rhode Island 792 749 833 862
South Carolina 3,852 4,235 3,967 3,491
South Dakota 1,153 1,142 1,135 1,098
Tennessee 1,373 1,745 1,759 1,797
Texas 3,034 2,955 3,071 2,788
Utah 1,882 2,318 2,620 3,017
Vermont 1,195 1,373 1,502 1,531
Virginia 5,096 5,418 5,211 4,698
Washington 483 505 552 620
West Virginia 345 423 414 359
Wisconsin 5,153 5,939 6,285 6,299
Wyoming 2,001 2,149 2,307 2,295
TOTALS 94,974 101,054 104,921 104,512
Source:  U.S. Department of State, “Facts and Figures,” Exchange Visitor Program website, https://j1visa.state.gov/basics/facts-and-figures/.34 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
Appendix B
Principles for Fair Recruitment
The ILRWG has developed a list of eight principles that should be ensured in any visa 
program that recruits international workers to the U.S., including programs that may 
also contain a cultural exchange component. These principles should inform the regula -
tions, structure, and enforcement of the J-1 Summer Work and Travel program, among 
myriad other work visa categories:
1. Freedom from Discrimination and 
Retaliation.  Workers have the right to a 
recruitment and employment experience 
free of discrimination and retaliation.
2. Right to Know The Process and 
Their Rights.  Workers have the right to 
be informed in a language they understand 
about the recruitment process and their 
rights under U.S. work visa programs.
3. Freedom from Economic Coercion. 
Workers shall have the right to freedom 
from economic coercion in U.S. work 
visa programs and should not be charged 
recruitment fees.
4. Right to Receive a Contract with Fair 
Terms and to Give Informed Consent. 
Workers shall have the right to a legal em -
ployment contract that respects their 
rights and the right to provide informed 
consent before being hired.5. Employer Accountability.  Workers 
shall have the right to be recruited for 
work in the United States under a system 
that holds the employer accountable for 
any and all abuses suffered during their re -
cruitment or employment.
6. Freedom of Movement.  Workers 
shall have the right to move freely and 
change employers while working in the  
United States.
7. Freedom of Association and Collec -
tive Bargaining.  Workers shall have the 
right to form and join unions and to bar -
gain and advocate collectively to promote 
their rights and interests.
8. Access to Justice.  Workers shall have 
the right to access justice for abuses suf -
fered under U.S. work visa programs.INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  35
36 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
Endnotes
1 The data used in this report were requested, collated, and an -
alyzed by Cate Bowman and generously shared with the ILRWG. 
See Catherine Bowman, Flexible Workers, Fissured Workplaces: 
Cultural Exchange For Hire In An Era of Precarious Labor , Ph.D. 
dissertation (2019), University of Colorado.
2 For a breakdown of the number of J-1 SWT workers employed 
in each state, see Appendix A.
3 We define “lead companies” or “lead brands” as the main 
company or brand that other corporate entities may be affiliated 
with. For example, we consider McDonald's to be the lead 
company for the many individual McDonald’s franchisees across 
numerous zip codes in the United States. Therefore, we count Mc -
Donald’s as only one company in the data for our count of 16,000, 
rather than counting each individual McDonald’s location.
4 U.S. Department of State, Exchange Visitor Program, available 
at https:/ /j1visa.state.gov/about-us/ . For more information about 
the program see Justice in Motion, Visa Pages: U.S. Temporary 
Foreign Worker Visas; J-1 Visa, https:/ /static1.squarespace.com/
static/57d09e5c5016e1b4f21c9bd3/t/590b7f78bf629a657e -
fa465c/1493925754158/VisaPages_J1_2015update.pdf.
5 See e.g., Daniel Costa, Guestworker Diplomacy , Economic 
Policy Institute (July 14, 2011), https:/ /www.epi.org/publication/j_
visas_minimal_oversight_despite_significant_implications_for_
the_labor_ma/.
6 8 U.S.C. §101(a)(15)(J). The categories of participant eligibility 
are listed in 22 C.F.R. § 62.4. Note that there are seven separate 
categories listed in (a) through (g), and there are seven more sub -
categories listed within (h) (other person of similar description). 
The word “categories” is used and refers to the fourteen distinct 
categories and subcategories found in Part 62. While there are 
fourteen categories, there are thirteen sets of regulations because 
interns and trainees are grouped together. The thirteen bodies of 
regulations are found in 22 C.F.R. Part 62, Subpart B.
7 U.S. Department of State, Table XVI(B) Nonimmigrant Visas 
Issued by Classification (Including Border Crossing Cards) Fiscal 
Years 2011-2015, available at https:/ /travel.state.gov/content/dam/
visas/Statistics/AnnualReports/FY2015AnnualReport/FY15Annual -
Report-TableXVIB.pdf.
8 Daniel Costa, Guestworker Diplomacy , Economic Policy Institute 
(July 14, 2011), https:/ /www.epi.org/publication/j_visas_minimal_
oversight_despite_significant_implications_for_the_labor_ma/.
9 U.S. Department of State, Exchange Visitor Program, Facts and 
Figures, https:/ /j1visa.state.gov/basics/facts-and-figures/. For a 
breakdown of the number of J-1 SWT workers employed in each 
state, see Appendix A.
10 U.S. Department of State, Exchange Visitor Program, Summer 
Work Travel Program, available at https:/ /j1visa.state.gov/pro -
grams/summer-work-travel
11 22 CFR § 62.32(b).
12 22 CFR § 62.32(c).
13 22 CFR § 62.32(f)(1-2).
14 See e.g., Southern Poverty Law Center, Culture Shock: The 
Exploitation of J-1 Cultural Exchange Workers , 17, (2014), https:/ /
www.splcenter.org/sites/default/files/d6_legacy_files/downloads/
publication/j-1_report_v2_web.pdf
15 Daniel Costa, Guestworker Diplomacy , Economic Policy Institute 
(July 14, 2011), https:/ /www.epi.org/publication/j_visas_minimal_
oversight_despite_significant_implications_for_the_labor_ma/.
16 See for example, Jobofer.org, “Reasons Seasonal Employers Hire 
International Students Include:”, http:/ /www.jobofer.org/benefits/.17 Authors’ analysis of fiscal 2015 disclosure data of H-2B labor 
certifications from the Office of Foreign Labor Certification’s Per -
formance Data, available at:https:/ /www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.
gov/docs/py2015q4/H-2B_Disclosure_Data_FY15_Q4.xlsx. 
18 See, e.g., Sarah Mizes-Tan, “Summer on the Cape Defined by 
14-Hour Days for J-1 Students,” WGBH News (August 31, 2019), 
https:/ /www.wgbh.org/news/local-news/2018/08/31/summer-
on-the-cape-defined-by-14-hour-days-for-j-1-students; David 
Weissman, “‘I thought it would be more fun’: Do international 
student workers enjoy Myrtle Beach?” Myrtle Beach Online  
(August 1, 2018) https:/ /www.myrtlebeachonline.com/news/local/
article215324625.html; Michelle Theriault Boots, “In Alaska, young 
foreign workers on ‘cultural exchange’ visas wash the dishes and 
make hotel beds,” Anchorage Daily News  (August 13, 2016) https:/ /
www.adn.com/features/business-economy/2016/08/13/in-alaska-
young-foreign-workers-on-cultural-exchange-visas-wash-the-dish -
es-and-make-the-beds-of-tourists/; Southern Poverty Law Center, 
Culture Shock: The Exploitation of J-1 Cultural Exchange Workers , 
17, (2014), https:/ /www.splcenter.org/sites/default/files/d6_lega -
cy_files/downloads/publication/j-1_report_v2_web.pdf; Katheryn 
Houghton, “Bozeman, Big Sky food banks note increase in ski 
resorts’ foreign workers requesting help,” Bozeman Daily Chronicle  
(May 19, 2019), https:/ /www.bozemandailychronicle.com/news/
business/bozeman-big-sky-food-banks-note-increase-in-ski-re -
sorts/article_577e2872-125d-53fa-93ba-ad9d27656d13.html.
19 NAICS industry codes were assigned by Catherine Bowman 
in Flexible Workers, Fissured Workplaces: Cultural Exchange For 
Hire In An Era of Precarious Labor , Ph.D. dissertation (2019), 
University of Colorado.
20 Kit Johnson, The Wonderful World of Disney Visas , Florida Law 
Review, Vol. 63, p. 915, 2011. Available at SSRN: https:/ /ssrn.com/
abstract=1839544
21 Id. 
22 Miram Jordan, “Guest Worker Visa Troubles Visit McDonald’s,” 
The Wall Street Journal  (March 8, 2013), https:/ /www.wsj.com/
articles/SB10001424127887323628804578348620014963766.
23 National Guestworker Alliance, “Victory at McDonald's!” 
(February 18, 2014), http:/ /www.guestworkeralliance.org/2014/02/
victory-at-mcdonalds-2-18-14/
24 Melena Ryzik, “In a Test of Their Power, #MeToo’s Legal Forces 
Take On McDonald’s,” The New York Times  (May 21, 2019), https:/ /
www.nytimes.com/2019/05/21/business/mcdonalds-female-em -
ployees-sexual-harassment.html.
25 Sandra Garcia, “Stop & Shop Strike Ends With Union Claiming 
Victory on Pay and Health Care,” The New York Times  (April 22, 
2019), https:/ /nyti.ms/2IAXoqZ.
26 YMCA website, https:/ /www.ymca.net/
27 Xanterra website, https:/ /www.xanterra.com/
28 Johanna Jainchill, “Many industry leaders in panic over fate of 
J-1 visas under Trump,” Travel Weekly  (September 8, 2017), https:/ /
www.travelweekly.com/North-America-Travel/Many-industry-lead -
ers-in-panic-over-fate-of-J1-visas-under-Trump. 
29 Marisa Schultz, “Why pools are facing a severe lifeguard short -
age,” New York Post  (July 3, 2018), https:/ /nypost.com/2018/07/03/
why-pools-are-facing-a-severe-lifeguard-shortage/.
30 See, e.g., 33-9092 Lifeguards, Ski Patrol, and Other Recre -
ational Protective Service Workers, Occupational Employment 
Statistics, Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, 
https:/ /www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes339092.htm; 39-3091 Amuse -
ment and Recreation Attendants, Occupational Employment 
Statistics, Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, INTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  37
https:/ /www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes393091.htm; 37-2012 Maids 
and Housekeeping Cleaners, Occupational Employment Statistics, 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, https:/ /www.
bls.gov/oes/2017/may/oes372012.htm.
31 For example, in the H-2A program minimum wage rates are 
calculated to guarantee “that guestworkers would not ‘adversely 
affect’ the wages of U.S. workers. To prevent ‘adverse effects,’ the 
program required employers to pay at least the local ‘prevailing 
wage’ for the specific job.” See Farmworker Justice, Adverse Effect 
Wage Rate Rule, https:/ /www.farmworkerjustice.org/sites/default/
files/AEWR% 20Fact%20Sheet.pdf. Similar calculations are made 
to establish H-2B wages (employers must usually pay the local 
average wage), but no such consideration or calculation is made to 
prevent adverse effects by SWT wages.
32 For more information on fissuring and its impact on labor 
standards, see generally David Weil, The Fissured Workplace: Why 
Work Became So Bad for So Many and What Can Be Done to 
Improve It, Harvard University Press  (2014), and website at http:/ /
www.fissuredworkplace.net/the-problem.php. 
33 David Weil, “How to Make Employment Fair in an Age of 
Contracting and Temp Work,” Harvard Business Review  (March 24, 
2017), https:/ /hbr.org/2017/03/making-employment-a-fair-deal-in-
the-age-of-contracting-subcontracting-and-temp-work.
34 Justice at Hershey, National Guestworker Alliance, http:/ /www.
guestworkeralliance.org/category/justice-at-hersheys-2/; and Julia 
Preston, “Foreign Students in Work Visa Program Stage Walkout at 
Plant,” The New York Times  (August 17, 2011), https:/ /nyti.ms/2M0bUY7.
35 Melena Ryzik, “In a Test of Their Power, #MeToo’s Legal Forces 
Take On McDonald’s,” The New York Times  (May 21, 2019), https:/ /
www.nytimes.com/2019/05/21/business/mcdonalds-female-em -
ployees-sexual-harassment.html.
36 Ochoa, et al. v. McDonald’s Corp., et al., Case No. 3:14-cv-
02098-JD (ND. Cal.)
37 Because of the difficulty of matching employer names 
between data sets of J-1 SWT workers and H-2B labor certifica -
tions, both of which contain administrative and spelling errors and 
differences, 197 is the number of employers using both programs 
that we are confident in reporting to appear in both, but the 197 
number should be considered the minimum and not the ceiling. 
In addition, it should be noted that employers listed in H-2B labor 
certification data have only completed the first step in hiring an 
H-2B worker, therefore an approved labor certification does not 
necessarily mean that a visa was eventually issued to an H-2B 
worker who was hired by that employer. Source: Authors’ analysis 
of 2015 J-1 SWT data on employers acquired by Freedom of 
Information Act request, and fiscal 2015 disclosure data of H-2B 
labor certifications from the Office of Foreign Labor Certification’s 
Performance Data, U.S. Department of Labor, available at https:/ /
www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/docs/py2015q4/H-2B_Disclo -
sure_Data_FY15_Q4.xlsx.
38 Southern Poverty Law Center, SPLC complaint: Cultural 
exchange students in South Carolina exploited for cheap labor, 
accessed April, 2019, https:/ /www.splcenter.org/news/2016/07/27/
splc-complaint-cultural-exchange-students-south-carolina-ex -
ploited-cheap-labor
39 Laura Francis, “Minnesota Farm to Pay $154,000 in Taxes on 
Guestworker Wages,” Bloomberg Law  (June 13, 2019), https:/ /
news.bloomberglaw.com/daily-labor-report/minnesota-farm-
must-pay-154-000-in-taxes-on-guestworker-wages.
40 U.S. Department of Labor, “Adverse Effect Wage Rates for 
2019,” https:/ /www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/adverse.cfm.
41 U.S. Department of Labor, “US Labor Department finds $576 in 
back wages, restitution for Dominican Republic farm workers who 
‘paid’ to pick vegetables” WHD News Releases (August 25, 2016), 
https:/ /www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/whd/whd20160825.42 Paul Walsh, “Illegal kickbacks for foreign farm workers in Minn. 
put Ohioan in prison for 5 years,” Minnesota  Star Tribune  (January 
26, 2017), http:/ /strib.mn/2jtqTgJ.
43 Kit Johnson, Beauty and the Beast: Disney’s Use of the Q and 
H-1B Visas , 11 NYU Journal of Law & Liberty 915 (2018). Available at 
SSRN: https:/ /ssrn.com/abstract=3273011
44 U.S. Department of State, Nonimmigrant Visa Statistics website, 
Table XVI(B), Nonimmigrant Visas Issued by Classification (Includ -
ing Crossing Cards), Fiscal Years 2014-2018, available at https:/ /
travel.state.gov/content/dam/visas/Statistics/AnnualReports/
FY2018AnnualReport/FY18AnnualReport%20-%20TableXVIB.pdf.
45 Kit Johnson, Beauty and the Beast: Disney’s Use of the Q and 
H-1B Visas , 11 NYU Journal of Law & Liberty 915 (2018). Available at 
SSRN: https:/ /ssrn.com/abstract=3273011
46 Id. 
47 See Meredith TerHaar, “Local Authorities Working to Educate 
and Protect J-1 Visa Cultural Exchange Students,” WHLG Channel 
7 (February 24, 2014), https:/ /www.wjhg.com/home/headlines/Lo -
cal-Authorities-Are-Working-to-Educate-and-Protect-J-1-Visa-Cul -
tural-Exchange-Students-246923771.html, and Theo Hayes, “J1 
students describe summertime nightmare in Myrtle Beach,” WMBF 
News (May 25, 2017), https:/ /www.wmbfnews.com/story/35512081/
j1-students-describe-summertime-nightmare-in-myrtle-beach.
48 U.S. Department of State, “Strengthening and Reforming the 
Summer Work Travel Program,” https:/ /j1visa.state.gov/strength -
ening-and-reforming-the-summer-work-travel-program/.
49 Testimony of Oliver Benzon Martinez to the Maryland House 
Economic Matters Committee, March 13, 2018, and conversations 
between Oliver Benzon Martinez and Centro de los Derechos del 
Migrante, Inc. 
50 Polaris, Human Trafficking on Temporary Work Visas - A Data 
Analysis 2015 - 2017 , Accessed April 2019, https:/ /polarisproject.
org/sites/default/files/Polaris%20Temporary%20Work%20
Visa%20Report.pdf.
51 Josh Saul, “Florida Man Tricked Asian College Students into 
Prostitution by Offering Work in His Nonexistent Yoga Studio: 
Fed,” Newsweek  (June 12, 2016), www.newsweek.com/flori -
da-man-tricks-asian-college-students-prostitution-yoga-stu -
dio-458654.  David J. Neal, “He used a U.S. travel program to pimp 
young women. That’s when the feds stepped in,” Miami Herald  (March 
26, 2017), https:/ /www.miamiherald.com/news/local/community/mi -
ami-dade/miami-beach/article140871958.html.
52 Legal Aid at Work, “Second labor trafficking lawsuit against 
Walter and Carolyn Schumacher and their businesses filed by former 
‘cross-cultural exchange’ workers” (June 15, 2018), https:/ /legalaidat -
work.org/releases/labor_trafficking_lawsuit_filed_francis_v_apex/
53 8 CFR § 62.32(g)(10) and (11)
54 A number of entries for workers from countries that do not 
participate in the Visa Waiver Program—including Jamaica, Turkey, 
Romania, Ukraine, Russia, Moldova, Serbia, Montenegro, the 
Dominican Republic, China, and others—are required to arrive in 
the United States with pre-arranged employment but show up 
in the data as having no employer and seeking employment. The 
available data does not allow us to make any further determina -
tions about those entries, however, including whether SWT pro -
gram regulations permitted those job seekers to be unemployed 
(because they were in the process of switching employers or were 
in a travel period but the database was not updated correctly to 
list “on travel”). 
55 DHS operates the Student and Exchange Visitor Information 
System (SEVIS) – the federal database which tracks all foreign 
students and exchange visitors, see https:/ /www.ice.gov/sevis.
56 State Department, Exchange Visitor Program, https:/ /j1visa.
state.gov/basics/facts-and-figures/ (last visited May 22, 2019).38 SHINING A LIGHT ON SUMMER WORK
Acknowledgments
The data used in this report were requested, collated, and analyzed by Cate Bowman 
and generously shared with the ILRWG. The authors of the report are Daniel Costa, 
Economic Policy Institute; Shannon Lederer, AFL-CIO; Jeremy McLean, Justice in 
Motion; Meredith B. Stewart, Southern Poverty Law Center; and Sulma Guzman, 
Centro de los Derechos del Migrante.  The ILRWG would also like to thank the 
students from the Cornell Law School Farmworker Legal Assistance Clinic for their 
analysis and development of the research. Finally, the ILRWG is grateful to the J-1 
workers featured in the report, and others not named, who are on the front lines 
of the efforts to reform the program. Cierra Brinson, of the Southern Poverty Law 
Center, designed the report. The SPLC’s Jamie Kizzire provided editorial support.
SOUTHERN POVERTY LAW CENTER
CREATIVE D IRECTOR  Russell Estes
SENIOR CREATIVE LEADS  Michelle Leland, Scott Phillips, Kristina Turner
DESIGNERS  Shannon Anderson, Hillary Andrews, Cierra Brinson, Sunny Paulk, Alex Trott
DESIGN  ASSOCIATE  Angela GreerINTERNATIONAL LABOR RECRUITMENT WORKING GROUP  39
