2021 Results
Photo Background: Adobe Stock
Illustrations: Amanda Flores
15 years ago, we had an idea: What could 
we achieve if human rights advocates 
worked together, across borders, to ensure 
that migrants who traveled between Central 
America, Mexico, and the United States were 
never cut off from access to justice? 
To make that vision a reality, we formed the Justice in 
Motion Defender Network, a unique coalition of trusted 
local human rights lawyers and organizations in key 
areas of Mexico and Central America. By partnering 
advocates in the U.S. with their counterparts in migrants’ 
countries of origin, we can ensure portable justice: the 
right and ability to access justice across borders.
Throughout the past year, we were the critical piece:
▶   Helping to reunify families torn apart by the Trump 
Administration’s Family Separation policy 
▶   Gathering key evidence to support asylum claims in 
an increasingly restrictive system
▶   Ensuring justice in the U.S. for migrant workers who 
suffered human trafficking, wage theft, and other abuses
▶   Empowering advocates in the U.S., Mexico, and 
Central America through trainings, thought leadership, 
and expert advice on cross-border challenges 
Defender  
Network  EL SALVADOR
Universidad Gerardo Barrios (UGB Usulután) - 
Facultad de Ciencias Jurídicas
Oficina Jurídica y Asociados: Yudith Patricia 
Euceda de Diaz
Grupo de Monitoreo Independiente de El 
Salvador (GMIES)
Universidad Gerardo Barrios (UGB San Miguel) - 
Facultad de Ciencias Jurídicas
Organización De Mujeres Salvadoreñas por 
La Paz (ORMUSA)
HONDURAS
Oficina Jurídica Melara Gómez
Firma Legal Ocampo Garcia
Pastoral de Movilidad Humana - Conferencia 
Episcopal de HondurasLic. Claudia Pinto
Bufete Ruth Yamileth Espinoza Rodriguez
Despacho Juridico Abogado Leonardo Rojas
Centro de Investigación y Promoción de los 
Derechos Humanos (CIPRODEH)
Barra de Abogadas
Bufete Nuñez Velasquez
NICARAGUA
Federación de Trabajadores/as del departamento 
de Chinandega (FETDECH-CST)
NicasMigranteThe Justice in Motion Defender 
Network is made up of 47 human 
rights lawyers and organizations in 
Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, 
Nicaragua, and Mexico  
Justice in Motion’s work 
impacted over 2,131 
individual migrants and 
families in the past year.
Continued on next page18
13
59
2Defenders  
in Mexico
in Guatemala
in El Salvadorin Honduras
in NicaraguaFamily Separation  
Crisis Response
Family Reunification is Under Way! This time last 
year, there were very few options for families who had 
been torn apart by the Trump administration’s Family 
Separation policies, but President Biden’s commitment 
to reunify families changed that reality. Justice in Motion 
is serving a key role helping deported parents and 
families access every new opportunity for reunification, 
justice, and healing. 
▶   Finding “Unreachable” parents 
▶    Providing input on the design and implementation of 
the U.S. government’s family reunification efforts
▶   Delivering trusted local support to families who have 
little reason to trust the U.S. government after suffering 
such deep harm
GUATEMALA
Lic. Marco Vinicio López Maldonado
Bufete Jurídico R&L
Lic. Hector Waldemar Barrera Palma
Oficinas Chay Medrano
Oficina de Derechos Humanos del Arzobispado 
de Guatemala (ODHAG)
Oficina Juridica Lic. Aroldo Palacios
Lic. Miriam RamirezG & C Consultores
Pastoral Social de la Diócesis de San Marcos
Oficina Jurídica de Rebeca Sanchez y 
Kenny Gonzalez
Oficina Juridica Notarial Licdo. Het Waldemar 
Barrera Trinidad
Asociación de Abogados y Notarios Mayas 
de Guatemala (AANMG)
Centro de Estudios y Apoyo al Desarrollo 
Local (CEADEL)
Last Spring, President Biden’s 
Task Force for the Reunification 
of Families began inviting families 
to apply to return to the U.S. to 
reunite with their children in safety 
and access services to begin 
healing from the traumas they 
suffered. The U.S. government   
turned to Justice in Motion and 
the other non-profits representing 
the families to respond quickly 
while the government planned a 
scaled up response. We jumped 
into immediate action, working 
together to help dozens of 
parents return to the U.S. at 
the soonest possible moment. 
Defenders accompanied parents to 
secure passports and COVID tests 
and provided critical local legal 
services related to family law and 
document correction. 
We worked on 379 searches in 5 
countries to locate and reach out to 
parents who would have otherwise 
been unreachable.
We provided continued support for 68 
deported families seeking justice and 
restitution from the U.S. government.
We identified 101 deported families 
who were in danger or had other 
immediate concerns, and referred 
them to allied organizations for 
additional support.
Expanding Local Capacity
Over the past year, Justice in Motion 
provided 15 virtual training events for 
Defenders to deepen their knowledge of 
U.S. law and policies and empower their 
cross-border work. 
Defenders in the News
Justice in Motion Defender Eriberto Pop was 
on the front page of the Washington Post 
showing how Defenders find and support 
parents harmed by “Family Separation.” 
“A motorcycle-riding lawyer searches Guatemala’s remotest 
corners to reunite families separated by the U.S.”   
Washington Post July 26, 2021Migrant Worker 
Exploitation
▶   We provided cross-border support to help migrant 
workers defend their legal rights against human trafficking, 
wage theft, and abuse
▶   We maintained and updated Visa Pages: Temporary 
Foreign Worker Visas, the leading resource for advocates 
and policymakers about U.S. migrant labor programs 
▶   We called for caution when the Biden administration 
increased the number of temporary foreign worker visas 
designated for Northern Central America. Rapid expansion 
without robust reforms is likely to lead to more recruitment 
fraud, abuse, and human traffickingU.S. Legal
Actions 2021
67%4%
Humanitarian 
Immigration26%
Child DetentionCivil Rights
*Not including our cross-border 
collaborations related to the 
Family Separation Crisis Response3%
EmploymentImmigration 
Protection
▶   Our legal action team and Defender Network supported 
186 protection cases, helping individuals find safety 
through asylum and other forms of immigration protection
▶   We provided vital cross border support in 71 Child 
Detention cases to help expedite the safe release of 
children from US immigration custody and safely reunite 
them with their families 
▶   We presented at Defend Asylum Together! Essentials of 
Immigration Law for Effective Pro Bono Representation—
hosted by the American Bar Association. Over 400 lawyers 
in attendance from across the country learned how cross-
border collaboration can improve case outcomes
MEXICO
Scalabrinianas Misión con Migrantes y Refugiados - 
SMR/ Padre José Marchetti A.C
Asociación de Auxiliares Voluntarios para Servicios 
Sociales, AC
Comunitaria por los Derechos Humanos 
"Tzobibaltik" A.C.
Frente Indigena de Organizaciones 
Binacionales (FIOB)
Pastoral de Migrantes - Chinameca, Veracruz
Pastoral de Migrantes - Hidalgo
Respuesta Alternativa A.C.
Servicios Educativos del Bajio A.C.
Instituto para las Mujeres en la Migración, AC (IMUMI)Red de Mujeres y Hombres por una Opinión 
Pública con Perspectiva de Género en Campeche, 
A.C. (REDMYH A.C.)
Centro de Orientacion del Migrante de 
Oaxaca (COMI)
Centro Juvenil Generando Dignidad A.C. (CJGD)
Comisión de Derechos Humanos y Laborales del 
Valle de Tehuacán A.C. (CDHLVT A.C.)
Laboratorio de Innovación para la Paz
Arredondo & Amaro Abogados
Centro de Acompañamiento a Migrantes 
A.C. (CAMINOS)
Pastoral de Movilidad Humana - Diócesis de Zamora
Red de Mujeres del Bajío A.C.
Defenders Sharing Their Expertise
We launched an online library with materials utilizing 
the expansive knowledge of the Defender Network on 
country of origin issues including family law, repatriation, 
obtaining records in Central America, and criminalization 
of migrants. We worked with Defenders to create 15  
pre-recorded webinars, three expert declarations, and 
the issue alert Informal Adoptions in Central America and 
their Implications for U.S. Immigration Cases*. 
*Created in collaboration with the Young Center for Immigrant 
Children’s  RightsJustice in Motion supported 270 cases*Our Team & Partners
Where Your  
Donation Goes42%
16%
20%General & 
Administrative
Policy 
Advocacy
Figures are based upon preliminary end-of-year forecasts for Fiscal Year 2021.
PO Box 160128, Brooklyn, NY 11216   ▶   (646) 351-1160   ▶   info@justiceinmotion.org   ▶   justiceinmotion.orgAmy Rohan 
Legal Assistant
Angela Fernandez 
Development Director
Cathleen Caron  
Founder & Executive Director 
Courtney Davies  
Finance & Administration Director
Emma Glynn 
Human Resources & Operations AssociateEvan Fagan  
Defender Network Assistant
Jeremy McLean  
Policy & Advocacy Manager 
Keeli Sorenson 
Director of Policy & Governmental Affairs 
Laura Vasquez  
Legal Manager
Lissa Córdova Le ón 
Legal AssociateMartha Menendez 
Legal Manager
Nan Schivone  
Legal Director
Yadira Huerta  
Defender Network Director
Susan Fryberger  
Board President 
Director of Development,  
Montclair State University
Gretchen Kuhner 
Board Vice President  
Director, Institute for Women in Migration
Mark Caron  
Board Treasurer  
Tech Entrepreneur  
Christian Muñoz-Vázquez  
Board Secretary 
Associate Director of Cross-Sector  
Innovation, Data Science , 
S & P Global RatingsKen Pasquale 
Board Compliance Officer 
Partner, Stroock & Stroock & Lavan LLP
Claudia Herrmannsdörfer
Lawyer and Human Rights Advocate, Honduras
Julie Jorgensen
Founder & CEO of GreenMark Solar, Inc.
Sabrina LeBlanc
Behavior Change Expert & Product Manager
Beth Lyon
Clinical Professor of Law, Associate Dean for 
Experiential Education and Clinical Program 
Director, Cornell Law SchoolEleanor Nordholm 
Corporate Associate, Wyche Law Firm
Maria M. Odom 
Vice President for Legal Services, 
Kids in Need of Defense 
Lucrecia Oliva 
Development Consultant & Human Rights Advocate
Christa Stewart 
Deputy Director, Immigrant Justice Corps
Marc Taylor
Executive Client Director, H1
Louis and Anne Abrons Foundation
Appleton Foundation
Annie E. Casey Foundation
Anonymous (2)
Choose Love
Hispanics in Philanthropy
Humanity United
The Leafglen FoundationMilagro Foundation
Charles Stewart Mott Foundation
National Immigration Law Center
NEO Philanthropy
New York Community Trust
The Overbrook Foundation
Patrick J. McGovern Foundation
This is About Humanity FundTides Foundation
Together Rising
Serena Foundation
Unitarian Universalist Service Committee
WE Trust
Wellspring AdvisorsStaff
Board of Directors
Foundation Partners
Legal 
Action
Defender 
Network13%9%Fundraising