I
Change This
THE CASE FOR TRANSPARENCY
Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking  
Under Temporary Foreign Worker VisasTHE CASE FOR TRANSPARENCY
Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking  
Under Temporary Foreign Worker VisasIV
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work VisasAbout Justice in Motion 
Justice in Motion is a U.S.-based nonprofit that advocates for 
migrant rights across borders.
Farmworker lawyer and human rights advocate Cathleen Caron 
founded Justice in Motion in 2005 to address a growing crisis in 
our globalizing economy: abused migrant workers were shut out of 
the justice system after returning to their country of origin. These 
abuses ranged from unsafe working conditions to human trafficking 
and often left survivors with few options. She recognized that this 
was a global phenomenon, and saw a solution. Human rights lawyers 
and NGOs could work together, across borders, to secure access to 
justice for those migrant workers. 
To make justice across borders a reality, Justice in Motion 
connects advocates in the United States and Canada to the 
Justice in Motion Defender Network of on-the-ground human 
rights defenders in Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, 
and Nicaragua. Together, we work on individual cases and 
advocate to stop abuses before they begin. 
Now, we work to defend the rights of thousands of migrants 
from across the region each year -- from parents separated from 
their children at the U.S. border to migrant workers exploited by 
U.S. employers. 
Printed September 2020
© Justice in Motion 
PO Box 160128 
Brooklyn, NY 11216 
justiceinmotion.orgChange This
VTable of Contents 
1 Introduction   
3  Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Worker Visa Programs
5  H-2B Workers Claim Human Trafficking  
  Castro v. Midwest Rides
7  How Lack of Data Contributes to Guestworker Trafficking
9  G-5 Visa Holder Claims She Was Trafficked  
  Elat v. Ngoubene
10  Alleged Trafficking of an H-1B Visa Holder  
  Saiyed v. Archon, Inc. et al.
13  Data Already Collected on Guestworker Visa Programs
17  Government Data is Not Accessible to Anti-Trafficking Advocates
19  H-2A Farmworkers Assert They Were Trafficked  
  Alvaro-Flores v. Garcia-Pineda
20  The Case for Transparency  
20  Conclusion  
22  Appendix A  
23 Appendix B
24 Endnotes  Jeremy McLean is the principal author of this report. 
Invaluable contributions were provided by Daniel 
Costa and Isabelle Barnard. Cathleen Caron, Beth 
Lyon, and Ashwini Sukthankar improved the quality 
of this resource through their careful and helpful edits. 
Natalia Vilela is responsible for the report’s design. 
All photography provided by UnsplashChange This
1
Introduction 
Over the past several decades, millions of temporary 
foreign workers have come to the United States through 
nonimmigrant visa programs.1 Their importance and 
use in the United States economy is only expected to 
grow. Workers who hold nonimmigrant visas, known as 
“temporary foreign workers” or “guestworkers,” come 
as seasonal workers, technical specialists, executives, 
interns, domestic servants, and are employed in 
numerous occupations and industries. Unfortunately, 
many guestworkers are exploited, abused, and even 
trafficked2 due to systemic program flaws that create 
imbalances in favor of employers. 
Anti-trafficking and labor rights advocates, researchers, 
and policymakers are working creatively and tenaciously 
to prevent trafficking under nonimmigrant visas, support 
trafficking survivors, and advance reforms to protect 
workers and reward good employers. However, their 
efforts are hampered because they cannot access 
accurate, up-to-date, and holistic data about those 
programs. The U.S. government already collects a 
considerable amount of data about these programs, but 
that information is dispersed between different agencies 
and not shared in a uniform manner. Moreover, much of 
the data is inaccessible to the public, except through the 
lengthy and unreliable process of requesting data through 
the Freedom of Information Act. 
The dizzying array of temporary foreign worker visa 
classifications is still little understood.3 Without better 
information, workers cannot distinguish between 
legitimate job offers and trafficking schemes; advocates 
cannot effectively design and implement targeted 
prevention campaigns; and policymakers cannot 
accurately assess the impacts of these programs and 
develop reforms to improve them. Data transparency 
will put data that is already collected in the hands of the 
workers and advocates who need it to combat trafficking. 
Transparency is a commonsense first step toward 
eliminating the scourge of human trafficking under U.S. 
guestworker visas. 2
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visas
Trafficking Under  
Temporary Foreign  
Worker Visa Programs
Nonimmigrant visa programs play a substantial and ever-
growing role in the U.S. labor market. The Economic Policy 
Institute (EPI) estimates that in 2013, 1.4 million temporary 
foreign workers were employed in the United States under 
the major nonimmigrant visa classifications, making up 
approximately one percent of the U.S. labor force at the 
time. Temporary foreign worker visa programs continue to 
grow. For the H-2A agricultural worker program alone, the 
number of visas issued has more than doubled since EPI’s 
estimates, from 89,274 visas in 2014 to 204,801 in 2019.4 
According to the Congressional Research Service, there 
are currently 24 major nonimmigrant visa categories, and 
over 70 specific types of nonimmigrant visas for entry into 
the United States.5 “Nonimmigrant” visas are temporary, 
meaning the foreign-born person holding the visa may not 
remain in the country indefinitely. Of those nonimmigrant 
visas, many permit working in the United States; holders of 
these visas are therefore considered “temporary foreign 
workers” or “guestworkers.”
Unfortunately, many participants in temporary foreign 
worker visa programs are exploited, abused, and even 
trafficked due to systemic program flaws that create 
imbalances in favor of employers. First, visas are tied 
to a specific employer for a specific period of time, and 
3The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visas
4the ability of each guestworker to maintain a visa is 
contingent on continued employment with the original visa-
sponsoring employer. This means that, in most cases, if a 
guestworker’s employment ends prematurely for whatever 
reason, they become instantly deportable.6 This rule is a 
weighty disincentive to any complaint about workplace 
conditions, either to the employer or to the authorities. 
Second, although it is illegal for labor recruiters to require 
a fee in most U.S. programs, many temporary foreign 
workers are coerced into paying significant fees, up to 
tens of thousands of dollars, to access temporary jobs in 
the United States, often contracting large debts to pay 
those fees. Losing or leaving a job cuts off a guestworker’s 
opportunity to pay back the debts they owe. This 
combination of employer control and indebtedness 
expose temporary foreign workers to exploitation and 
human trafficking.There are concrete examples of trafficking on almost every 
nonimmigrant work visa classification, documented by 
government auditors, advocacy groups, and news reports. 
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) recently 
described the vulnerabilities faced by temporary foreign 
workers in the H-2A and H-2B visa classifications, noting 
that between 2009 and 2013, 49 H-2A and 137 H-2B 
workers obtained nonimmigrant T visas,7 which are issued 
to victims of human trafficking.8 
Polaris, a non-profit organization with a mission of 
eradicating human trafficking and modern-day slavery,9 
collects data from their National Human Trafficking Hotline10 
on the immigration status of potential trafficking victims. 
From January 1, 2015 – December 31, 2017, Polaris recorded:
some 800 individual victims of human trafficking… 
who were [in the United States] and working under 
temporary work visas. Overall, nearly half of the 
victims of labor trafficking reported to the National 
Hotline during this period whose immigration 
status was identified were foreign nationals 
holding legal visas.11
The trafficking cases reported to Polaris were associated 
with a variety of nonimmigrant work visas, ranging from 
the more commonly known H-2A, H-2B, and H-1B visas, 
to the lesser known A-3 and G-5 domestic worker visas, 
B-1 business visitor visa, F-1 student visa, and J-1 exchange 
visitor visa.12
Data published by the Human Trafficking Legal Center 
also indicates that a significant number of federal human 
trafficking cases involved victims holding nonimmigrant 
work visas. From 2003 through May of 2020, 422 civil 
lawsuits containing claims of human trafficking were filed 
in federal court. Of those, 174 alleged the trafficking of a 
non-immigrant visa holder. Accordingly, over 40% of the 
civil human trafficking federal lawsuits filed in the U.S. 
counted nonimmigrant work visa holders as victims.13 
Similar to the data reported by Polaris, a look at the civil 
cases filed on behalf of temporary foreign workers involve 
individuals holding every type of visa that allows work, 
including those requiring technical expertise, such as the 
H-1B and TN visas, the investor-based EB visas, to the 
manual labor-focused H-2 visas.
In 2014, the Urban Institute and Northeastern University 
studied 122 closed labor trafficking victim service records 
from service providers in four United States cities. The 
vast majority of trafficking survivors sampled (71 percent) 
entered the United States on a temporary visa. The 
most common temporary visas were H-2A visas for 
work in agriculture and H-2B visas for jobs in hospitality, 
construction, and restaurants. The study also identified 
female domestic servitude victims who had arrived in the 
United States on diplomatic, business, or tourist visas.14Visa Type Civil Cases
A-2/G-2 0
A-3 21
B-1 20
B-2 8
B-1/B-2 7
DV 1
E-2 4
EB-1/EB-2/EB-3 2
F-1 2
G-5 16
H-1B 22
H-2A 31
H-2B 37
H-4 1
J-1 5
Multi-entry 1
R-1 1
TN 1
TOTAL 180
Data from The Human Trafficking Legal Center, 
Federal Criminal and Civil Trafficking Cases 
Involving Legal Visas (May, 2020)Alleged Human Trafficking  
Cases per Visa Type Change ThisH-2B Workers Claim Human Trafficking
Castro v. Midwest Rides
In 2015, 29 workers were hired by Midwest Rides to operate games, 
rides, and food concessions at fairs and carnivals in the states of 
Minnesota, Iowa, Oklahoma, Kansas, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas. 
Midwest hired a recruiter to find workers in Mexico to participate in 
the H-2B visa program. At the time of recruitment, the workers were 
required to pay recruitment fees and instructed to lie about making such 
payments during their visa application process. Once they arrived in the 
U.S., they became subject to regular abuse. The workers lived in terrible 
conditions. Housed in trailers with no bathrooms, air conditioning, or 
refrigeration, they would go up to 2-3 days without electricity. Up to 50 
workers were forced to share one or two portable toilets. The workers 
received a flat weekly rate of $200 regardless of the number of hours 
worked, even when the workweek amounted to 60–100 hours. Non-
Hispanic employees did not experience these conditions.  Additionally, 
the workers were subjected to racial insults and threats of deportation 
and physical harm.  Finally, after a physical altercation between some of 
the workers and management, the workers were finally able to escape.  
Castro v. Midwest Rides, 0:16-cv-00014, U.S. District Court for the District of Minnesota
56
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visas
Change This
How Lack of Data Contributes  
to Guestworker Trafficking
Despite clear evidence of human trafficking taking 
place under nonimmigrant visas, workers, anti-trafficking 
advocates, and policymakers alike face an alarming 
dearth of information about these visa programs. The 
sprawling, employer-driven web of visa categories is little 
understood, and lack of unified and transparent data about 
visa programs increases worker vulnerability to trafficking, 
hampers prevention efforts, and blocks policymakers 
from crafting effective, bipartisan reforms to improve 
guestworker programs. 
Lack of Data Makes Workers Vulnerable to Trafficking 
Without access to reliable data about temporary foreign 
worker programs, migrant workers are less able to identify 
and avoid human trafficking schemes. Workers in foreign 
countries seeking temporary employment in the United 
States have virtually no way to assess the accuracy of 
advertised job offers. Migrants usually have no reliable 
source of information they can turn to in order to verify job 
offers, check if the employer listed on the offer actually 
exists, and see whether the employer obeys the law and 
pays workers.15 Temporary foreign workers who have been 
trafficked and exploited often report that the reality did 
not match the job that was promised before they left their 
country of origin. Temporary foreign workers often arrive 
78
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visasto find a different occupation, in a different location, with a 
different employer, and a much lower salary than they were 
promised.16 Data that connects specific employers with a 
job location, job description, and wage rates would allow 
workers to vet job offers for legitimacy.
Lack of Data Hinders Trafficking Prevention 
Lack of data also makes trafficking prevention work less 
effective. Human trafficking can be reduced or prevented if 
advocates can reach out to workers during the recruitment 
stage or once they are in the United States. However, 
without specific, accurate, and holistic data, it is difficult 
for anti-trafficking organizations and advocates to identify 
trends and develop targeted campaigns. For example, 
the age and gender of the foreign workforce are key 
pieces of data. A foreign workforce that is significantly 
demographically distinct from its U.S. counterpart may 
be an indicator about whether human trafficking is 
taking place. The government already collects these 
demographic data but does not make them publicly 
available; without them, governments (foreign, state, and 
local) and advocates are missing key pieces of information 
they can analyze and utilize in their efforts to combat 
human trafficking. In order to conduct effective, targeted 
worker outreach and education, anti-trafficking advocates 
also need access to the names of the employers and 
businesses that are hiring temporary foreign workers, the 
occupations temporary foreign workers are employed in, 
as well as their countries of origin and promised salaries. 
With this information, advocates could identify anomalies 
that may indicate abusive situations and craft thoughtful 
outreach strategies that contemplate the industries that 
workers are laboring in, and the cultural context that 
workers are coming from.
Lack of Data Impedes Policy Reforms 
Finally, lack of data on temporary foreign worker programs 
hinders policymakers’ and advocates’ abilities to craft 
informed, bipartisan reforms to the visa system. As a result 
of the numerous scandals that have come to light, including 
human trafficking and worker exploitation, nonimmigrant 
work visa programs are the subject of scrutiny from anti-
human trafficking advocates, the media, and policymakers. 
Effective scrutiny that leads to meaningful reforms is almost 
impossible, however, because too little is known about 
how the programs are used and what their impacts are. 
Employers may make claims about nonimmigrant work 
visa classifications, while advocates may offer other views 
and critiques about how they are used and the impacts 
on workers that reflect the realities they come across 
every day in their work. Unfortunately, many of the claims 
made by all sides are difficult to verify without access to 
better quality data and information that are more reliable, 
so that all stakeholders can make an honest assessment 
of the vulnerabilities the programs create and how to fix 
them. This is especially important in the human trafficking 
context—where many of the work visa programs that 
have facilitated trafficking are a black box—with only three 
federal agencies knowing bits and pieces of information 
about which employers use the programs and where 
potential victims are located and employed.After seeing reports of human trafficking of nonimmigrants 
by employers and of U.S. workers being replaced 
by vastly underpaid temporary foreign workers with 
nonimmigrant visas, some members of the public rightly 
have little faith that nonimmigrant work visa programs are 
a credible option for U.S. employers that will safeguard 
labor standards for all workers. Without access to more 
information, better solutions cannot be crafted to protect 
potential trafficking victims and migrant and U.S. workers 
alike, and honest policy discussions cannot take place.  
Human trafficking is a global problem that will require 
a wide range of innovative efforts to combat. Making 
information about nonimmigrant work visas available 
can make a major impact at a nominal cost, because 
the U.S. government already collects significant amounts 
of valuable information that it does not publish. The U.S. 
government also already possesses the infrastructure 
to begin making the information widely available and 
easily accessible to law enforcement, advocacy groups, 
researchers, and policymakers.17 Without access to 
more information, 
better solutions 
cannot be crafted 
to protect potential 
trafficking victims  
and migrant and 
U.S. workers alike, 
and honest policy 
discussions cannot 
take place.“Change ThisG-5 Visa Holder Claims  
She Was Trafficked
Elat v. Ngoubene 
In late 2005, Elat was living in Cameroon and finishing high school. 
That year, she was persuaded by her uncle to obtain a G-5 visa and 
go to the United States, where she was told she would attend nursing 
school. However, when Elat arrived in the U.S. in 2006, she was not 
allowed to enroll in nursing school and made to work as a domestic 
worker for her uncle. She was forced to wake up before 6 AM to make 
breakfast, clean, maintain the entire 7-bedroom, 2-kitchen, 4-bathroom 
house. She also had to do the laundry, wash the cars, and go shopping 
for groceries. She was only allowed to eat leftovers, could not seek 
medical help, and was isolated from the outside community. Her uncle 
and his family constantly threatened her with threats of deportation 
and  physical abuse. After enduring years of abuse, Elat managed to 
escape in 2008.
Elat v. Ngoubene, 993 F. Supp. 2d 497 - Dist. Court, D. Maryland 2014
9The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work VisasAlleged Trafficking  
of an H-1B Visa Holder 
Saiyed v. Archon, Inc. et al.
Saiyed is an Indian national who was recruited to work in the U.S. under 
the H-1B visa program. He was promised that he would be paid around 
$48,000 yearly. When he arrived, his employers began to consistently 
demand that Saiyed return cash to them from his already reduced 
paychecks, more than halving his actual take-home salary. They also 
forced Saiyed to pay all the fees and costs associated with his visa 
application. When Saiyed balked at his diminished salary, his employers 
threatened to cancel Saiyed’s visa and leave him without legal status. 
Saiyed was also threatened with discharge and physical harm. To 
further intimidate Saiyed, his employers would also show up at his home 
unannounced to inspect the premises. When he would no longer comply 
with their coercion, he was terminated. Officers of the company then went 
to Saiyed’s house and threatened him, saying that he needed to either 
return to India or commit suicide. They also threatened to harm him and 
his loved ones. Finally, to harass Saiyed further, the employers sued him 
under a non-compete agreement.
Saiyed V. Archon, Inc. et al, 2:14cv6862, U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York
1011
Change This
12
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visas
Change This
Data Already Collected 
on Guestworker 
Visa Programs
Three U.S. government agencies—the departments of 
State, Labor, and Homeland Security—currently collect 
a significant amount of data on nonimmigrant visas that 
authorize employment through various applications and 
administrative forms. 
DOL Data 
There are some examples of data that are published 
on nonimmigrant work visa applications, which provide 
the public with limited insight into how a small number 
of nonimmigrant work visa programs—only the H-visa 
programs—are used by employers. The website of the 
U.S. Department of Labor’s (DOL) Office of Foreign Labor 
Certification (OFLC) hosts a number of reports, statistics, 
and fact sheets, as well as downloadable “disclosure data” 
on Excel spreadsheets based on applications made by 
employers for labor certifications for H-2A and H-2B visas, 
and labor condition applications (LCA) submitted for H-1B 
visas.18 This data includes summaries of petition data, how 
many applications were received and how many were 
certified, how many positions were requested and how many 
were certified, how many prevailing wage determinations 
were completed, and a breakdown of the top sending 
countries, receiving states, employing corporations, and job 
types according to visa category. 
1314
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work VisasUSCIS Data 
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services 
(USCIS) collects key information on many of the major 
nonimmigrant work visas, particularly through information 
provided by employers on Form I-129, Petition for a 
Nonimmigrant Worker. Most of the data from the Form 
I-129 that are made public are available on the Buy American, 
Hire American page on USCIS’s website, 19 which was 
created in 2017, as well as Characteristics of H-1B Specialty 
Occupation Workers reports and Characteristics of H-2B 
Nonagricultural Temporary Workers reports,20 although 
some other bits of information are scattered in USCIS’s 
website. Data is available that describes both employers 
(company name, location, and denial approval) and visa 
holders (gender, country of origin, and job type). However, 
the information is not uniform between visa type. For 
example, gender information is available for H-1B holders, 
but not for H-2Bs.
ICE Data 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) collects key 
information on M-1, F-1, and J-1 nonimmigrant visas through 
the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System 
(SEVIS).21 Some nonimmigrants in these visa classifications 
are either eligible to be employed under the terms of 
their visa or eligible to receive Employment Authorization 
Documents from USCIS. The biggest and most significant 
groups are the Optional Practical Training (OPT) program, 
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) 
OPT program, and the Curricular Practical Training (CPT) 
program which allows employment required as part of the 
program of study. ICE’s SEVIS data are published on the 
Student and Exchange Visitor (SEVP) Data Library page 
of their website, and the information provided includes 
aggregated information on the total number of EADs issued 
to F-1 nonimmigrants in OPT, STEM-OPT, and CPT, and the 
top employers of F-1 nonimmigrants in OPT, STEM-OPT, and 
CPT. However, individual-level data are not published.
DOS Data 
The U.S. Department of State (DOS)—as the lead federal 
agency that processes and issues both permanent and 
nonimmigrant visas to migrants who are located abroad—
collects a large amount of information and data on 
nonimmigrant work visas. Some of the information DOS has 
is published on the Nonimmigrant Visa Statistics page on 
its website . There, it publishes the number of nonimmigrant 
visas issued by classification, and by classification and 
nationality. Also published are the number of visas that were 
refused and the number of refusals that were waived or 
overcome. DOS, however, does not publish the names of the 
employers hiring workers on the nonimmigrant visas it issues. 
This makes it difficult to know much about the employers 
who ultimately hire workers in the different nonimmigrant 
visa classifications.
CBP Data 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) is a sub-agency 
of DHS that is its largest federal law enforcement agency. 
CBP is charged with policing the U.S. border, and with respect to nonimmigrant visas, one of the agency’s main 
functions is to either permit or deny entry to persons holding 
nonimmigrant visas wishing to enter the United States after 
presenting themselves for inspection at a port of entry. A 
person entering the United States with a nonimmigrant visa 
is counted as an “admission” and CBP compiles the number 
of admissions into the United States on an annual basis, by 
broad nonimmigrant visa classification, and DHS publishes 
the totals in its annual reports.22  
Digitized Records Facilitate Transparency and 
the Collection and Sharing of Data 
The ability of agencies to collect the key information 
on nonimmigrant work visas, and ultimately make that 
information public, is getting easier over time thanks to 
efforts to make more immigration applications electronic 
rather than paper-based, which will streamline the 
process and keep expenses low. This has occurred in part 
due to the efforts of former USCIS director Francis Cissna, 
who stated publicly that his “top priority” was to convert 
USCIS into an agency that is paperless when it comes to 
the agency’s intake forms, which will include electronic 
applications and petitions. Director Cissna told Bloomberg 
Law in an interview that “it’s going to happen before the 
end of 2020.”23  This has not yet become a reality, but if it 
does, since a large share of the most valuable information 
on nonimmigrant work visas comes from the USCIS Form 
I-129, transitioning to an electronic Form I-129 will ensure 
that most of the key data on nonimmigrant visas is collected 
and stored electronically. That in turn will reduce the need 
for staff time to be spent on preparing annual reports on 
nonimmigrant visa data, inclusion in a nonimmigrant visa 
database, or compiling spreadsheets to respond to Freedom 
of Information Act requests.
Transparency has been a declared priority for the federal 
government at different points in the last few administrations. 
The Obama administration announced in January of 
2009 that transparency would be a priority going forward. 
The President declared that the government should be 
transparent, participatory, and collaborative. With the idea 
that openness strengthens democracy and promotes 
efficiency and effectiveness in government, Obama 
ordered all executive departments and agencies to employ 
new technology to disseminate information about operations 
and decisions on the internet, easily accessible to the 
public.24 Though these goals weren’t entirely accomplished 
during Obama’s time as president, they were marked 
as priorities during those eight years. On April 18, 2017, 
President Trump signed the Buy American and Hire 
American (BAHA) Executive Order, with the declared purpose 
of protecting American workers.25 As described above, 
on the BAHA website data is published on the H-1B, H-2B, 
and L-1 guestworker programs, even though publication 
is not an explicit requirement of the Executive Order.26 
These initiatives show that transparency and the use of 
the technology necessary for transparency are not new 
ideas and do enjoy some bipartisan support across vastly 
different administrations.15
Change This
16
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visas
Change This
Government Data is 
Not Accessible to Anti-
Trafficking Advocates
The breadth of data already collected on nonimmigrant 
work visa programs is considerable, and measures are 
already in place to digitize data collection and storage. 
At present, however, much of these data are not 
collected uniformly or shared between federal agencies. 
Furthermore, most are not published in annual reports 
or otherwise made publicly available. Data transparency 
is a commonsense step toward preventing human 
trafficking under nonimmigrant work visa programs. Much 
of the information advocates, policymakers, and workers 
themselves need is already collected and stored. Once 
those data are publicly available, advocates can put it to 
work and more effectively combat trafficking of temporary 
foreign workers. 
FOIA Requests: Inefficient, Expensive, and Unreliable 
In the absence of transparent, holistic data about 
nonimmigrant work visa programs, advocates are forced to 
request data through Freedom of Information Act requests 
to the appropriate agency (or agencies) and hope that their 
request is granted. The lengthy, inefficient FOIA process 
is burdensome for requestors and government agencies 
alike. The processing time and uncertainty surrounding 
FOIA requests present substantial obstacles for advocates, 
researchers, journalists, and other stakeholders seeking 
1718
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visasinformation about these public programs.  At USCIS and 
other agencies, for example, responses to FOIA requests 
can sometimes take an entire year or more to process, and 
the requests might still be denied. These delays and the 
possibility of denial make it difficult for advocates to put 
the requested information to good use within a reasonable 
amount of time. 
The FOIA process often ends up being very expensive as 
well. Processing FOIA requests requires the full-time effort 
of hundreds of employees. At DHS in 2017, the equivalent 
of 552 full-time employees were dedicated to receiving, 
processing, and releasing FOIA requests. Inevitably, the 
government rejects some portion of the FOIA petitions. 
In order to obtain information requested, some portion 
of FOIA petitioners file suit against the agency that 
denied that request. Defending those FOIA lawsuits is an 
expensive proposition. In the case of the DHS, a report is 
released every year detailing the costs of litigating FOIA 
lawsuits. In 2017, FOIA litigation cost the DHS nearly $3.4 
million dollars. Together with general administration costs 
of FOIA requests, the DHS spent $56.6 million in 2017.27 
The FOIA process as currently constructed is incredibly 
expensive for the federal government. 
Even when FOIA requests are granted, there may be 
problems with the data released by the government 
that make the information less than useful. For example, 
the federal agency may redact key bits of information, 
claiming a privacy exemption, or some of the data may 
appear unreliable, inconsistent, or difficult to interpret. 
The record-keeping practices of the agency may also be 
an obstacle. One example is USCIS, which stores much 
of the information it collects on nonimmigrant work visas 
on paper files, rather than electronically. As a result, even 
when USCIS grants a FOIA request, it may only be able 
to release the parts that have been transferred to an 
electronic format.Case Study: Requesting J-1 Data using FOIA 
One researcher’s prolonged efforts over three years serve 
well to illustrate how arduous and inefficient the process 
can be. Researcher Cate Bowman began a request for 
two years (2012-2014) of J-1 Summer Work Travel data in 
2015. She first requested information from the Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS). That request was denied by 
DHS, citing DOS as the controlling agency of the requested 
data since the DOS administers the program. DHS therefore 
told Bowman to request the data from DOS instead. 
Thirteen months after Bowman submitted the FOIA request 
to DOS, that agency also denied her request, stating that J-1 
Summer Work Travel data was housed in a system that was 
“owned and maintained” by DHS (Student and Exchange 
Visitor Information System – SEVIS). After being shuttled 
back and forth between the two agencies, Bowman elected 
to submit a new request to DOS, this time requesting only 
one year of data. The data finally arrived on a compact 
disk. Unfortunately, it was presented as a scanned 
Portable Document File (PDF) document that was more 
than 2,600 pages in length. Bowman and her team were 
forced to spend the following year and a half transferring 
that information to a useable spreadsheet format. In total, 
obtaining the data via FOIA request required waiting over 
18 months and more than 500 hours of work to convert the 
data into a format useful to any kind of analysis.28 
Obtaining even the most basic information on 
nonimmigrant work visas through FOIA requests is 
unreliable and ad hoc, especially for organizations and 
advocates that need key data on nonimmigrant visas to 
aid advocacy and trafficking prevention efforts. In an era 
of big data, the current situation is inexcusably inefficient. 
Obscuring information and releasing it only through 
litigation is draining resources from government agencies 
and civil society organizations that should be collaborating 
closely to prevent trafficking, protect trafficking victims, and 
punish traffickers.
Department of Homeland Security, 2017 Freedom of Information Act Report to the Attorney General of the United States and the Director of the Office of Government 
Information Services, (February 2018), https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/FY%202017%20DHS% 20FOIA%20Annual%20Report.pdf
2017 DHS FOIA COSTS
Number of “Full-Time FOIA Employees”    386.15
Number of “Equivalent Full-Time FOIA Employees” 166.04
Total Number of “Full-Time FOIA Staff”   552.19
Processing Costs  $53,298,043.08
Litigation - Related Costs   $3,371,007.54
Total Costs   $56,669,050.62
Total Amount of FOIA Fees Collected  $13,502.07
Percentage of FOIA Costs Covered by FOIA Fees  0.03%Change ThisH-2A Farmworkers Assert  
They Were Trafficked  
Alvarado-Flores v. Garcia-Pineda
The Garcias were granted a petition to bring 80 H-2A guestworkers from 
Mexico to cultivate and harvest tobacco, cucumber, and sweet potatoes 
during the 2015 growing season in North Carolina. The Garcias promised 
their recruits a wage of at least $10.32 per hour. Through third party 
agents, the Garcias recruited Mexican workers who they required to pay 
large recruitment fees before they were hired, ranging from $850-$1500 
USD. In July 2015, the workers arrived in North Carolina but found that 
instead of working for the employer listed in the H-2A petition, they were 
sent to various farms throughout the state. The workers were housed in a 
remote and hidden labor camp with no running water, adequate lighting, 
or safe walkways. The Garcias also confiscated the workers’ personal 
documents including passports and denied them any chance to seek 
out medical care. One worker broke his ribs in a workplace accident but 
was denied sufficient medical attention and was later unable to receive 
workers’ compensation because the Garcias failed to complete the 
necessary paperwork. The Garcias also employed intimidation tactics 
to ensure worker compliance. Workers were ridiculed, verbally berated, 
and physically threatened. The workers described feeling hopeless and 
very afraid, and eventually filed a civil suit against the Garcias in federal 
court to seek redress for the poor treatment they received.
Alvarado-Flores v. Garcia-Pineda, 5:17-cv-00369, U.S. District Court for the Eastern District 
of North Carolina
1920
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work VisasConclusion 
Cases of human trafficking under nonimmigrant work 
visa programs represents a shameful abuse of the U.S. 
immigration system and often involve numerous violations 
of labor law. Combatting trafficking and improving these 
visa programs requires holistic, accurate, and up-to-date 
data, and that data must be available to those who need it 
most, whether they are migrants considering a job offer to 
work on a temporary visa, advocates attempting to target 
their prevention campaigns, or policymakers seeking to 
improve temporary foreign worker programs. Without 
access to reliable data about guestworker programs, 
worker advocates, policymakers, and the general public 
will lack the evidence they need to devise trafficking 
survivor outreach and prevention plans, or to improve 
public policies relating to the employment of temporary 
foreign workers. Outreach and prevention efforts will be 
hindered if advocates don’t know which employers use 
nonimmigrant work visa programs and where temporary 
foreign workers are located. 
Transparency can help to put the guestworker system 
on the path to modernization, integrity, and credibility. 
Transparency and fairness are bipartisan concerns. 
Members of Congress from both parties and on all sides 
of the immigration debate should come together to support 
increased access to guestworker data – to protect workers 
from human trafficking, and to build fair and credible 
temporary work visa programs where migrants are paid 
fairly and treated with dignity. 
The Case for Transparency 
The U.S. government already possesses a vast amount of 
data on nonimmigrant work visas, but most of this data is 
not published. Anti-trafficking advocates and researchers 
must instead try to access data through an inefficient 
and burdensome FOIA request process, which drains 
their resources as well as those of the government. The 
inaccessibility of data on guestworker visa programs is 
harmful to trafficking prevention efforts and, ultimately, the 
integrity of nonimmigrant work visa programs. Moreover, it 
is unnecessary: government agencies already collect the 
data that advocates need. All that remains is to make it 
publicly available. 
Increased access to existing nonimmigrant visa data 
that is already collected as part of the application 
process for work visas would bring a much-needed 
dose of transparency to the U.S. immigration system. 
Transparency would drastically improve the ability of anti-
trafficking advocates to protect vulnerable migrants before 
and after they arrive in the United States. Increased access 
to nonimmigrant visa data would also improve the quality of 
public policy debates surrounding guestworker programs, 
including their benefits and their flaws. The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work VisasAppendix A 
Temporary Foreign Worker Visa Categories 
Temporary foreign workers participate in a wide range of 
industries and sectors of the economy, including seasonal 
occupations like agriculture (H-2A),29 landscaping, forestry, 
hospitality, and seafood processing (H-2B),30 and technical 
fields like technology and medicine (H-1B).31 Other visas, 
like the TN visa (for Canadian and Mexican professionals),32 
L-1 (for intracompany transfers, specifically management 
and employees with “specialized knowledge”),33 and O-1 
(for persons with extraordinary ability) also allow holders to 
work.34 Some nonimmigrant visas, like the F-1 (for university 
students)35 and the J-1, (intended to facilitate cultural or 
educational exchange), also permit work, but employment 
is not their primary purpose.36 The B-1 visa for “business 
visitors” generally does not allow employment, but there 
are certain exceptions.37 B-1 holders can be employed 
as construction supervisors,38 domestic workers,39 and in 
occupations that would normally require the nonimmigrant 
to obtain an H-1B or H-3 visa.40 
For more information on the nonimmigrant visas allowing 
work, please see Justice in Motion’s online resource 
Visa Pages, accessible at https://www.justiceinmotion.org/
visa-pages.
22Change ThisAppendix B
FOIA Request Timeline: Requesting J-1 Visa Data 
Using Freedom of Information Act Process 
Researcher Cate Bowman submitted a Freedom 
of Information Act (FOIA) request to Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) for demographic 
and employment placement data for participants 
in the J-1 Summer Work Travel Program, for the 
years 2012-2014 on April 6, 2015. This request 
was denied, with the rationale that “information 
pertaining to J-1 SWT program participants is 
under the purview of DOS.”
Bowman then submitted a second FOIA request to 
the Department of State (DOS) for the same data 
at the same time she appealed the DHS’s denial 
of her initial FOIA request.
On May 15, 2015, the DHS upheld its denial of the 
original FOIA request.
DOS also denied the FOIA request on June 30, 
2016, explaining that the data was housed in the 
Student and Exchange Visitor Information System 
(SEVIS), which was “owned and maintained” by 
DHS. DOS therefore recommended that the 
request be directed to DHS. 
In August of 2016, Bowman made a second 
request for J-1 Summer Work Travel data from 
DOS, this time restricting their request to 2015 
data only. She also appealed the DOS denial of 
the original two-year data request. 
On October 17, 2016 the 2015 data requested from 
DOS arrived on a compact disk, presented as a 
2,639-page, scanned Adobe Portable Document 
Format (PDF) document. Researchers then spent 
18 months working to convert the PDF data into a 
usable spreadsheet format. 
In April of 2018, the data was finally completely 
converted into spreadsheets that could be 
analyzed and used for an academic study.41  
2324
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visas1  This report uses “nonimmigrant visa programs” to refer to 
visas issued by the United States for individuals who wish to 
enter the U.S. on a temporary basis (see https://www.cbp.gov/
travel/international-visitors/visa-waiver-program/requirements-
immigrant-and-nonimmigrant-visas). Many of these nonimmigrant 
visa programs allow work; participants in these programs 
are commonly known as temporary foreign workers or 
“guestworkers.” Some advocates find the term “guestworker” an 
unacceptable euphemism for programs under which, in practice, 
many workers have been abused.  However, “guestworker” is 
a term frequently employed by journalists and anti-trafficking 
advocates (see, for instance, American University Washington 
College of Law International Human Rights Law Clinic and 
Centro de los Derechos del Migrante, Picked Apart: The Hidden 
Struggles of Migrant Worker Women in the Maryland Crab 
Industry (2010); Southern Poverty Law Center, Close to Slavery: 
Guestworker Programs in the United States (2013); and Polaris, 
Human Trafficking on Temporary Work Visas: A Data Analysis 
2015-2017 (2018)). In alignment with common usage, this report 
therefore employs “temporary foreign worker” and “guestworker” 
interchangeably and refers to overall programs as “nonimmigrant 
work visa programs” “temporary foreign worker visa programs,” 
“temporary foreign worker programs,” and “guestworker 
programs,” also interchangeably. 
2  Human Trafficking is a crime that involves exploiting a person 
for labor, services, or commercial sex. The Trafficking Victims 
Protection Act of 2000 and its subsequent reauthorizations 
define human trafficking as: a) Sex trafficking in which a 
commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in 
which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 
18 years of age; or b) The recruitment, harboring, transportation, 
provision, or obtaining of a person for labor or services, through 
the use of force, fraud, or coercion for the purpose of subjection 
to involuntary servitude, peonage, debt bondage, or slavery. 
22 U.S.C. § 7102(9); see generally 18 U.S. Code Chapter 77—
Peonage, Slavery, and Trafficking in Persons, §§ 1581-97.
3  See Appendix A. For more information on the distinctions 
between nonimmigrant visas allowing work, please see Ashwini 
Sukthankar, Visas Inc., Global Workers Justice Alliance (now 
Justice in Motion), 2012, accessible at https://bit.ly/3gXAWFF.  
Visas, Inc. is one of the first attempts to describe the complicated 
and fragmented system that is the U.S. temporary foreign 
worker system.
4  Daniel Costa and Philip Martin, Coronavirus and farmworkers: 
Farm employment, safety issues, and the H-2A guestworker 
program, Economic Policy Institute (March 24, 2020), https://
www.epi.org/publication/coronavirus-and-farmworkers-h-2a/, 
Figure B; citing U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Foreign Labor 
Certification, OFLC Performance Data, and U.S. Department of 
State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Nonimmigrant Visa Statistics. 
5  Ruth Ellen Wasem, Immigration: Visa Security Policies, 
Congressional Research Service (November 18, 2015), https://fas.
org/sgp/crs/homesec/R43589.pdf.
6  A few visa classifications for college educated guestworkers or those with extraordinary ability permit a 60-day grace period 
allowing the worker to remain in the United States to find 
new employment. 
7  T nonimmigrant status is a temporary immigration benefit 
permitting victims of a severe form of human trafficking, and 
qualifying family members, to remain in the United States for 
having assisted the investigation or prosecution of human 
trafficking crimes. Qualifying T nonimmigrants are eligible 
for employment authorization and certain federal and state 
benefits and services and may become lawful permanent 
residents. See U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, Victims 
of Human Trafficking: T Nonimmigrant Status, https://www.uscis.
gov/humanitarian/victims-human-trafficking-other-crimes/victims-
human-trafficking-t-nonimmigrant-status .
8  U.S. Government Accountability Office, H-2A and H-2B 
Programs: Increased Protections Needed for Foreign Workers, 
March 2015 (revised on May 30, 2017), https://www.gao.gov/
assets/690/684985.pdf . 
9  Polaris website, https://polarisproject.org/. 
10  The National Human Trafficking Hotline attempts to connect 
human trafficking victims and survivors to critical support 
and services to get help and stay safe, and to equip the anti-
trafficking community with the tools to effectively combat all 
forms of human trafficking. It is a national, toll-free hotline, 
available to answer calls, texts, and live chats from anywhere in 
the United States, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, in more than 
200 languages. See https://humantraffickinghotline.org.
11  Polaris, Human Trafficking on Temporary Work Visas: A Data 
Analysis 2015-2017, https://polarisproject.org/human-trafficking-
temporary-work-visas-data-analysis-2015-2017 . 
12  See Appendix A.
13  The Human Trafficking Legal Center, Federal Criminal 
and Civil Trafficking Cases Involving Legal Visas (May, 2020), 
available by request at http://www.htlegalcenter.org/resources/
case-database/.
14  Colleen Owens et al., Understanding the Organization, 
Operation, and Victimization Process of Labor Trafficking in the 
United States, Urban Institute (October 21, 2014), https://www.
urban.org/research/publication/understanding-organization-
operation-and-victimization-process-labor-trafficking-united-states. 
15  Efforts do exist to provide resources to close this information 
gap. One example is Contratados, a peer-informed review 
service for both recruiters and employers using the U.S. 
temporary foreign worker program. Contratados is operated by 
Centro de los Derechos del Migrante, and focuses primarily on 
international recruitment in Mexico. See https://contratados.org.
16  For examples, please see: International Labor Recruitment 
Working Group, Shining A Light on Summer Work:  A First Look 
at the Employers Using the J-1 Program, July 30, 2019, https://
fairlaborrecruitment.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/shining-a-Endnotes25
Change Thislight-on-summer-work.pdf , (J-1 Summer Work Travel participants 
report finding wages, work conditions, and housing that are sub-
standard and less then promised at their recruitment); Stephanie 
Hanes, Modern slavery: Labor Trafficking is Everywhere and 
Nowhere, October 26, 2015, Christian Science Monitor, https://
www.csmonitor.com/World/2015/1026/Modern-slavery-Labor-
trafficking-is-everywhere-and-nowhere , (H-2B carnival workers 
were made to endure illegal work and living conditions, earning 
less than a quarter of their promised wage); Kevin C. Hall, 
Moultrians charged in human trafficking case in Wisconsin, May 
30, 2019, https://www.moultrieobserver.com/news/local_news/
moultrians-charged-in-human-trafficking-case-in-wisconsin/
article_1c722254-82e7-11e9-a665-bbd82c100fa9.html, (H-2A 
workers contracted to work in Georgia were moved illicitly to 
farms in Wisconsin).
17  See for example, the data and reports posted on the 
Department of Homeland Security’s Office of Immigration 
Statistics webpage, https://www.dhs.gov/office-immigration-
statistics, the USCIS’s Buy American Hire American page, https://
www.uscis.gov/legal-resources/buy-american-hire-american-
putting-american-workers-first.
18  OFLC Performance Data, Office of Foreign Labor Certification, 
U.S. Department of Labor, https://www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.
gov/performancedata.cfm.
19  “Buy American and Hire American: Putting American Workers 
First,” USCIS website, https://www.uscis.gov/legal-resources/buy-
american-hire-american-putting-american-workers-first. 
20  See USCIS, “Reports and Studies,” https://www.uscis.gov/
tools/reports-studies/reports-and-studies.
21  U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Student and 
Exchange Visitor Program, https://www.ice.gov/sevis.
22  See DHS Office of Immigration Statistics, Annual Flow Report, 
Nonimmigrant Admissions (October 2018), https://www.dhs.gov/
sites/default/files/publications/Nonimmigrant_Admissions_2017.pdf .   
23  Laura Francis, “Paperless Intake Is Immigration Agency 
Director’s Top Priority,” Bloomberg Law (Oct. 17, 2018), https://
news.bloomberglaw.com/daily-labor-report/paperless-intake-is-
immigration-agency-directors-top-priority .
24  The Obama White House, Transparency and Open 
Government Memorandum for the Heads of Executive 
Departments and Agencies (January 21, 2009), https://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/transparency-
and-open-government.
25  The Trump Administration, Presidential Executive Order on 
Buy American and Hire American, (April 18, 2017), https://www.
whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/presidential-executive-
order-buy-american-hire-american/.
26  “Buy American and Hire American: Putting American Workers 
First,” USCIS website, https://www.uscis.gov/legal-resources/buy-
american-hire-american-putting-american-workers-first.27  Department of Homeland Security, 2017 Freedom 
of Information Act Report to the Attorney General of the 
United States and the Director of the Office of Government 
Information Services, (February 2018), https://www.dhs.gov/sites/
default/files/publications/FY%202017%20DHS% 20FOIA%20
Annual%20 Report.pdf
28  For a detailed timeline of this FOIA request, see Appendix B. 
See also International Labor Recruitment Working Group, Shining 
A Light on Summer Work- A First Look at the Employers Using 
the J-1 Summer Work Travel Visa (June, 2019), available at https://
fairlaborrecruitment.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/shining-a-light-
on-summer-work.pdf .
29  See Justice in Motion, Visa Pages: H-2A Visa,  
https://bit.ly/2Whwji3.
30  See Justice in Motion, Visa Pages: H-2B Visa,  
https://bit.ly/2WzMUOj.
31  See Justice in Motion, Visa Pages: H-1B Visa,  
https://bit.ly/3j39GHO.
32  See USCIS, TN NAFTA Professionals, https://www.uscis.gov/
working-united-states/temporary-workers/tn-nafta-professionals.
33  See Justice in Motion, Visa Pages: L-1 Visa, https://bit.
ly/32tUi1t.
34  See USCIS, O-1 Visa: Individuals with Extraordinary 
Ability or Achievement, https://www.uscis.gov/working-united-
states/temporary-workers/o-1-visa-individuals-extraordinary-
ability-or-achievement.
35  See Justice in Motion, Visa Pages: F-1 Visa,  
https://bit.ly/3fsXLRx.
36  See Justice in Motion, Visa Pages: J-1 Visa,  
https://bit.ly/2OpzH5X.
37  See Justice in Motion, Visa Pages: B-1 Visa,  
https://bit.ly/38UaFFD.
38  9 FAM 402.2-5(E)(1)(b) - (U) Commercial or Industrial 
Workers; 8 CFR 214.2(b)(5); 22 CFR 41.31(b)(1).
39  9 FAM 402.2-5(D) - (U) Personal Employees/
Domestic Workers.
40  9 FAM 402.2-5(F) - (U) Aliens Normally Classifiable H1 or H3; 
9 FAM 402.2-5(F)(4) - (U) H-3 Trainees.
41  Correspondence with Cate Bowman. See also Catherine 
Bowman, Flexible Workers, Fissured Workplaces: Cultural 
Exchange for Hire in An Era of Precarious Labor, Ph.D. 
dissertation (2019), University of Colorado.26
The Case for Transparency: Using Data to Combat Human Trafficking Under Temporary Foreign Work Visas
