We’re 
leading 
the way 
together
Drug Policy Alliance Annual ReportTable of Contents
Ending Marijuana Prohibition
Ending the Drug War and Mass 
Incarceration
Promoting Health, Reducing Harm
Foundation Support
Advocacy Grants
Board and Honorary Board
Financial Statements7
13
17
23
24
25
26
The work described herein includes that 
of the Drug Policy Alliance, a 501(c)(3) 
organization, and Drug Policy Action, a 
501(c)(4) organization. References to “DPA” 
refer to the work of both organizations.
At DPA’s Reform Conference, asha bandele of DPA joined 
with activists Kemba Smith, who was granted clemency by 
President Clinton in 2000, and Jason Hernandez, the first 
Latino to receive clemency from President Obama. Both were 
convicted of nonviolent drug offenses – Smith was sentenced 
to 24.5 years behind bars, while Hernandez was sentenced to 
life in prison.www.drugpolicy.org3Are You Ready to Make 
the Drug War History?
Never before has the ground been more  
fertile for a fundamental shift in our  
nation’s drug policies.  
As a DPA member, you can be proud of the 
real change you’ve helped bring to fruition. As 
a result of our work, hundreds of thousands of 
people have been diverted from incarceration, 
millions of people can safely access marijuana 
without being considered criminals, and states 
like California, Colorado, Connecticut, New 
Jersey, New Mexico and New York have saved 
millions – and in some cases, billions –  
of dollars by eliminating wasteful and  
ineffective drug law enforcement, prosecution 
and prison expenditures.Making marijuana legal has always been a big 
part of our work. Beginning with California in 
1996, DPA has played a pivotal role in roughly 
half of the campaigns that have legalized 
medical marijuana, most recently in New York. 
We’re also the only organization that played  
a role in all the victorious campaigns to legalize 
marijuana more broadly – Colorado and 
Washington in 2012, Uruguay in 2013,  
and Oregon, Alaska and Washington, D.C.,  
in 2014. 
But ending marijuana prohibition is only part 
of what DPA does. DPA’s mission is to end 
the drug war, which means treating drug use 
and addiction as health issues, not criminal Letter from the President and Executive Director4 2015 Annual Reportissues. It means supporting harm reduction 
interventions to reduce the death, disease, 
crime, and suffering associated with both drug 
use and drug prohibition. 
It means not arresting people for possessing or 
using any drug, absent harm to others. And 
it means drastically reducing the number of 
people locked up for drug law violations. 
Our movement is fast maturing. DPA’s biennial 
gathering in Washington D.C. last year 
drew over 1,500 people from 71 countries – 
dramatically more than ever before. We came 
together to celebrate our many successes but 
also to vigorously debate issues raised by the  
#BlackLivesMatter movement, the disease 
model of addiction, and the growing role of 
for-profit interests in marijuana policy reform. 
Even as we step up our attacks on drug war 
policies we increasingly find ourselves working 
with people in government, at local, state, 
federal and international levels – not because we’ve compromised on our principles  
but because the mainstream is heading  
in our direction. 
Recent rhetorical and policy shifts among 
elected officials and policymakers are 
encouraging but still far too timid and modest. 
That’s why we – you, DPA, and our allies – 
need to be agents of change. We lead, so that 
elected officials may follow. That is the nature 
of movements for individual freedom and 
justice. How well we do it, not what our leaders 
initiate, will determine the pace and scope  
of change.
DPA’s approach has been grounded, since 
our origins, in three principles: freedom, 
responsibility and compassion. We believe that 
people should not be punished solely for what 
they put into their bodies but only for crimes 
that hurt others. We insist that both individuals 
and governments be held responsible for the 
harmful consequences of their actions. And  
we know that when people struggle with  Letter from the President and Executive Director  
(continued)www.drugpolicy.org 5
Ira Glasser,  
PresidentEthan Nadelmann,  
Executive Director
Letter from the President and Executive Director  
(continued)
drug misuse, compassion is typically more 
effective, humane and fiscally responsible  
than punishment.
The shift in public opinion toward these same 
principles is now accelerating. Yet the assault 
on American citizens and others continues, 
with 700,000 people still arrested for marijuana 
offenses each year and almost 500,000 people 
still behind bars for nothing more than a drug 
law violation.
The end of the tragic war on drugs is within 
our grasp. But we must reach for it together.“Never before  
has the ground 
been more 
fertile for a 
fundamental 
shift in  
our nation’s  
drug policies.” Mainstream media 
continues to use cliched 
“stoner” images for 
otherwise serious news 
stories about marijuana. 
Our alternative library of 
stock photos was created 
to fight this stereotype, 
and features real, everyday 
people who use marijuana.www.drugpolicy.org7Ending Marijuana 
Prohibition – 
And Ensuring Responsible and Inclusive Legal Regulation
DPA works to repeal marijuana prohibition  
and create sensible systems of regulation 
for adult use. We support creating access 
to marijuana for medical purposes and 
decriminalizing marijuana in places where 
legalization is not yet politically feasible but 
where wasteful, racially disproportionate mass 
arrests persist. And we look for ways to leverage 
marijuana policy reform to help rebuild 
communities most harmed by prohibition  
and criminalization.
Our work goes well beyond legislative and 
ballot initiative campaigns. Ensuring effective 
implementation is essential. We work closely 
with government agencies to devise regulations even as we mobilize external pressure to 
ensure laws are enacted in good faith. Our 
public relations work has generated earned 
media coverage valued at tens of millions of 
dollars over the years, shaping national and 
international perception in ways that advance 
our agenda.
We ended 2014 on an up note, with 
marijuana legalization measures passing in 
Oregon, Washington, D.C., and Alaska. 
2015 was a year we worked on implementing 
these successes, while making tremendous 
efforts to lay the groundwork for marijuana 
legalization initiatives potentially on the 
ballot in California, Nevada, Arizona, Maine 8
2015 Annual Reportand Massachusetts, and medical marijuana 
initiatives in Florida, Arkansas, Ohio  
and Missouri.
2015 also marked a breakthrough in our work 
on Capitol Hill to reform federal marijuana 
policy. We played an instrumental role in 
several successful legislative efforts, such as 
renewing legislation that cuts off funding for 
the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) 
and other federal law enforcement agencies to 
interfere with state medical marijuana laws.
We also played a pivotal role in the 
introduction of the historic CARERS Act, 
sponsored by Senators Cory Booker (D-NJ), 
Rand Paul (R-KY), and Kristen Gillibrand 
(D-NY), a sweeping reform bill that would 
end federal interference with state medical 
marijuana laws, ease restrictions on medical 
research, and enable banks to provide financial 
services to marijuana businesses.
After leading the campaign in 2014 that made 
New York the 23rd state to allow legal access to medical marijuana, we’ve since been working 
hard to improve and expand the law. In fall of 
2015, we successfully led an effort to pass an 
“emergency access” bill to expedite the state’s 
program for some patients.
And much of the year’s most exciting news 
came from elsewhere in the hemisphere. In 
Jamaica, we helped draft legislation and advised 
senior ministers and elected officials from both 
political parties on sweeping reforms enacted 
in June 2015 that decriminalized marijuana 
possession and created protections for religious, 
scientific and medical uses. In Canada, where 
we’ve advised four successive Vancouver 
mayors, new Prime Minister Justin T rudeau  
has promised to legalize marijuana. In 
Mexico, where the Supreme Court issued a 
ruling in October that could pave the way for 
legalization, we testified before Congress and 
advised attorneys involved in this seminal case 
as well as elected officials and allies. None of 
this would be happening, of course, if not for 
our successful efforts to make marijuana legal 
in the U.S. Ending Marijuana Prohibition  
(continued)“It’s heartening to see that tens of 
thousands of otherwise law-abiding 
Coloradans have been spared the 
travesty of getting handcuffed or 
being charged for small amounts 
of marijuana. By focusing on public 
health rather than criminalization, 
Colorado is better positioned to 
address the potential harms of 
marijuana use, while diminishing 
many of the worst aspects of the 
war on drugs.”
Art Way
Colorado State Director  
and Senior Director,  
National Criminal  
Justice Reform Strategy
After 
legalization, 
Colorado 
pot arrests 
plunge10
2015 Annual ReportDPA’s leadership role requires us to help 
manage two parallel challenges with nuance, 
vision and all the resources we can bring to 
bear. Within the U.S., we must negotiate the 
twists and turns of the struggle between policy 
reforms at the state and local level and our 
opponents’ vigorous efforts to undermine that 
progress. And internationally we must assist our 
allies in reforming their own drug laws in the 
face of persistent pressures to sustain the global 
drug prohibition regime. 
We’re entering a new era of marijuana law 
reform in which the influence of philanthropic 
funders and organizations driven primarily by 
concerns for civil rights and personal liberties, 
and not by any financial interest in legalizing 
marijuana, will be superseded by people and 
companies driven largely by their pursuit of 
legal profits.Ending Marijuana Prohibition  
(continued)
That’s a positive development insofar as it 
means that legal profit seekers will play a 
leading role in ending the pervasive and racially 
disproportionate arrests, illegal markets and 
many other harms of marijuana prohibition. 
But legislators, citizens and advocates for civil 
rights and liberties as well as public health and 
equitable economic development will need to 
do all we can to ensure that post-prohibition 
policies reflect the values that have driven 
marijuana reform until now.
We took a lot of important steps in 2015, but 
2016 is shaping up to be the most significant 
year yet for moving toward our ultimate goal  
of ending federal marijuana prohibition.Medical 
marijuanaMarijuana 
legalization
Potential marijuana 
legalization ballot 
initiatives in 2016Potential medical 
marijuana ballot 
initiatives in 2016Marijuana Legalization in the U.S.
“With California and some other, smaller states 
hopefully legalizing marijuana in 2016, the 
federal government will be forced to reckon 
with this. We’re hoping that this leads to the 
end of marijuana prohibition nationally.”
Lynne Lyman
California State DirectorAudience members 
applaud at the conclusion 
of a DPA national town 
hall, “Connecting the 
Dots: Where the Drug 
Policy Reform and 
#BlackLivesMatter 
Movements Intersect.”www.drugpolicy.org13Ending the Drug War 
and Mass Incarceration
Almost half a million people, disproportionately 
black and Latino, are locked up in U.S. prisons 
and jails today because of drug prohibition. 
It costs many billions of dollars annually to 
incarcerate them. 
Even as support for criminal justice reform 
grows dramatically, drug policy reform is more 
than ever the cutting-edge of broader efforts 
to end mass incarceration and re-envision the 
criminal justice system. 
DPA has been at the forefront of many, perhaps 
most, major drug sentencing reforms over the 
past two decades. It’s safe to say that there are 
many tens of thousands fewer people behind bars today as a result of DPA’s efforts – and 
hundreds of thousands who either did not go 
to jail or prison, or who spent less time there, 
because of our work.
The 2014 election was a big turning point for 
our criminal justice reform efforts, revealing an 
electorate eager to reduce prison populations 
and the power of the prison industrial complex. 
California took a significant step toward ending 
mass incarceration and the war on drugs by 
approving Proposition 47 – which we assisted 
on drafting while providing financial support 
for the campaign – thereby changing simple 
drug possession and other petty offenses from a 
felony to a misdemeanor, with groundbreaking 14
2015 Annual Reportretroactive resentencing provisions. Since 
its passage, we’ve helped ensure effective 
implementation and worked closely with local 
allies to help thousands of people remove a 
felony drug conviction from their record. 
DPA also led a first-of-its-kind, hard-fought 
battle to reform the broken bail system in  
New Jersey, where 75% of the 15,000 people  
in its jails were simply awaiting trial rather  
than serving a sentence, often just too poor to 
make bail. This victory set a new model for the 
nation and will significantly reduce the number  
of people behind bars in New Jersey for 
nothing more than a low-level drug  
law violation.
Perhaps most impressively, 2015 saw us win an 
enormous victory in New Mexico, where we 
led a successful effort to pass legislation that 
eliminated civil asset forfeiture in the state. We 
are now working in Congress and many states 
around the country to replicate and build on 
this landmark triumph as well as to defend our win in New Mexico from attack by the law 
enforcement lobby.
We also broke new ground in California in 
2015 by taking on challenging issues around 
criminal justice and immigration, passing 
two bills through the legislature to reduce the 
likelihood that immigrants are deported for 
minor drug possession, a common occurrence 
that breaks up families by the thousands  
every year.  
We’re leading efforts, meanwhile, to initiate 
and implement Law Enforcement Assisted 
Diversion (LEAD) programs in several cities 
across the country such as Santa Fe, NM, 
Albany, NY and San Francisco, CA. This is the 
closest thing to Portugal-style decriminalization 
in the U.S. and a major step toward our 
ultimate goal of ending arrests and criminal 
penalties for drug use and possession. In July, 
DPA convened a historic two-day summit 
– at the White House, of all places – with 
government officials and community leaders Ending the Drug War and Mass Incarceration  
(continued)www.drugpolicy.org 15from over 30 city, county and state jurisdictions 
to learn about how this innovative program can 
drastically reduce the role of criminalization in 
drug policy.
And in perhaps the most bitterly divided 
Congress ever, we’re working closely with 
legislators from both sides of the aisle to 
reform mandatory minimum drug laws. These 
disastrous laws have put millions of people 
behind bars – sometimes for life – for low-level 
nonviolent drug offenses. President Obama has continued to speak out forcefully against 
mass incarceration and challenged Congress to 
send him legislation that would end mandatory 
minimums and reduce sentences for those 
behind bars. 
With your support, more and more 
policymakers and elected officials are realizing 
that for the sake of our safety and health –  
and their careers – it makes sense to reduce  
the role of criminalization in drug policy.Ending the Drug War and Mass Incarceration  
(continued)
Simple possession of 
drugs like heroin and 
cocaine is still a felony 
in 34 states.U.S. Senators Cory 
Booker and Kirsten 
Gillibrand speak 
in support of the 
CARERS Act during a 
press conference at 
DPA’s New York office.www.drugpolicy.org17Promoting Health, 
Reducing Harm
DPA is leading the fight to reduce the death, 
disease, crime and suffering associated with 
both drug use and drug prohibition. This 
means supporting harm reduction interventions 
grounded in science, compassion, health and 
human rights. 
Earlier in DPA’s history, our major focus was 
reducing the spread of HIV/AIDS by making 
syringes legally available. We passed reforms 
in California, New Jersey and New York, and 
continue to devote resources to this work. This 
paid off in a big way in 2015, with Congress 
overturning the decades-long ban on federal 
funding for syringe access programs, and with Kentucky and Indiana passing legislative 
reforms to initiate such programs. 
We also promote counseling and treatment, 
including maintenance therapies such as 
methadone, buprenorphine and prescribed 
heroin programs for people struggling  
with addiction.
But more than a decade ago, DPA took the 
lead in addressing the rapidly growing number 
of overdose deaths, which recently surpassed 
auto accidents as the leading cause of accidental 
death in the U.S.  18
2015 Annual ReportThe past couple years have been transformative 
for overdose prevention efforts in the U.S., and 
much of it can be credited to your support. 
Since 2014, 18 states have passed legislation 
to increase access to the overdose antidote, 
naloxone, and “911 Good Samaritan” laws  
to stop arresting and prosecuting people for 
drug possession when they call 911 to report  
an overdose.
In New Jersey, where Gov. Christie initially 
opposed our efforts, we won him over with 
hard-fought campaigns. He signed our 2013 
overdose prevention bill and another in 2015 
to expand prevention efforts. Last year alone, 
police officers in the state saved the lives of 
more than 1,819 people with naloxone, and 
now 98% of all law enforcement agencies are 
trained to use it. The numbers for both would 
be zero were it not for the laws that DPA 
helped pass and implement. It’s a great example 
of how policy change is the single most efficient 
way to deal with this problem.In California, we’re especially proud to have 
led a successful effort in 2014 that made it the 
first state to pass a law that permits pharmacists 
to furnish naloxone upon request. It was 
previously available only by prescription from 
a healthcare provider or from a small handful 
of naloxone distribution programs throughout 
the state. 
In 2015, CVS became the first chain pharmacy 
to sell naloxone without a prescription, as a 
direct result of our efforts. We’re now urgently 
working to expand over-the-counter naloxone 
to many more states.
In Congress, the federal Stop Overdose Stat 
Act, drafted and supported by DPA, passed 
its first committee and has gained over 50 
co-sponsors. And President Obama announced 
an initiative that will significantly increase  
the availability of naloxone and access  
to buprenorphine.   Promoting Health, Reducing Harm  
(continued)Thanks to you, naloxone access and 911 Good 
Samaritan reforms are saving lives every day 
in states around the country.
States that have 
passed a Naloxone 
Access LawStates that have 
passed a 911 Good 
Samaritan LawStates that have 
passed both
20
2015 Annual ReportPromoting Health, Reducing Harm  
(continued)
Another key development in 2015 was our 
work building support for the first supervised 
injection facility (SIF) in the United States.  
SIFs are places where people who inject drugs 
can consume safely and connect with health 
care services. There is overwhelming evidence 
from the nearly 100 SIFs operating in 68 cities 
worldwide that they drastically reduce new 
HIV infections, overdoses, and public nuisance 
without increasing drug use or criminal activity. 
They also provide enormous fiscal benefits  
to taxpayers. With your continued support,  
this life-saving strategy will be coming to the  
U.S. soon.
Between all the policy victories and the 
groundswell of press coverage, it’s clear that a 
nationwide movement to address the overdose crisis is finally emerging. DPA was one of the 
first organizations sounding the alarm about 
the problem at a time when the politics around 
drug policy, and the political climate in general, 
were far less favorable and even hostile. 
It is now up to us to ensure the nation’s focus 
on overdose and the growing problems around 
opiate abuse does not lead to a backlash, that 
well-intentioned bills do not contain bad 
provisions, that good policy is implemented in 
good faith, and that steady progress continues 
to be made across the country.  
Many thanks to you for making all of this 
possible. Your support is helping save lives  
every day, all over the country.“The good news about opioid 
overdoses is that many of them 
are preventable. The fundamental 
problem we’re facing is the 
stigma surrounding drug use 
in general, and toward injection 
drug use in particular—that 
stigma is killing people.”
Julie Netherland
Director of Academic 
Engagement
How to 
Survive 
the Heroin 
EpidemicThe Drug Policy Alliance 
partnered with Human 
Intonation, an apparel 
brand dedicated to raising 
social awareness, to create 
t-shirts and tank tops 
that spread the love for 
drug policy reform. Visit 
drugpolicy.org/store to get 
your #NoMoreDrugWar tee 
or tank.Foundation Support
Brightwater Fund
Buck Foundation
Change Happens Foundation
Curtis W. McGraw Foundation
Doris Goodwin Walbridge Foundation
Elton John AIDS Foundation
Fund for New Jersey
Herb Block Foundation
Hugh M. Hefner Foundation
Jacob & Valeria Langeloth Foundation
Jockey Hollow Foundation
John M. Lloyd Foundation
Levi Strauss Foundation
Libra Foundation
MAC AIDS Fund 
New York Foundation
New York State Health Foundation
Open Society Foundations
Proteus Fund
PSEG Fund
Public Welfare Foundation
RiverStyx Foundation
Robert W. Wilson Charitable Trust
Santa Fe Community Foundation
Shanbrom Family Foundation
Shelley & Donald Rubin FoundationDPA received grants from 26 local and 
national foundations in 2015. Most 
support specific parts of our agenda 
that align with their own organizational 
priorities, on issues including criminal 
justice reform, racial justice, human 
rights, civil liberties, HIV/AIDS 
prevention, and public health.Advocacy Grants
Promoting Policy Change  
A New PATH/Moms United
A New Way of Life Reentry Project
California Society of Addiction Medicine
CANGRESS/LA CAN
Center for Living and Learning
Legal Services for Prisoners with Children
Los Angeles Regional Reentry Partnership
Oakland Community Organizations
Progressive Christians Uniting/Justice  
Not Jails
San Francisco Drug Users’ Union
William C. Velasquez Institute
Colorado Criminal Justice Reform Coalition
Harm Reduction Action Center
New Mexico Women’s Justice Project
Young Women United
BOOMHealth
Breast Cancer Coalition of Rochester
Center for Law and Justice
Justice StrategiesThe Drug Policy Alliance Advocacy 
Grants Program promotes policy 
change and advances drug policy 
reform at the local, state and national 
levels by strategically funding smaller, 
geographically limited or single-issue 
projects. Funded annually at a level 
of roughly $1.2 million, the Advocacy 
Grants program raises awareness  
and promotes policy change through 
two vehicles: the Promoting Policy 
Change Program and the Special  
Opportunities Program.New York Academy of Medicine
VOCAL
A Better Way Foundation
AlterNet
DRCNet
Drug Policy Forum of Hawaii
Drug Truth Network
Illinois Consortium on Drug Policy/
Roosevelt University
Institute of the Black World
North Carolina Harm Reduction Coalition
One Voice Mississippi
People’s Harm Reduction Alliance
Protect Families First
Samuel DeWitt Proctor Conference
Southern Coalition for Social Justice
The Ordinary People Society
Women With a Vision
Special Opportunities Program
California Hepatitis Alliance 
VOCAL 
Students for Sensible Drug Policy 
DanceSafe
Partnership for Safety and Justice
Texas Criminal Justice Coalition 
Immigrant Defense Project 
BOOMHealth 
Suncoast Harm Reduction Project 
Canadian Students for Sensible  
Drug Policy 
Intercambios Puerto Rico 
Community Thrive Drug Policy Project of Utah 
Louisiana Public Health Institute 
Cleo Parker Robinson Dance 
Trinity United Church of Christ 
Sawbuck Productions, Inc. 
The Ordinary People Society 
Twelves Organization 
CommonSenseNOLA
United Methodist Church, General Board  
of Church and SocietyDrug Policy Alliance 
Honorary BoardDrug Policy Alliance 
Board of Directors
Former Mayor Rocky Anderson
Harry Belafonte
Former Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci
Deepak Chopra
Congressman John Conyers, Jr.
Walter Cronkite [1916-2009]
Ram Dass
Dr. Vincent Dole [1913-2006]
Former Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders
U.S. District Court Judge Nancy Gertner 
(Ret.)
Former Police Chief Penny Harrington
Calvin Hill
Arianna Huffington
Former Governor Gary Johnson
U.S. District Court Judge John Kane
Former Attorney General Nicholas deB. 
Katzenbach [1922-2012]
Former Police Chief Joseph McNamara 
[1934-2014]
Former Police Commissioner Patrick V. 
Murphy [1920-2011]
Dr. Beny J. Primm [1928-2015]
Dennis Rivera
Former Mayor Kurt Schmoke
Dr. Charles Schuster  [1930-2011] 
Alexander Shulgin [1925-2014]
Former Secretary of State George P. Shultz
Russell Simmons
U.S. District Court Judge Robert Sweet
Former Chairman of the Federal Reserve 
Paul Volcker
International Honorary Board
Richard Branson
Ruth Dreifuss
Václav Havel [1936-2011]
StingThe Hon. Larry Campbell
Senator, The Senate of Canada
Christine Downton
Former Vice Chairman and Founding 
Partner of Pareto Partners
Jodie Evans
Co-founder, CODEPINK
James E. Ferguson, II
Senior Partner, Ferguson, Stein, Chambers 
Law Offices
Jason Flom
President, Lava Records
Ira Glasser, President
President of Board
Former Executive Director, American Civil 
Liberties Union
Carl Hart, PhD
New York State Psychiatric Institute
Kenneth Hertz
Senior Partner, Hertz Lichtenstein & Young 
LLP
Mathilde Krim, PhD
Founding Chair, American Foundation for 
AIDS Research (amfAR)David C. Lewis, MD
Founding Director, Center for Alcohol and 
Addiction Studies, Brown University
Pamela Lichty
President, Drug Policy Forum of Hawai’i
Ethan Nadelmann, JD, PhD,  
Executive Director
Josiah Rich, MD
Professor of Medicine and Community 
Health, The Warren Alpert Medical School 
of Brown University
Rev. Edwin Sanders,  Secretary
Senior Servant, Metropolitan 
Interdenominational Church
Coordinator, Religious Leaders for a More 
Just and Compassionate Drug Policy
Michael Skolnik
Editor-in-Chief, Globalgrind.com
Political Director to Russell Simmons
George Soros
Chairman, Soros Fund Management
Ilona Szabó de Carvalho
Director, Igarapé InstituteDrug Policy Alliance, a 501(c)(3) OrganizationDrug Policy Alliance, 
Statement of Financial Position  
FY 2015Drug Policy Alliance, 
Statement of Activities  
FY 2015
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,419,251
Investments $ 698,992
Grants receivable, net $ 4,936,281
Accounts receivable $ 44,105
Prepaid expenses and other assets $ 96,137
Deposits $ 89,422
Property, equipment and 
leasehold improvements, net $ 5,643,129
Total Assets $ 12,927,317
SUPPORT AND REVENUE
Contributions unrestricted $ 10,260,158
Contributions 
temporarily restricted $ 4,033,109
Total Income $ 14,293,267
CHANGE IN NET ASSETS 
Unrestricted $ (2,217,360)
Temporarily restricted $ 4,033,109
CHANGE IN NET ASSETS
Net assets, Beginning of year $ 4,044,196
Net assets, End of year $ 5,859,945EXPENSES
Program Expenses $ 9,295,600
Management $ 1,477,857
Fundraising $ 1,704,061
Total Expenses $ 12,477,518LIABILITIES
Accounts payable and 
accrued expenses $ 693,463
Accrued compensated absences $ 351,655
Due to Drug Policy Action $ 150,000
Note payables $ 3,000,000
Mortgage payables $ 2,872,254
Total Liabilities $ 7,067,372
NET ASSETS
Unrestricted $ (299,113)
Temporarily restricted $ 6,159,058
Total Net Assets $ 5,859,945
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND NET ASSETS $ 12,927,317Program Expenses
Management
Fundraising$12,477,518Total ExpensesDrug Policy Action, a 501(c)(4) OrganizationDrug Policy Action, 
Statement of Financial Position  
FY 2015Drug Policy Action, 
Statement of Activities  
FY 2015
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents $ 12,227,485
Investments $ 2,883,421
Due from Drug Policy Alliance $ 150,000
Note receivable $ 3,000,000
Grants receivable $ 23,949,582
Total Assets $ 42,210,488
SUPPORT AND REVENUE
Contributions unrestricted $ 9,351,934
Contributions 
temporarily restricted $ (6,550,000)
Total Income $ 2,801,934
CHANGE IN NET ASSETS
Unrestricted $ 6,099,546
Temporarily restricted $ (6,550,000)
CHANGE IN NET ASSETS
Net assets, Beginning of year $ 42,606,141
Net assets, End of year $ 42,155,687EXPENSES
Program Expenses $ 3,072,678
Management $ 171,407
Fundraising $ 8,303
Total Expenses $ 3,252,388LIABILITIES
Accounts payable and 
accrued expenses $ 54,801
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND NET ASSETS $ 42,210,488NET ASSETS
Unrestricted $ 23,285,106
Temporarily restricted $ 18,870,581
Total Net Assets $ 42,155,687
Several Drug Policy Alliance and Drug Policy Action donors have 
made multi-year pledges to these organizations. These unfulfilled 
pledges are projected future revenue that will be received within one 
to nine years and does not constitute an endowment. These donor 
commitments reflect a strong current and future financial outlook for 
the Drug Policy Alliance and Drug Policy Action.Program Expenses
Management
Fundraising$3,252,388Total ExpensesCalifornia
Los Angeles, CA
la@drugpolicy.org
Bay Area, CA
oakland@drugpolicy.org
Colorado
Denver, CO
co@drugpolicy.orgDistrict of Columbia
Washington, D.C.
dc@drugpolicy.org
New Jersey
Trenton, NJ
nj@drugpolicy.org
New Mexico
Santa Fe, NM
nm@drugpolicy.orgNew York
Drug Policy Alliance
Headquarters
131 West 33rd Street
15th Floor
New York, NY 10001
212.613.8020 phone
212.613.8021 fax
nyc@drugpolicy.org
www.drugpolicy.org