Read the declassified summary of the 
Torture Report at  
https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/
default/files/publications/CRPT -
113srpt288.pdf   Exposing the Truth of U.S. Torture: 
Restoring Human Dignity  
 
  
THE TORTURE REPORT
 
                      What it is  
                          Why it matters  
                              What you can do  
 
 
 
WHAT THE REPORT  DESCRIBES:  The Torture Report is a more than 6, 000 page document that 
details the CIA’s use of morally abhorrent and horrific acts of torture. Acts of torture described in the 
report include waterboarding to the point of inducing convulsion and vomiting and medically 
unnecessary rectal feedings. One detainee was chained, partly unclothed, to a concrete floor and left to die of hypothermia. Others were stripped, hooded, bound with Mylar tape, and dragged 
through corridors while being slapped and punched.  
 
The CIA placed detainees in ice water “baths” to induce hypothermia and threatened to sexually abuse or otherwise harm the family members of detainees. The CIA also imprisoned an intellectually 
challenged family member of a detainee solely for the purpose of forcing the detainee to provide 
information and used his taped crying in an attempt to do so.  
 The Report is the product of a multi -year investigation the Senate Intelligence Committee conducted 
into the CIA's torture program.  In addition to describing the immoral brutality of the program, it also 
shows that torture often failed to produce intelligence or produced false information. In a public response to the Report, CIA Director Brennan himself admitted that the CIA did not know whether 
torture had produced any useful intelligence. Further, the R eport shows that the CIA repeatedly 
misled Congress, the President, and the Department of Justice about the extent, severity, and outcomes of the torture program.  
 Most of the 6,000 page Torture Report is classifie d and 
has never been shared with the American people. Instead a 500 page summary of the Torture Report was 
declassified and shared with the public  in 2014.  
 The investigation into CIA torture had bipartisan support from the time it began through the release 
of the declassified summary.  Republicans and Democrats alike were horrified by the brutality the 
CIA inflicted upon its prisoners.  
 
WHY THE REPORT  MATTERS – THE MORAL VIEW: The Torture Report describes acts of 
brutality that don't have any place in a decent society. Our democracy depends upon the truth about 
the torture program being made public. Our values depend on us acting to ensure that it is never 
repeated. As people of faith, we believe that torture is a sin against humanity and against God.  
 NRCAT’s Executive Director, Rev. Ron 
Stief appeared on CNN to discuss the 
Torture Report.  http://bit.ly/1CmDLVA   The 500 page summary of the Torture Report has been made public, however the full Torture 
Report remains classified.  Further, President Trump has expressed an interest in torturing prisoners, 
in his words, "even if it doesn't work."  We have a responsibility to ensure that our fellow citizens hear 
about both the brutality and ineffectiveness of the torture program , and that we make clear to our politicians that it 
was wrong. We will lose something irrecoverable if we allow 
torture to bec ome accepted by our society.   
 WHY THE REPORT MATTERS – THE LEGAL VIEW : 
Torture was clearly against the law even while the CIA was conducting its torture progr am. Unfortunately though, 
unethical lawyers in the CIA, the Department of Justice, and 
the White House twisted the law to claim that hurting people 
wasn't torture so long as they had information the U.S.  
wanted and so long as the pain that was inflicted upon them 
fell short of imminent organ failure or death (the CIA did in fact torture at least one detainee to death 
- but no CIA employee faced justice for it).  
 
After the Senate Intelligence Committee finished investigating the torture program, Senators John 
McCain and Dianne Feinstein led a bipartisan coalition of Senators to pass a law mandating that all 
CIA interrogations adhere to the humane standards in the Army Field Manual on Human Intelligence 
Collector Operations.  The same law also provides the Internat ional Committee of the Red Cross 
access to all detainees.  
 The McCain-Feinstein law provides an important bulwark against the return of CIA torture.  That 
being said, the current President s upports the use of torture and CI A Director, Gina Haspel 
personally supervised torture earlier in her career.  Congress should act to ensure that unethical 
lawyers don't again skew the law to allow for torture by releasing the full 6,000 page Torture Report, 
requiring that all interrogations be videotaped, and banning the use of contractors in interrogations.  
 
WHAT YOU CAN DO:  We have a responsibility to ensure that these crimes are never repeated. 
Those who are answerable to the U.S. public –  the President, the CIA, Congress, and the Justice 
Department must work with us to make clear that torture will never be used again. You c an make a 
difference by taking action now:  
 
• Contact Congress and t he President and tell them to release the full Torture Report : 
www.nrcat.org/torture  
• Organize a screening of The Report  – A political drama scheduled to be released in November 2019 
about the CIA torture program and the battle to fight its coverup: www.nrcat.org/TheReport   
• Use social media  to share anti -torture messages.  We have samples at www.nrcat.org /GetInvolved  
• Join NRCAT ’s e-mail list to be sure you are contacted with opportunities to ask your legislators to put 
into law new anti -torture safeguards or write an op- ed or letter  to the editor.  www.nrcat.o rg/supporter  
 
For more information and links to all these activities, go to:  
www.nrcat.org/GetInvolved  
LEARN. PRAY. ACT.  
www.nrcat.org  
www.facebook.com/nrcat  
@nrcattweets  
@nrcatphotos  
www.pinterest.com/nrcat/  