Case  
Facilitation  
Overview
Collaborations for  
Justice Across Borders
Collaborations  
through 5-Step Case 
Facilitation Process
1
3
4
5
Evaluation: The Advocate  
and Defender complete an  
evaluation about the Case  
Facilitation, and the   
Advocate reports the case  
outcome (when known) to  
Justice in Motion.Assignment: The Defender  
completes the tasks assigned  
for the case, maintaining  
direct communication with   
the Advocate.  
Payment: The Defender sends  
an hour and expense report  
to Justice in Motion. Justice  
in Motion reviews the report,  
invoices the Advocate, and pays  
the Defender. The Advocate  
pays Justice in Motion after  
receiving the invoice.  Case Review:  The Advocate  
needs work done in client’s  
country of origin to support  
a case pending in the U.S. or  
Canada and contacts Justice in  
Motion. Justice in Motion reviews  
the case with the Advocate then  
assigns it to a Defender.  
2
Agreement: The Advocate completes  
a one-time Advocate Agreement and  
the case-specific Case Facilitation  
Contract, which Justice in Motion  
and the Defender review and edit.  
The Advocate, Justice in Motion,   
and the Defender sign the contract.  
THE DEFENDER NETWORK  
Making Justice Across Borders a Reality
Prioritizing Cases Requiring  
Collaboration Across Borders 
– when the migrant is back home in 
their country of origin and has a case 
pending in the U.S. or Canada: 
• Locating clients: when their lawyers 
lose touch
• Facilitating communication: via 
virtual interviews, delivering 
documents, reviewing statements, 
obtaining signatures on sworn 
declarations
• Coordinating settlement 
announcements: obtaining 
signatures, troubleshooting the 
international transfer of awards
– when the migrant is in the U.S. 
or Canada but has a need in their 
country of origin:
• Witness affidavits: interviewing local 
witnesses, preparing declarations• Document collection: assisting with 
birth certificates and other country 
of origin documents
• Service of process: locating 
witnesses or opposing parties, 
serving documents, completing 
return of serviceJustice in Motion trains and supports more than sixty human 
rights advocates (“Defenders”) in Mexico, Guatemala, El  
Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua. Defenders have a 
wide range of legal and professional backgrounds and are 
equipped with the local knowledge and expertise necessary  
to provide assistance in transnational cases. 
Rights violations: when migrants 
have returned to their country of 
origin after suffering violations of 
their rights in the U.S. or Canada, 
Defenders are available to meet 
them in person and help their 
lawyers in pending litigation.
Protection: when migrants seek 
protection in the U.S. or Canada 
through a form of humanitarian 
immigration relief such as asylum, 
Defenders are available to provide 
case support in the migrants’ 
country of origin.Examples of how 
Defenders provide 
case support–Benefits of the Case Facilitation Model 
TRUSTED, LOCAL RESOURCES.  
The Defenders are experienced human rights advocates who live and  
work in migrant countries of origin. They have deep insider knowledge  
of each country’s geography, politics, and culture and are able to  
maneuver in a known local landscape.  
LOW COST.  
The charge for Case Facilitations is minimal compared with the cost  
of for-profit international litigation support, or the cost of a U.S. or  
Canadian lawyer traveling personally to their client’s country of origin  
and attempting to do the work.
SMART, SUSTAINABLE SUPPORT.  
The fees that Defenders are paid support their core work, which  
becomes an investment in civil society human rights support in  
migrants’ countries of origin. Each time Defenders work on specific  
cases, they gain knowledge and skills to improve their service and  
advocacy within local communities.  
Ready to initiate a Case Facilitation 
with a member of the Justice in Motion 
Defender Network?
Contact legalaction@justiceinmotion.org to set up an intake call. New 
Advocates will receive a copy of the Advocate Agreement, which outlines 
the terms and conditions of working with Justice in Motion and the 
Defender Network on Case Facilitations. Once an Advocate signs this 
Agreement, it endures through future Case Facilitations.“
“
“
789 Washington Ave. | Brooklyn, NY 11238 | (646) 351-1160 | legalaction@justiceinmotion.orgJustice in Motion’s Defender Network is an essential resource for 
lawyers that represent transnational workers. By making direct 
connections with workers and their families in their home countries, 
Justice in Motion empowers migrant workers to access the justice 
system and enforce their basic rights.
Our high-stakes immigration matter would not have been successful 
without Justice in Motion’s help. Your network of Defenders made it 
possible to access evidence and witnesses in remote places that made 
a life-saving difference for ourselves and our clients.
The service Justice in Motion provided was invaluable to our legal clinic. Their 
Defender helped us communicate and create legal documents with a client 
abroad. While we could communicate with our client abroad, we could not do 
so as efficiently and cost-effectively as Justice in Motion, and we absolutely 
could not have created legal documents abroad without their help. The quality 
of the work was outstanding and is making a meaningful difference in our ability 
to advocate for our client, even though she is out of the country.Advocate Experiences with  
Our Case Facilitation Model
 – Equal Justice Center, Austin TX
 – Reed Smith LLP, Chicago IL  
– Scarborough County Legal Services, Toronto ON  