June 2, 2021
To: Rep. Ed Gainey , District Attorney Stephen A. Zappala,
Jr., and all candidates for Magisterial 
District Judge
The following letter is a list of considerations and
demands written by members and af filiates of 
the Pittsbur gh chapter of the Sex Workers Outreach
Project (SWOP).
Sex Workers Outreach Project is
a national social
justice network dedicated to the fundamental 
human rights of people involved in the sex trade and
their communities, focusing on ending 
violence and stigma through education and advocacy
.
Founded in 2018, SWOP  Pittsbur gh is a 
diverse group of local community members and constituents,
loosely af filiated with the broader 
national network. We connect sex workers to social
services, collaborate with local health 
institutions (Allies, Planned Parenthood, etc.), and
most recently , organized a mutual aid fund to 
support sex workers impacted by the pandemic.
We urge the of fices of the Mayor and District Attorney ,
and all magistral candidates running for 
office in November to consider the following while
campaigning and when taking of fice:
Criminalizing sex work is a violation of personal
autonomy and privacy . 
Laws that criminalize voluntary and consensual sex,
including the exchange of sex for money , 
are anathema to the constitutional promise of a right
to privacy . No government should be in the 
business of dictating the conditions under which consenting
adults have sex.
Criminalizing sex work leads to an incr eased risk
of violence and harm for  those engaged 
in the work itself.
By criminalizing sex work and driving sex workers
under ground, current laws add risk and stress 
to the work itself, which sex workers report is a
driver of substance use and addiction. The fear 
of arrest leads to rushed negotations over services
and fees, putting sex workers at greater risk of 
violence at the hands of their clients. Clients know
they can rob and assault sex workers, without 
consequences. As long as sex work is criminalized,
sex workers risk arrest if they report abuse.
Decriminalization will r educe abuse, exploitation,
and violence by police against sex 
workers.
Police often harass, extort, physically or verbally abuse, or even coerce sex or rape street-based
sex workers
1
2
. Police may threaten arrest to compel
sex workers to perform sex acts or to 
generally perpetuate fear in the sex work community .
Without the threat of arrest, sex workers 
can more easily come forward to seek justice against
police who commit these crimes. 
Decriminalization is the most humane response to create
safer working conditions and ensure 
that sex workers receive access to healthcare, housing, and other basic needs without
discrimination. Full decriminalization of sex work
is harm reduction
3
.
Criminalization dispr oportionately harms gr oups that
are alr eady vulnerable. 
Black and brown sex workers, transgender sex workers
and immigrant sex workers bear the 
brunt of police prosecution of these laws. If sex
work were decriminalized, police would have 
one less tool to harass and mar ginalize members of
the LGBQ&T  community . Sex workers, and 
especially trans women of color , would have more agency
when it comes to their own bodies and 
livelihoods.
Criminalization of clients or sex buyers continues
a pattern of interference and overreach by law 
enforcement that places sex workers in harm’ s way .
This includes partial criminalization policies, 
such as the Nordic Model, End Demand, or Equality
Model. We do not endorse or accept half 
measures that purport to support sex workers while
simultaneously eroding their ability to 
conduct business and support themselves or their families.
Sex work is done by consenting adults
. 
Conflating human traf ficking with sex work makes it
more dif ficult to fight the very real crime 
of human traf ficking. Under decriminalization, traf fickers
and patrons of victims of traf ficking 
would remain subject to serious criminal penalties.
In fact, decriminalizing sex work will make it 
easier for victims of traf ficking to speak out against
their abuser without fear of facing arrest 
themselves.
Diversion pr ograms ar e not the solution. 
Programs like PRIDE, whose stated goals are to “reduce
prostitution and related of fenses,” are 
not solutions to the criminalization of sex work.
These programs still operate within the carceral 
system. These programs continue the surveillance and
harassment of sex workers and their 
clients, continue to place sex workers in jail or
on house-arrest, and involve sex workers with 
other harmful systems (such as institutionalized care
or Child, Youth and Family Services) 
whose ostensible goals are protection or assistance,
but who discriminate against and punish 
people experiencing poverty , people of color , and
those engaged in the street economy .
3
Jana S, Rojanapithayakorn W, Steen R. Harm reduction
for sex workers. Lancet. 2006 Mar 
11;367(9513):814. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68331-1.
PMID: 16530572.
2
“Abused Then Arrested: inside California's Crackdown
on Sex Work.”
The Guardian
, Guardian News 
and Media, 28 Nov. 2018, www.theguardian.com/us-news/2018/nov/28/california-sex-workers-crackdown.
1
Ruland, Dylan Segelbaum and Sam. “'At What Point
Do They Stop?' Tactics in Prostitution Stings Raise 
Questions in Pa.”
York Daily Record
, York Daily Record, 14 May 2019, 
www.ydr.com/story/news/watchdog/2019/05/06/investigation-undercover-prostitution-sting-cases-pennsyl 
vania-police/3344293002/.In the past, SWOP  Pittsbur gh has supported law enforcement. However , the pattern of abuse and 
harm directed at sex workers has made it clear that
there is no mutual understanding. As such, 
SWOP  cannot, in good conscience, endorse any or ganization
that harms sex workers with 
impunity .
To the leaders and of ficials of the City of Pittsbur gh
and Allegheny County ,
our broad 
membership makes the following demands:
●
Immediately end enforcement of all laws related to
prostitution (consensual adult sex 
work);
●
The immediate resignation or removal of DA  Stephen
Zappala from the district attorney’ s 
office, for his unethical and punitive ban of plea
deals from Attorney Milton Raiford or 
Raiford’ s clients;
●
Refuse to prosecute all cases related to solicitation
and prosecution should law 
enforcement refuse to cease arrests;
●
Release all inmates who were char ged with prositution,
unlicensed massage, 
assisting/promoting prositution, and other char ges
related to sex work and expunge the 
records of those convicted of such crimes;
●
Withdraw and drop all pending char ges for sex work-related
crimes, including recalling 
all pending warrants that have not yet been served/executed;
●
Defund police ef forts to track, surveil, and arrest
sex workers,  pledging these funds  to 
non-carceral, non-coercive services such as housing,
healthcare, education, and job 
training. Research has clearly shown that access to
resources reduces vulnerability to 
trafficking and other forms of violence whereas prosecution
that happens after the fact 
does no such thing
4
.
The city of Pittsbur gh and Allegheny County have continually
ignored and delayed actions to 
address the discrimination of
Black women
,
transgender
people
, and
immigrants
. Members from 
these communities are also disproportionately tar geted,
arrested, and incarcerated for prostitution 
charges, which systematically disadvantages them in
accessing housing and employment. Even if 
they are not involved in sex work, transgender women
of color are frequently harassed and 
profiled by police who assume that they are.
Acknowledging our harm-reduction demands will show
a considerable ef fort towards creating a 
more equitable city .
Thank you for considering these policy recommendations
and the needs of those harmed by the 
criminalization of sex work. As a community of informed
voters, we look forward to following 
your work and engaging in further conversations about
these issues.
4
Chen, Michelle. “Why Do Sex-Work Diversion Programs
Fail?”
The Nation
, 25 Sept. 2015, 
www.thenation.com/article/archive/why-do-sex-work-diversion-programs-fail/.Signed,
SWOP  Pittsbur gh
swop.pittsbur gh@gmail.com
412-509-8526
www .swoppittsbur gh.com
Endorsed by:
Jailbreak PGH
Let’s Get Free
Abolitionist Law Center
Pittsburgh DSA
Rachael "Renzy" Neffshade
Megan Laychak