People often ask me how I can spend 
day after day – indeed, year after year 
– dealing with an issue as dark as pris -
oner rape. ‘Isn’t it depressing?’ they wonder. 
Yes, it is depress -
ing that so many 
inmates are sexu -
ally assaulted, of -
ten at the hands 
of the very guards 
who are supposed 
to guarantee their 
safety. But it’s not 
depressing at all 
to work for an 
organization devoted to ending such terrible 
abuses. 
On the contrary, our work is full of hope. At 
JDI, we draft legislation, improve prison poli -
cies, educate corrections staff and inmates, and 
make sure that rape in detention is taken seri -
ously in the public debate. And we touch the 
lives of the many prisoner rape survivors who 
reach out to us every day, like Nicole Garza:
JDI makes me feel whole and gives me the confi -
dence to help others. Thank you for being a part of 
my life and for trusting me to do you proud.
The reason JDI continues this fight is simple: 
prisoner rape is wrong. It is a perversion of jus -
tice and an affront to our society’s most essential 
values. It ruins the lives of countless people in 
detention every year, and it hurts the rest of us 
as well.
If we as a society want to put an end to prisoner 
rape, we can. And because we can, we must. 
Lovisa Stannow 
Executive Director
Lack of Prison Oversight = 
Sexual Abuse and Impunity
Just Detention International Launches Prison Oversight Initiativeaction update                                                                                       june 2009
WhEN ThE  government 
removes someone’s liberty, 
it takes on the absolute re -
sponsibility to protect that 
person’s safety. With more than 2.3 mil -
lion people behind bars in the U.S. at any 
given time, keeping each inmate safe is a 
formidable task. 
Today, corrections facilities across the U.S. 
are failing at that task. Their failure stems, 
in large part, from the unparalleled secrecy 
of U.S. corrections facilities, which has led to a culture of violence, impunity, and retalia -
tion that pervades U.S. prisons and jails.
Only a handful of states have independent 
agencies empowered to audit corrections fa -
cilities. In the worst prisons, officials facili -
tate or participate in sexual violence, respond 
to inmates’ cries for help with derision, and 
grant perpetrators impunity. Many correc -
tions grievance systems lack mechanisms for 
serious investigation or redress, and impose 
complex procedural requirements on inmates 
who wish to report sexual abuse – requirements 
See OVERSIGHT, continued on page 2
Sexual abuse and other forms of violence thrive when prisons are closed off to outside scrutiny. Just 
Detention International has initiated a project to improve the external monitoring of U.S. detention 
facilities. Photo: AP
just detention international  june 2009  | action  updatejust detention international  june 2009  | action  updateLandmark Transgender Policy 
for Washington, D.C. Jails
Improved Housing Options for Transgender WomenOversight
continued from page 1action update                      
that many inmates are unable to meet. To 
make matters worse, incarcerated rape sur -
vivors rarely have adequate options for re -
porting their abuse.
Garrett Cunningham, a prisoner rape survi -
vor from Texas and a member of JDI’s Board 
of Directors, explains: “After being raped by 
a prison guard, I was devastated and terri -
fied. I felt sure that filing a formal complaint 
with the perpetrator’s colleagues would only 
have made my situation worse.”
The lack of external oversight of U.S. pris -
ons has drawn international attention. In its 
most recent review of U.S. compliance with 
the Convention Against Torture and Other 
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment, 
the U.N. Committee Against Torture ex -
pressed concern about the reliable reports it 
had received about sexual assault of detainees, 
noting “the lack of prompt and independent 
investigation of such acts” and highlighting 
that “appropriate measures to combat these 
abuses have not been implemented.”  
In early 2009, JDI launched a new deten -
tion oversight initiative, mobilizing hu -
man rights, criminal justice, immigration 
rights, and disability rights organizations 
from across the U.S. to take on the urgent 
need for independent monitoring of all U.S. 
detention facilities. The first-ever bind -
ing national standards addressing sexual 
abuse in detention – which will be released 
in late June 2009 by the National Prison 
Rape Elimination Commission – will be a 
pivotal tool in this effort. A draft version of 
the standards stipulated that all U.S. cor -
rections systems must undergo independent 
audits certifying their compliance with the 
standards. Those who fail to do so will lose 
a portion of their federal funding.
“Corrections officials who are committed to 
ending sexual abuse tend to agree that inde -
pendent audits are an opportunity to iden -
tify, and remedy, weaknesses,” says Lovisa 
Stannow, Executive Director of JDI. “Of -
ficials who automatically object to exter -
nal monitoring often run unsafe facilities. 
Openness, not secrecy, is the foundation of 
healthy prisons.”In the U.S., transgender women are 
usually housed in accordance with their 
‘birth gender.’ In other words, they are 
held in men’s prisons and jails – even 
if they self-identify as women and are per -
ceived as such by others. While behind bars, 
a majority of transgender women are sub -
jected to sexual abuse, by other inmates or 
by staff. In early 2009, JDI helped to secure 
a groundbreaking policy within the District 
of Columbia Department of Corrections 
that creates the option of housing transgen -
der inmates based on their gender identity, 
rather than their birth gender. 
“Transgender women are in acute need 
of protection from rape,” explains Darby 
hickey, JDI’s Policy Associate. “In order to 
keep these women safe, corrections officials 
must begin using a more nuanced analysis 
than simply looking at whether they were 
born male.”The new policy establishes a committee that 
will interview transgender inmates and rec -
ommend where to house them, taking into 
consideration the inmate’s own perception of 
vulnerability. The committee will include a 
transgender advocate from the community. 
The policy also prohibits the strip searching 
of transgender inmates in front of other in -
mates and non-critical staff – an important 
change from past practices. 
“The new policy is an important step forward 
for the D.C. jails and can become a model for other jurisdictions,” says hickey. 
In recognition of its key role in securing the 
new policy, JDI was a co-recipient (with the 
D.C. Trans Coalition and the Washington 
Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights and 
Urban Affairs) of the Distinguished Service 
Award of the D.C.-based Gay and Lesbian 
Activists Alliance.
California state prisoners who have 
been raped are finally able to access 
the crisis intervention services that 
all rape survivors so desperately 
need. Working closely with the California 
Department of Corrections and Rehabilita -
tion (CDCR) and with rape crisis centers 
throughout the state, JDI has created a 
network of counseling services for inmates. 
Each prison, its local rape crisis center, and 
JDI have signed a three-way memorandum 
of understanding (MOU), formalizing their 
collaboration. By agreeing to post placards 
inside its prisons, the CDCR has also made 
sure that inmates know how to contact both 
the participating rape crisis center and JDI.
“This project has brought a new awareness 
to the CDCR,” says Sergeant Robert Patter -
son of the California Institution for Women 
(CIW) of its partnership with the Riverside Area Rape Crisis Center. “Rape crisis counsel -
ors are the experts in the area of sexual abuse, 
and they are only a phone call away, 24-hours 
a day. In the past, we didn’t even know that.”
An impressive 31 of California’s 33 adult 
state prisons have signed MOUs. While 
seeking to secure the two final MOUs (with 
San Quentin and Pelican Bay), JDI will also 
begin expanding this initiative to California’s 
youth detention facilities.
“Rape is devastating regardless of where it oc -
curs. Survivors in prison are not able to leave 
the environment where the assault occurred – 
indeed, many are forced to continue living with 
the perpetrator,” explains Linda McFarlane, 
JDI’s Deputy Executive Director. “Thanks to 
the CDCR’s willingness to collaborate with 
JDI and local counselors, survivors can now get 
basic support to begin healing.”JDI Secures Crisis Counseling for  
Prisoner Rape Survivors in Californiajust detention international  june 2009  | action  updateSurvivor Profile: Toni Bunton 
Michigan Prisoner Rape Survivor Speaks about her Abuse, and about Life on the Outside
Toni Bunton was incarcerated in 
Michigan for second-degree murder, 
armed robbery, and assault with intent 
to murder, for driving her cousin’s friends 
to a gas station where one of them shot 
two men during a botched drug deal. She 
had no prior arrests. 
In September 2008, Bunton’s sentence 
was commuted by Governor Jennifer 
Granholm. During her 16-year incarcera -
tion at Scott Correctional Facility, Bunton 
endured multiple sexual assaults at the 
hands of corrections officers. In May 
2009, she spoke with JDI’s Survivor Out -
reach Associate, Christine Kregg. 
Can you tell me about the sexual abuse you 
experienced while incarcerated?  
I had just turned 18 when I went to prison. 
It was a highly sexualized environment. We 
went through cross-gender pat downs ev -
ery day. They were creepy, but after a while 
I became numb to them. The first officer 
who sexually abused me would give me pat 
downs and follow me around. One day, he 
took me into a bathroom and raped me 
while another officer stood watch. After the 
rape, I felt like I didn’t have a choice but 
to be silent. I didn’t want to be harassed. I 
knew about cases where prisoners reported 
abuse, the investigations were unsubstan -
tiated, and the survivors ultimately were 
charged with making false reports. I didn’t 
want that to happen to me.
How did you get through the aftermath of the 
abuse?
I talked briefly to a counselor because I was 
depressed. But, there are so many people in 
prison with extreme mental illness, so prison 
counselors don’t have the time to focus on 
people like me. To them, I was doing well.  
In the end, I found strength I didn’t know 
I had. I thought, “I’m going to survive and 
get out of here.” But it’s still hard for me to 
talk about the rape with people who don’t 
understand the power and control of these 
officers. People think rape is rape only when 
someone has a gun to your head. Prison officials don’t need a gun; they already have full 
control over you.
You ended up winning a lawsuit last year. Can 
you tell me about that?
My attorneys filed a class-action lawsuit in 
1996 for discrimination and sexual abuse of 
female prisoners in Michigan. The state ap -
pealed the case for 12 years, but it finally went 
to trial in January 2008. I testified along with 
ten other women. We were the first group to 
go to trial out of 500 plaintiffs. No one be -
lieved we could win, but our attorneys sub -
mitted overwhelming evidence that the state 
knew about the sexual abuse and tried to 
cover it up. The jury agreed and found that 
the state was liable. The jury even apologized 
to us on behalf of the state of Michigan! For 
the first time in my life, I felt like I mattered 
to the legal system. 
What is your life like now that you have been 
released?
Life is very good. I am a graduate student at 
the University of Michigan, getting my Mas -
ters in Women’s Studies. I work for a non-
profit organization that offers GED classes 
and after-school programs for girls in the De -
troit community. I love being with my family. 
Now, when the holidays come I can be there. 
It’s a beautiful, beautiful thing. The downside 
is that I’m still scared. The other day, a siren 
went off and I had an anxiety attack because 
it reminded me of prison. Sometimes I be -
lieve they will come and take me back. 
Is there anything you want other survivors to 
know?
I wish I had known more about my rights. I 
want women who have been abused, or those 
who are being abused, to know that it’s not 
their fault. You’re not dirty; you’re not the one 
who caused the abuse. 
Esperanza en
la Recuperación
Información para sobrevivientes
de agresión sexual en reclusión
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340, Los Angeles, CA 90010
T el: (213) 384-1400 • Fax: (213) 384-1411
Email: info@justdetention.org
www.justdetention.org Just Detention International – Detención Justa InternacionalHOPE FOR HEALING IN SPANISH
Incarcerated rape survivors have access to 
scant resources, and those available are gener -
ally provided only in English. Recognizing the 
urgent need for assis -
tance in the aftermath 
of a sexual assault, 
JDI developed Hope 
for Healing , a self-
help manual offering 
incarcerated survi -
vors the information 
they would receive 
in the first few ses -
sions of rape crisis 
counseling in the community. JDI is pleased to 
announce the publication of a Spanish version 
of this sought-after manual, Esperanza en la 
Recuperación , now available on JDI’s website, 
at http://www.justdetention.org/pdf/Esperanza
%20en%20la%20Recuperacion.pdf.Photo: Regina H. Boone / Detroit Free Pressjust detention international  june 2009  | action  updateFocus on Sexual Abuse 
in the Philippines
JDI WORk S TO ShED LIGh T on 
the sexual abuse that occurs in Philip -
pine prisons and jails. JDI prepared a 
shadow report about prisoner rape in    
the Philippines, which was considered dur -
ing the second periodic review by the United 
Nations Committee Against Torture of the 
Philippines’ compliance with the Convention 
Against Torture. The report, An Emerging 
Human Rights Crisis: Sexual Violence in Phil -
ippine Detention Facilities , details the Philip -
pine government’s failings in meeting its legal 
obligations to address prisoner rape and pro -
vides recommendations for bringing an end 
to this form of torture. The report is available 
on JDI’s website, at http://www.justdetention.
org/pdf/PhilippinesShadow.pdf.
JDI also responded to Congressional requests 
for input on a pending bill, modeled on the 
U.S. Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) 
of 2003. JDI proposed several revisions, high -
lighting the need to establish an independent 
corrections oversight entity and to develop 
national standards addressing sexual violence 
in detention. A new version of the Philippine 
PREA will be introduced in Congress later 
this year.action update                      
juSt dEtENtION  INtERNA tIONAL   
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400    Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971   Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org   www.justdetention.orgA glimpse from inside the Manila City Jail.the problem of sexual abuse in de -
tention remains neglected and 
widespread, in the United States 
and beyond. In an effort to shed 
light on various dimensions of this human 
rights crisis, JDI has created more than a 
dozen fact sheets, which are now available 
on its website at http://www.justdetention.
org/en/fact_sheets.aspx.
•  The Basics About Sexual Abuse in  
U.S. Detention 
•  Truths About Sexual Abuse in U.S. 
Detention Facilities 
•  The Prison Rape Elimination Act 
•  LGBTQ Detainees Chief 
Targets for Sexual 
Abuse in Detention  
•  Mental health 
Consequences of Sexual 
Abuse in Detention 
•  Sexual Abuse in Detention 
is a Public health Issue  
•  The Prison Litigation Reform  
Act Obstructs Justice for 
Survivors of Sexual Abuse  
in Detention 
•  Sexual Abuse in U.S. 
Immigration Detention 
•  U.N. Optional Protocol to the  
Convention Against Torture
•  Prisoner Rape is Torture Under 
International Law•  The Need for Prison Oversight 
•  Sexual Violence in South African 
Detention Facilities 
•  Sexual Abuse in Philippine Detention  
Please contact JDI at info@justdetention. org 
with any feedback on these brief documents, 
including suggestions for additional topics 
that deserve to be highlighted in a JDI fact 
sheet. Easy-to-Access Fact Sheets on Prisoner Rape
Just Detention International has joined the 
ranks of human rights organizations on 
Facebook, the social networking website 
linking millions of individuals across the 
world.
On its Facebook page, JDI shares with sup -
porters, prisoner rape survivors, journalists, 
and others the most up-to-date information 
about its work, including photos, program 
updates, and contact information. In addi -
tion, JDI is listed in the popular “Causes” application, an outlet for users to donate to 
non-profit organizations of their choice.  
If you are on Facebook, please help spread the 
word by sharing JDI’s page with your friends. 
A large Facebook fan pool has the potential 
to translate into much needed attention to 
the problem of sexual abuse in detention.  
To visit JDI on Facebook, simply search for 
Just Detention International and become a 
fan. Thank you for your support.JDI on Facebook – Become a Fan!

KVTUEFUFOUJPOJOUFSOBUJPOBMGFCSVBSZ]FACT SHEET3ape and other forms of 
sexual assault in detention 
are a particularly despicable 
violation of the inherent dignity 
and right to physical integrity of 
every human being; and accordingly 
constitute an act of torture.1
— United Nations
Special Rapporteur on Torture1SJTPOFS3BQFJT5PSUVSF
6OEFS*OUFSOBUJPOBM-BX GBDUTIFFUGFCSVBSZ
5he sexual assault of prisoners, 
whether perpetrated by correc-
tions officials or by other in-
mates, amounts to torture under 
international law. Torture is prohibited by 
international conventions and treaties, in-
cluding the Convention against Torture 
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or degrading 
Treatment or punishment (CaT)2 and the 
International Covenant on Civil and polit-
ical Rights (ICCpR),3both of which have 
been ratified by the United States. 
The ICCpR provides that all people, 
including prisoners, have a broad range 
of civil and political rights, including that 
“[n]o one shall be subjected to torture or to 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment.”4 The CaT focuses specifically 
on this right and requires ratifying nations 
to take action to prevent acts of torture 
within their jurisdictions. 
The CaT also provides a definition of 
torture:
any act by which severe pain or suf-
fering, whether physical or mental, is 
intentionally inflicted on a person for 
such purposes as obtaining from him 
or a third person information or a 
confession, punishing him for an act 
he or a third person has committed, or 
intimidating him or a third person, or 
for any reason based on discrimination 
of any kind, when such pain or suffer-
ing is inflicted by or at the instigation 
of or with the consent or acquiescence 
of a public official or other person act-
ing in an official capacity.5Sexual violence behind bars meets each 
element of this definition. Victims of prisoner 
rape are left beaten and bloodied, contract 
HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases,6
and suffer severe psychological harm.7
Sexual violence has been used as a tool to 
punish inmates for misbehavior, or to further 
marginalize vulnerable populations.8even 
when corrections staff are not the perpetrators, 
some officials have set up inmate-on-inmate 
rape by intentionally housing vulnerable 
inmates with known predators. Furthermore, 
the failure of corrections officials to take 
appropriate steps to prevent and address 
prisoner rape amounts to state acquiescence 
in this type of abuse.
To ensure that the right to be free from tor-
ture is protected, both the ICCpR and the 
CaT have international bodies that monitor 
their implementation in signatory states. The 
CaT is monitored by the U.n. Commit-
teeagainst Torture (the CaT Committee), 
and the ICCpR is monitored by the Human 
Rights Committee. In 2006, the CaT Com-
mittee and the Human Rights Committee 
reviewed U.S. compliance with the CaT and 
the ICCpR respectively. Both committees 
recognize sexual violence in detention as part 
of their mandate and have identified it as a 
serious problem in the U.S.
The CaT Committee commended certain 
U.S. initiatives, including the enactment of 
theprison Rape elimination act of 2003, 
which calls for a “zero-tolerance” standard for 
rape in U.S. detention facilities.9 However, 
the Committee detailed numerous concerns 
with U.S. policy and practice, including 
KVTUEFUFOUJPOJOUFSOBUJPOBM  GFCSVBSZ ]FACT SHEET5he protection  of 
persons deprived of their 
liberty against torture and 
other cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment or punishment can be 
strengthened by non-judicial means 
of a preventive nature, based on 
regular visits to places of detention.
— Preamble, Optional Protocol 
to the Convention Against 
Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment6/0QUJPOBM1SPUPDPMUPUIF
$POWFOUJPO"HBJOTU5PSUVSFGBDUTIFFU  GFCSVBSZ 
5here is growing   recogni -
tion internationally that prisons 
and jails must be transparent, 
have strong internal accountabil -
ity mechanisms, and be open for external 
monitoring. compared to canada, the eu-
ropean Union, and south Africa, for exam -
ple, the U. s. is lagging dangerously behind 
in allowing the vigorous scrutiny needed to 
protect inmates from abuse. in particular, 
the U. s. has not signed the optional pro-
tocol to the convention Against torture 
(opc At),1 which requires establishing an 
independent, national body that conducts 
regular visits to prisons and other correc -
tions settings with the aim of preventing 
torture. 
Unlike other international treaties, 2 the 
opc At focuses on preventing torture, 
rather than responding to abuses that 
have occurred.3it also establishes a 
collaborative approach to monitoring 
whereby international and domestic 
entities visit detention facilities and 
confidentially propose recommendations to 
better prevent torture, without the public 
shaming component common in human 
rights instruments.4
theopc At does not impose new 
obligations on ratifying states, but instead 
creates a system for monitoring the 
requirements already in place through the 
convention Against torture. By ratifying 
theopc At, the U. s. would give consent 
for the U. n. subcommittee on prevention 
oftorture ( spt) and a national preventive 
mechanism ( npM) to conduct regular, 
periodic visits to places of detention. inaddition to inspecting facilities, these 
visitors have the right to interview any 
detainee, with or without witnesses, and 
have access to records, rules, and other 
relevant documents.5
thespt is composed of ten experts from 
a variety of professional backgrounds and 
nationalities who conduct scheduled visits 
to detention facilities and provide assistance 
and advice in developing each npM.6the
npM is established by the signatory and 
can be designed in whatever manner best 
suits the needs and capacity of that country, 
so long as it is independent and capable of 
conducting regular visits and providing 
recommendations.7 Unlike the spt, the 
npM is also empowered to propose or 
comment on draft legislation.8
the federalist structure of the United 
states – whereby federal, state, and local 
jurisdictions each retain governmental 
powers and run their own detention facilities 
– creates unique challenges to establishing 
an npM. however, the opc At
provides for flexibility in how the npM
is developed, including relying on human 
rights commissions, ombudspersons, non-
governmental organizations, or composite 
mechanisms combining elements of such 
entities.9several countries with federalist 
or decentralized governmental structures, 
such as Mexico, the United Kingdom, south
Africa, Argentina, and switzerland have 
already ratified or signed the opc At.10
ratifying the opc At, and establishing 
annpM to provide domestic oversight, 
would help restore the moral authority of 