riminal justice reform  is a 
topic that seems to be on every -
one’s mind these days — and 
rightly so. We lock up too many 
people for too long in prisons plagued by 
violence and deprivation. 
Yet when people talk about fixing our 
criminal justice system, something is usu -
ally missing. The conversations tend to 
focus on keeping 
people out of 
prison and then, if 
they do get locked 
up, helping them 
reenter society once 
they have served 
their time. These 
are noble goals. 
But what about 
the more than two 
million people who are locked up in the 
U.S. on any given day? Should we simply 
forget about them? 
Boa Smith was given a life sentence when 
she was just 21 years old. Prison life was 
rough, but Boa managed to survive. 
Through a JDI initiative, she served as a 
peer educator, teaching fellow inmates 
about sexual abuse and how to stay safe. 
And, crucially, the warden at Boa’s prison 
believed that every prisoner — including 
lifers — deserved to be treated with 
dignity and to have opportunities to grow. 
Boa made parole in 2013, and she is 
flourishing. I should know: she’s now my 
colleague. Boa made it on the outside 
because she’s smart and resilient, and 
because she had a warden who cared 
and who gave her access to lifesaving 
JDI programs — programs that you, our 
supporters, make possible.
Lovisa Stannow
Executive Director 
iguel felt afraid from the 
moment he stepped foot inside 
his new home, a juvenile hall 
in California. The boy he was 
assigned to live with — an older, stronger 
teenager with lots of friends in the facility 
— had a reputation for violence.   Just 16 
years old, Miguel felt desperate, but he had no 
one to turn to for help. 
Miguel did not dare confide in staff. They 
treated the kids disrespectfully, or simply 
ignored them. Whenever fights broke out 
— and they frequently did at this facility 
— the officers looked the other way. So 
Miguel told no one that he was afraid. And 
after his cellmate raped him, he kept quiet 
about that, too. It’s About Leadership
It’s no mystery why some youth facilities are dangerous and others safe. In safe facilities, staff create a 
climate of openness and make sure the kids in their custody know their rights.See It’s About Leadership, continued on page 2
1action  update                                                                                       november 2016
just detention international  november 2016  | action  updateC
MOur juvenile detention system is filled with 
kids like Miguel. They feel unsafe, but are 
powerless to speak out. If only I had someone 
I could talk to about my safety, many think . If 
only there were someone I could trust — someone 
who cared. 
With people like Miguel in mind, JDI 
has long argued that sexual abuse is not an 
inevitable part of life in youth detention. We 
believe that facilities with strong leaders and 
staff who are committed to kids’ safety can 
end this violence. Now we have the hard data 
to prove it. 
In June, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
issued a landmark report on the factors that 
make a youth detention facility safe. Its Juvenile Detention Staff Who Want to Keep Youth Safe Can Do So
© Raymond Thompson, Jr.
continued from page 1
2action  update                     
just detention international  findings are straightforward. Facilities 
with very low rates of sexual abuse have 
staff who build trust among youth, and 
ensure that they know their rights and 
how to report abuse. In facilities that lack 
these qualities — like the juvenile hall 
where Miguel spent time — sexual abuse 
is widespread.
Simply telling kids that sexual abuse is 
against the rules has a dramatic impact. 
Per the BJS, facilities that give kids this 
basic message within 24 hours of their 
arrival have rates of staff misconduct that 
are roughly five times lower than facilities 
that never provide such information. 
Gaining youth’s trust is similarly crucial. 
The BJS shows that facilities where kids 
feel comfortable reporting sexual abuse 
to staff have low rates of this violence. 
Conversely, when youth have no faith 
in staff, either because they are afraid of 
retaliation or don’t think they will be taken 
seriously, sexual abuse thrives. 
These findings are decisive, but they did 
not come as a surprise to advocates. For 
years, JDI has argued that having staff  
who are trustworthy and compassionate is 
important — because that’s what survivors 
have always said to us. 
After Miguel told us about his rape, 
we asked him what would have made a 
difference. His response was simple: “Staff 
could have been more caring.”
(Miguel’s name has been changed to protect 
his privacy.)oe Booth and Morgan Givens each  
plays a vital role in JDI’s work to end 
prisoner rape. Joe serves on our Survivor 
Council, and Morgan is a Program Of -
ficer at our East Coast office.   
The two met for the first time at a White 
House meeting on LGBT and HIV criminal 
justice issues in September. They were 
speakers at this historic event, which was 
organized by a working group — of which 
JDI is a member — that fights for the safety 
of LGBT people and people living with HIV. 
Joe shared his story about being raped in 
the government’s custody. He had a simple 
request for the audience of federal officials 
and fellow advocates: please do a better job 
keeping inmates safe. As he left the podium, 
Joe was approached by a Justice Department 
lawyer who expressed dismay that he had 
reached out to the Department after his rape 
but hadn’t heard back. The attorney apologized 
to Joe on behalf of the Department. 
“It’s amazing to know that because I shared 
my story, people in our government are more Joe and Morgan at the White House 
It’s About Leadership
likely to listen the next time a survivor reaches 
out to them,” said Joe, who was moved to 
tears. “That’s why I’m going to keep telling 
my story — and why I won’t stop telling it 
until we end prisoner rape.”
A former Washington, DC police officer, 
Morgan works on JDI projects to keep 
prisoners safe in Virginia and South Carolina 
and on our new effort to end sexual assault by 
law enforcement. At the White House event, 
he talked about his experience on the DC 
police force. He shared that, as a young officer, 
he was officially taught to deescalate conflict. 
At the same time, though, he was told again and 
again by more experienced officers that part of 
his job was to use force to assert his authority.
“Officers learn that there is official policy — 
but that there is also a way that things are 
actually done. All too often, this meant that 
superiors on the force wrote off complaints 
of sexual harassment as ‘boys being boys,’” 
Morgan said. “If we’re going to stop police 
officers from committing these abuses, we need 
to dig deeply into policing culture and root out 
these core attitudes in departments nationwide.”
Joe (left) and Morgan (right), with JDI Executive Director Lovisa Stannow, at a historic White 
House meeting on LGBT and HIV criminal justice issues.With people like 
Miguel in mind, JDI 
has long argued that 
sexual abuse is not an 
inevitable part of life in 
youth detention. Now 
we have the hard data 
to prove it.Je believe that prisoner 
rape survivors — just like 
survivors in the commu -
nity — have a right to get 
counseling. Yet a decades-long federal 
rule blocked rape crisis centers from us -
ing Victims of Crime Act (VOCA) grant 
money to work with prisoners. One of 
JDI’s top priorities has been to overturn 
this unjust rule — and, in August, we fi -
nally did it. 
The VOCA ban had a devastating impact 
on survivors. Like Cornelius. A prisoner 
in Florida, Cornelius has been sexually 
assaulted behind bars many times. He 
struggled with anxiety and despair but, 
like many survivors, did not dare seek 
help from prison officials, who had failed 
repeatedly to protect him. So, he decided to 
write a letter to a nearby rape crisis center. 
The counselor who received Cornelius’s 
letter was an expert in assisting 
survivors of sexual assault. She could 
have worked with Cornelius on a plan 
to stop the spiral of depression and get 
him back on his feet. This approach 
was pioneered by advocates, and has 
helped countless survivors. 
Yet when the counselor saw the prison 
postmark on the letter, her heart sank. 
She knew that her hands were tied. The 
VOCA grant money allowed her agency 
to do lifesaving work, but with strings 
attached: no services to prisoners.
Years of JDI advocacy led the Department 
of Justice to recommend in 2013 that the 
VOCA ban be overturned. This is when JDI 
supporters stepped in, submitting a flood of 
public comments in support of letting rape 
crisis counselors use VOCA funding to 
work with prisoners. The Department made 
the change official in August. 
This victory will make a difference. 
Because we fought the rule and won, the 
next time someone like Cornelius asks 
for help, dedicated counselors will be able 
to provide it.  
3action update                     
november 2016  | action  updateWhen the Rapist is a Woman
Shortly after he arrived  at a 
federal prison, Michael was placed 
in protective custody. The purpose 
of the move was to keep him safe 
from gangs — but it wound up making him 
an easy target for an abuser who worked at 
the facility. Anytime Michael showered, the 
officer would leer at him and make degrading 
comments about his body. Pretty soon, the 
ongoing verbal abuse began to escalate into 
something far worse. It started with abusive 
pat searches and then, one day, the officer 
raped him. 
Michael tried to speak out, but other staff  
threatened to hurt him. Then they stopped 
giving him meals. Fearing further retaliation, 
Michael gave up trying to report. In a letter to 
JDI, he wrote, “I feel like this is all my fault.” 
Michael’s story follows a chillingly familiar 
script. His perpetrator was in a position of 
authority, and then used that power to compel 
him to keep quiet. But there’s one major 
difference that sets apart what happened 
to Michael from popular accounts of sexual 
violence: his abuser was a woman. 
Although we hardly hear about sexual 
abuse by women, that does not mean it is 
rare. In its national inmate surveys, the BJS 
found that female staff are responsible for 
more sexual violence than male staff, even 
though women make up only a third of the SWe Fought an Unjust 
Rule — and We Won
corrections workforce. In juvenile facilities, 
the gender breakdown of perpetrators is 
even more lopsided: a staggering 94 percent 
of youth victims of staff sexual misconduct 
were abused by a woman. Perhaps even 
more surprising is the data on sexual abuse 
committed by prisoners. Per the BJS, the 
rate of this abuse in women’s facilities is four 
times higher than it is in men’s facilities. 
Despite this overwhelming evidence, many 
people working in corrections have been 
slow to respond to the BJS’s revelations 
and to figure out how to address sexual 
abuse committed by women. Advocates, 
too, are often unsettled to learn that so 
many perpetrators do not fit the profile they 
expect. And it’s hard not to wonder how 
many survivors have kept quiet, believing 
their abuse does not “count” because it was a 
woman who attacked them. 
The issue of women perpetrators has 
remained in the shadows for far too long. 
We owe it to Michael — and other survivors 
like him — to tackle this taboo subject, no 
matter how challenging it is. In May, JDI 
held a landmark meeting on this topic, 
bringing together corrections officials, 
researchers, advocates, and former prisoners. 
The gathering helped illuminate some of the 
reasons sexual abuse by women is so common 
— and what can be done to stop it. 
At Mabel Bassett Correctional Center (above), a women’s prison in Oklahoma, more than 15 percent of 
the inmates reported being sexually assaulted by another inmate in one year.W© The OklahomanJDI staff tour a South Carolina prison with peer educators (left to right) Frank, Perez, and Oscar.
4 just detention international  november 2016  | action  updateaction  update                     
“This is a Way to Give Back”
guys don’t understand the difference between 
snitching and asking for help,” says Frank, 
another of the peer educators. “Sexual abuse 
is about your health and safety, sexual abuse is 
personal. Asking for help is not snitching.” 
At Kirkland, the peer educators have become 
mentors. When they walk the yard, other 
inmates seek them out to ask questions about 
PREA and about prison life. “To me, this is a 
way to give back, to share what I have learned, 
to help others avoid what I’ve been through,” 
says Oscar. Perez, also a peer educator, agrees. 
“I’m still young so many of the younger inmates 
can relate to me, and I’m bilingual, so I can help 
people who only speak Spanish.”
Frank has spent 13 years in prison, years that 
have seen plenty of pain and loss. “I’m doing 
this work to make up for not being able to be 
there for my son when he grew up. He was 
only nine when I was locked up. As prisoners, 
we have hurt ourselves so much, and we have 
hurt others. We have hurt our families and 
communities. For me, doing this work is a 
way to deal with the pain.” 
For the rest of the country, they have a 
message. “Sexual abuse is not cool, it’s not 
right. Everyone needs this knowledge and 
every prison should have peer educators 
to talk to other prisoners about PREA and 
sexual abuse.” hen Oscar speaks, other in -
mates listen. “You are either 
going to lose yourself or find 
yourself in here. Prison can de -
stroy you, or it can give you a chance to heal 
and start doing the right thing,” he explains. 
Dazed with fear, the newly arrived prisoners 
hang on Oscar’s every word. He’s a verifiably 
tough guy, golden teeth gleaming, with 22 
years in prison behind him.
As one of four inmate peer educators 
specializing in sexual abuse prevention at 
South Carolina’s Kirkland Correctional 
Institution, Oscar is busy. Kirkland is the 
state’s reception center, meaning that all 
inmates pass through here before moving on 
to the state prison where they will be housed 
long-term. To keep up, the peer educators 
hold several classes a day — through a 
pioneering initiative launched by JDI and the 
South Carolina Department of Corrections.  
The peer educators explain how to get help, 
what hotline numbers to dial on the prison 
phones, how to report sexual abuse to staff. 
They talk through prison policies and clarify 
what the Prison Rape Elimination Act 
(PREA) standards say. They also venture into 
the murky territory of snitching, of codes 
of silence, of the unwritten rules that every 
prisoner needs to know and that only a fellow 
inmate can properly convey. “Many of the  A JDI Program Puts Inmates in Charge of Education 
on Sexual Abuse — and It’s WorkingGive Survivors Your 
Words of Hope
JDI’s Words of Hope  holiday card 
campaign kicks off in just a few weeks! 
As a dedicated JDI supporter, you already 
know about Words of Hope . Every year, 
you help us deliver thousands of holiday 
messages to incarcerated survivors 
nationwide, providing them with 
compassion during a lonely time. 
With the holidays approaching, we 
wanted you to hear from Roderick, a 
survivor, about what these cards mean. 
He told us, “I look forward to the cards 
every year, because they inspire me with 
so much hope and bring me so much joy.”
To learn more about Words of Hope , visit 
www.justdetention.org/wordsofhope
just detention international
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
JDI-South Africa
Norwood Place, 2nd Floor 
66 Grant Avenue
Norwood, Johannesburg 2192
South Africa
Tel: +27 (11) 483 0989
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org© South Carolina Department of CorrectionsW
