hen i joined jdi 's Board of 
Directors in 2002, we had 
just opened our first office 
in Los Angeles and had two 
part-time staff members. Two years later, I 
agreed to serve as Acting Executive Direc -
tor for four months. Needless to say, that’s 
not how things worked out!
Now, after 18 
amazing years, I 
have decided to 
step down as Ex -
ecutive Director 
at the end of June. 
What we have 
built together at 
JDI is the pride of my professional life. To -
day, JDI has three offices, 25 staff mem -
bers, dozens of volunteers, and excellent 
Boards in the U.S. and South Africa.
We also have a strong network of support -
ers, like you, who make all our work pos -
sible. Thanks to you, we are bold, strategic, 
and visionary. Your compassion for survi -
vors of sexual abuse in detention has made 
us the indisputable global leader in the 
fight to end this violence.
I know this is the right time for me to make 
way for new leadership at this remarkable 
organization. Many nonprofit leaders over -
stay in their jobs. I don’t want to be one of 
them. 
The Board and I are deeply committed to 
working together to ensure a successful 
transition — after which I look forward to 
remaining a committed supporter, cheer -
ing JDI on as it achieves the many victories 
that I know lie ahead.
 
With love and gratitude,Together, We’re Making a Difference 
in the Lives of Kids in Cus tody 
While the juvenile justice system is safer overall, some facilities continue to fail the kids in their care. At 
Ohio's Circleville Juvenile Correctional Facility, pictured above, roughly one in six youth were sexu -
ally abused in a single year. (Photo by Jonathan Quilter/Columbus Dispatch)See Making a Difference for Kids , continued on page 2action  update                                                                                       MARCH  2020
W
ack in 2010 , Troy Isaac gave 
an interview to National Public 
Radio about the horrific sexual 
abuse he endured in a juvenile hall. 
During the segment, Troy was asked about 
an astonishing new government report 
showing that more than 12 percent of 
kids in youth detention were abused over 
a one-year period. “It did not surprise me, 
because this stuff happened when I was a 
kid,”  Troy told the reporter. “The juvenile 
justice system doesn’t believe in trying to 
prevent something before it happens — 
and they don’t like dealing with it when it 
does happen. ”
Because of courageous survivors like Troy, 
JDI had long known that sexual abuse was Brampant inside U.S. youth detention facilities. 
But the data from this study, conducted by the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), gave us rock 
solid proof. 
Armed with these findings, we ramped up 
the pressure on the Department of Justice 
to finalize its Prison Rape Elimination Act 
(PREA) standards to address this violence. 
The study also helped us make the case to 
youth corrections officials that, unless they 
took bold steps, they would continue to fail 
the kids in their care. 
Our approach worked. With your support, we 
fought for, and helped secure, strong PREA 
standards — which we then used as a tool 
to bring safer policies to juvenile detention A  new government report shows how far we’ve come in making 
youth detention facilities safer — and how much work is left. 
Lovisa Stannow
Executive Director
just detention international  MARCH 2020 | action  update1facilities. While we could see the change 
on the ground, there wasn't any concrete 
data to point to. Until now.
In December, the BJS released a new 
study showing that our juvenile justice 
system is in fact safer, with 7.1 percent of 
youth reporting abuse. A few percentage 
points may seem insignificant, but it 
amounts to many hundreds of young 
people who were protected from life-
shattering abuse. 
And yet, the new numbers aren’t cause 
for celebration. No child should ever 
experience sexual abuse in custody. Our 
goal isn’t to get to lower levels of sexual 
abuse — it’s to get to zero. And while we 
have seen plenty of progress, there are 
some facilities where this type of violence 
is still the norm, such as the Florida 
facility where more than a quarter of 
the kids reported being abused in the 
preceding year alone. 
What the report does affirm, however, 
is that sexual abuse in youth detention 
can be stopped. Roughly a dozen youth 
facilities have virtually eradicated sexual 
abuse, including two in Florida. A 
juvenile justice system without abuse isn’t 
a utopian vision — it’s completely within 
our grasp. 
After this latest BJS report came out, 
Troy Isaac reflected on its meaning. 
Troy’s expertise goes beyond simply 
having experienced sexual abuse while 
in juvenile hall. As a member of JDI’s 
Survivor Council, he’s been on the front 
lines of the effort to make sure no one 
lives through what he did.
“I’m thrilled that the system is doing 
better by the kids in its care,” he said. 
“But this isn’t the time to pat ourselves 
on the back. It’s the time to keep fighting. 
There are far too many kids who are still 
unsafe. We’re on the right path. Now we 
just need to finish what we’ve started.”action  update                     
henever bjs releases  a new re -
port on sexual abuse in detention, 
it’s a big deal for advocates. The 
BJS studies draw on anonymous 
surveys of thousands of people in detention 
about sexual abuse in their facilities. Crafted 
with input from JDI staff and survivor advo -
cates, the surveys shed light not only on who 
is at risk for this violence and where it hap -
pens most frequently, but also the conditions 
that make some facilities more dangerous 
than others. There are no other reports like 
these anywhere in the world. 
The latest BJS report, which was released in 
December and covered youth facilities, was 
especially significant. It had been nearly six 
years since the previous report on sexual abuse 
in juvenile detention came out. In addition, 
this was the first survey of detained youth 
since the release of the PREA standards — a 
set of binding commonsense measures aimed 
at detecting, preventing, and responding to 
sexual abuse. PREA is a game-changing hu -
man rights tool but, without data, it’s been 
difficult to assess its implementation.
On the morning the new report came out,  
JDI staff rushed to the printer, eager to pore 
over its findings. This data would shape our 
efforts, serving as a kind of roadmap that 
guides our work to ensure the safety of chil -
dren who are locked up. 
Our first reaction to the report was positive. 
The overall rate of sexual abuse in youth fa -
cilities decreased (see Making a Difference for 
Kids). But as we thumbed through the report’s 
pages, that excitement turned to confusion. 
The study was much thinner than expected. It 
soon became clear why: huge chunks of data 
were missing. This was a roadmap with most 
of the street names removed. 
Perhaps the most glaring omission involved 
the data on LGBT youth. The prior BJS stud -
ies showed that LGBT kids were far more 
likely than their straight peers to be sexu -
ally abused in youth detention. This finding 
matched what we were hearing from kids, and Where's the Data?Making a Difference 
for Kids
affirmed our view that the effort to stop rape 
in youth detention had to target homophobia, 
or it would fail. 
There are other gaps in the report. It con -
tained nothing on youth with a history of 
sexual victimization — a group that previous 
studies had shown was extremely vulnerable. 
Nor was there any data at all about staff per -
petrators. Indeed, one could read this report 
cover to cover and have no inkling that officer 
sexual misconduct has long plagued the juve -
nile detention system.   
Immediately following the report’s publica -
tion, JDI pressed BJS to account for the gaps 
in the report. So far, BJS responded in the 
media, but their answers have been evasive, 
and included only vague promises to release 
the findings at a later date.
That’s simply not good enough. They have 
the data, and there’s no reason at all to keep 
it under lock and key. JDI will continue to 
demand that BJS share what they have, and 
we won’t stop until they do.continued from page 1
JDI Survivor Council Troy Isaac knows that 
sexual abuse in youth facilities is completely pre -
ventable. He won't stop fighting until every kid in 
detention is safe. The New Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) Report Omits
Findings that We Need to Protect Kids
W
just detention international  
2DI’s 40th birthday is right around 
the corner. On May 20, we’ll be 
commemorating the founding of 
People Organized to Stop the Rape 
of Imprisoned Persons (POSRIP) 
by a prisoner rape survivor named Russell 
Dan Smith. While the name didn’t stick, 
POSRIP’s mission — to fight prisoner  
rape — had incredible staying power.  
Today, four decades later, JDI is still the  
only organization dedicated exclusively 
to ending this violence.
Throughout May, we will be honoring 
the people who have made JDI the 
human rights powerhouse that it is today. 
On our website and on social media, we’ll 
be sharing remembrances from longtime 
JDI allies, current and former staff, and 
prisoner rape survivors. 
But no celebration of our history would 
be complete without recognizing the 
contributions of you, JDI’s supporters. 
You have stood up for the dignity and 
safety of people who so often are ignored 
and forgotten. As we reflect on our 40 
years, we want to hear why you care about 
sexual abuse in detention, and what JDI’s 
work means to you. We’ll be posting 
these messages online starting May 1, 
including on our new Instagram page.   
If you’d like to share a message about why 
you care about prisoner rape, please send 
it to communications@justdetention.org. 
Thank you, JDI supporters, for everything 
that you’ve done — and that you continue 
to do — to protect the rights of people 
in detention.action  update                     
“Thank you for bringing hope to our prison” Help Celebrate 
our Anniversary! 
Students at the Episcopal School of Los Angeles — whose beautiful Words of Hope  cards are displayed 
above — were among the JDI supporters who sent their compassion to incarcerated survivors. 
It goes without saying  that prison life 
is isolating. Separated from friends and 
loved ones, inmates feel a sense of dis -
connect from society that can be hard to 
fathom. But for prisoner rape survivors, the 
sense of alienation is especially intense. Sur -
vivors not only have been robbed of their 
dignity, but many have no safe outlet for their 
pain. Carla, a survivor of staff sexual abuse, 
was punished when she tried to come forward 
— leading her to feel even more despair. “I’m 
losing my faith in humanity,” she told us.
Through our annual Words of Hope  campaign, 
we asked our supporters to write comforting 
notes to survivors like Carla. The response 
was overwhelming: warm greetings poured 
in from all over the globe. Overall, we 
received more than 20,000 messages, which 
we bundled up and delivered to incarcerated 
survivors nationwide.
Your compassion reached Carla at the perfect 
time. The bullying from staff was taking a toll, 
and she desperately needed a lifeline. “Admit -
tedly, I was a little blue,” Carla told us. “But 
that was quickly changed with your package. 
Thank you for bringing hope to our prison.” 
Lilly Anne also was in a dark place when your 
holiday messages arrived. “Broken and over -
whelmed,” is how she described her emotion -
al state after another difficult year. It seemed like no one cared at all about survivors like 
her — until your kind notes reached her. “I 
read and reread them,” she told us in a letter. 
“Thank you for the love and encouragement 
that I so desperately needed.”
These sentiments were echoed by scores of 
other survivors. John told us that your greet -
ings “made me feel like family.” Daniel said 
that you helped him “find strength to fight 
on.” Leo* talked about the “good feeling of 
knowing people are out there who care about 
our safety.”
In their thank you letters, survivors highlight -
ed the obvious care that was put into crafting 
the holiday cards. At card-writing meetups, 
JDI supporters channeled their inner artist, 
creating warm, colorful backdrops for their 
compassionate messages. “I have participat -
ed in Words of Hope  since 2016, and every year 
the experience is meaningful,” said Martina, 
an advocate who has organized card-writing 
events with colleagues and groups of youth 
volunteers. “Writing these cards seems like 
a small act, but it gives volunteers like me a 
chance to have an impact on the lives of in -
carcerated people nationwide.” 
We can say for sure that Martina’s words had 
an impact. Just ask Carla and Lilly Anne, 
and the scores of survivors who continue to 
send their thanks for your Words of Hope . 
*This name is a pseudonymJ
Holiday Card Campaign Reaches Survivors at a Time of Need
JDI's now on Instagram!
Follow us today at
@justdetentioninternational
  MARCH 2020 | action  update3action  update                      
“I Feel Welcome and Safe”
Victims of Crime, An Inside Line  is the first-
ever hotline that’s just for inmates. A survi -
vor of childhood sexual abuse and of sexual 
harassment in prison, Brian first called the 
line not long after it launched, in 2018, and 
he now checks in regularly. “I don’t need to 
hide my emotions anymore,” Brian told us. 
“The voice on the line, the voice at JDI, has 
a compassionate ear and an open heart. I feel 
welcome and safe.”
Today, An Inside Line  is a fixture in the lives of 
survivors in Michigan’s prisons. “It’s clear that 
prisoners find a great deal of comfort calling 
the hotline, and that’s not a small thing,” ex -
plains Linda McFarlane, a JDI Deputy Ex -
ecutive Director who worked closely with 
the Michigan Department of Corrections 
officials to set it up. “Let’s face it — the cor -
rections field has previously been wary, and 
sometimes even hostile, to the idea of con -
fidential communication between prisoners 
and outside advocates. But Michigan officials 
were willing to be bold, and their support for 
the project has been unshakable.” 
It was always JDI’s hope that other agencies 
would follow Michigan’s example, so we were 
thrilled when, in December, the Vermont De -
partment of Corrections agreed to make An 
Inside Line  available to people in its prisons. 
There is strong need in Vermont for a prison -
er hotline. The state’s only women’s prison has 
been plagued by staff sexual abuse; the culture 
at the facility was so toxic that prisoners and 
staff alike were too scared to talk. 
The flurry of calls that came in from Vermont 
after the hotline became operational shows 
how desperate prisoners there have been for 
a safe place to get help. “When a scandal like 
this hits, corrections officials often bury their 
heads in the sand. But that didn’t happen 
here. Strong officials stepped up and invited 
outside help. That kind of courage deserves to 
be applauded,” said McFarlane.
Meanwhile, Brian continues to make prog -
ress on his road to healing. “You all help so 
many hurting people who are hanging on by 
a thread,” he told us recently. “Thanks for giv -
ing us a hand to hold.”JDI’s Rape Crisis Hotline Provides Healing to Incarcerated
Survivors in Michigan, and now Vermont
fter brian was beaten  in a 
Michigan prison, he was taken to 
a nearby hospital. Though badly 
hurt, he at least felt protected — far 
away from the men who had assaulted him. 
But this respite was only temporary. He knew 
that, before long, he would have to return to 
the prison. “I thought that I’d rather die than 
go back there,” he told us in a letter. “I’m just 
not strong enough to face any more time.”
Brian’s fears were understandable. His assail -
ants were part of a powerful gang, and Brian 
had little faith that the staff would keep him 
safe from further harm. He also distrusted 
mental health officers, after one had told 
him that he should have tried fighting back 
against his attackers.
For a while, though, things seemed to be 
looking up for Brian: the gang mostly left 
him alone, and he held out hope for an early 
release. But the trauma from his assault did 
not go away. Brian was often depressed, his 
days were shrouded in heavy fog. 
Then something remarkable happened. Brian 
found out about An Inside Line , JDI’s confi -
dential hotline for prisoner rape survivors in 
Michigan’s prisons. Funded by the Office for A
JDI Program Officer Edward Cervantes fields a 
hotline call from a prisoner. In 2002, the late Senator Ted Kennedy gave a 
stirring speech before the Judiciary Commit -
tee. Ending prisoner rape “is not a liberal or 
a conservative issue,” he told his fellow Sena -
tors on the committee. “It is an issue of basic 
decency and human rights.”
In today’s political climate, that kind of bipar -
tisanship might seem like a relic. But Sena -
tors Brian Schatz (D-HI), and John Cornyn, 
(R-TX), are proving that when it comes to 
protecting prisoners from rape, the ideologi -
cal divide isn’t so vast. With input from JDI, 
the two Senators sent a powerful letter to the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons urging the agency 
do a better job ensuring the dignity of the 
people in its custody.
JDI applauds the two Senators for their cour -
age, and is proud to be working alongside 
them in the fight to end prisoner rape.An Issue of 
Basic Decency
just detention international
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
JDI-South Africa
Norwood Place, 2nd Floor 
66 Grant Avenue
Norwood, Johannesburg 2192
South Africa
Tel: +27 (11) 483 0989
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
just detention international  MARCH 2020 | action  update4