
While serving time  in a 
michigan prison, Jan lastocy was 
raped. not once, not twice, but 
three or four times a week for seven months. 
the rapist was an officer who supervised Jan 
at the prison warehouse. he assaulted her be -
hind pallets stacked with flour and sugar, in 
the walk-in freezer — anywhere he felt confi -
dent no one would catch him.
Desperate to go home to her husband and 
children, Jan didn’t report the abuse. if she 
did, the officer told her, he would write her up and delay her release. the warden had already 
made clear that she would always believe an 
officer’s word over an inmate’s. 
recently, i had lunch with Jan and her hus -
band of thirty years, John. he visited her 
regularly in prison. Back then, he knew Jan 
was having a tough time, but not that she was 
subjected to horrific sexual abuse. Jan was too 
afraid of her rapist even to tell John. it’s easy to feel numbed by the recent De
-
partment of Justice data that at least  216,600 
inmates are sexually abused every year in the 
U.s. let’s remember that behind that enor -
mous number are 216,600 fellow human be -
ings, like Jan. And behind each of them are 
their loved ones, like John. 
sincerely,
lovisa s tannow F or the longest time, U. s. correc -
tions officials tended to downplay 
the problem of sexual abuse, insist -
ing that such violence was an aber -
ration, a crisis fabricated by advocates and 
prisoners. But recently, a shift began. Of -
ficials and advocates are coming together, 
agreeing to respect significant differences 
of opinion while recognizing each other’s 
essential roles in the effort to end sexual 
abuse in detention. JD i’s participation at 
the American Correctional Association’s recent winter conference in san Antonio, 
texas, was a milestone in that effort. Prisoner rape survivor scott howard was one 
of JDi ’s panelists at the conference. his voice 
was strong and clear as he described his har -
rowing experience being raped, beaten, and 
extorted by a white supremacist gang while in a Colorado prison. scott had begged officials 
for protection, only to be called a “whiner” 
and told that, as a gay man, he should expect 
to be targeted by one gang or another. 
the audience —all corrections officials — was 
mesmerized by scott’s account. there was to -
tal silence, not a movement in the room; it 
was not clear what those listening were thinking. Advocates + Corrections Staff = 
Safer Prisons and Jails for All
JDI, prisoner rape survivors, and officials come together action update                                                                                       march 2011
just detention international  march 2011  | action  updateSexual abuse in detention will only come to an end if corrections officials, advocates, and inmates 
join hands and work together.  See ACA Conference, continued on page 2Jan Lastocy (left) and Lovisa Stannow.
The Department of Justice has released 
its first-ever estimate of how many 
people are sexually abused in U. s. de-
tention in a one-year period. in 2008, 
the Department says, at least 216,600 people 
were abused in prisons and jails, and in 17,100 
of these cases, in juvenile detention. 
Overall, that’s almost six hundred people a day — 25 an hour. these statistics reflect the 
number of people abused, not the number of incidents. many of those 216,600 are abused 
again and again. Contrary to common 
stereotypes, most inmates are victimized not 
by other inmates, but by staff.  
the Department generated this number by 
analyzing its own inmate surveys about sexual 
abuse, mandated by the Prison rape elimina -
tion Act. these surveys were created in recog -
nition of the fact that most inmates do not file 
a complaint after enduring sexual abuse. 
JDi receives letters from prisoner rape sur -
vivors every day, in which traumatized men 
Welcome, New Board Members New Government Report:action update                      
JDi is pleased to welcome three new members to its Board of Directors: 
Dawn Davison, Alicia Dixon, and scott howard. 
Dawn Davison is the first prison official to serve on JD i’s Board. 
Formerly warden of the California institution for Women, she placed herself 
within the vanguard of reform-minded corrections managers by allowing JD i 
and the riverside Area rape Crisis Center to bring counselors into the prison 
to speak confidentially with sexual abuse survivors.
Alicia Dixon is a public health professional with extensive philanthropic and organizational experience. she serves as  executive Director of the marcus Fos
-
ter education Fund. As program officer of the California endowment, Alicia 
boldly gave JD i a three-year grant for its work inside California prisons.
scott howard is a survivor of prisoner rape and one of the country’s leading 
advocates in the fight to end sexual abuse in detention. he has been profiled 
extensively in the media and has spoken publicly about his experiences enduring 
repeated assaults in prison while staff looked the other way.At least 216,600 U.S. Inmates 
Sexually Abused Every YearAfterward, scott described relief rushing 
through him as the room burst into applause. the Deputy Commissioner of a state correc
-
tions agency embraced him, saying, “scott, it 
wasn’t your fault.”
“they listened, they really listened,” scott 
said. “e ven after what i went through, i be-
lieve that most prison staff would like to pro -
tect inmates. today i had that feeling reaf -
firmed. sadly, so many staff at my prison, even 
the good ones, had no idea what to do.”For JDi, the effort to work with prison of
-
ficials is not a new one. Over the past five 
years, JDi has helped establish pilot pro -
grams at several prisons and has trained of -
ficials nationwide in sexual abuse awareness and human rights. JDi ’s programs include 
groundbreaking ones, such as bringing com -
munity rape crisis counselors into prisons 
and training inmates as peer educators on the Prison r ape elimination Act.
“Working with JDi sometimes makes me want to pull my hair out — the little hair i 
have left — but it’s still worth it,” explained Jim gondles, executive Director of the 
American Correctional Association. “We 
need to collaborate with advocates to make 
our prisons as safe as possible.”
At the conference, scott and JDi staff shared 
the stage with two officials from the Cali -
fornia Correctional institution, a large men’s 
prison in southern California. there, fa -
cility staff are working in partnership with 
JDi and a local community rape crisis cen -
ter, Women’s Center – high Desert. health 
Program specialist Jodi ramirez and inves -
tigative sergeant Charles Contreras spoke 
about how opening up their prison has 
helped make it safer for everyone, and about the positive impact JDi ’s presence has had 
on prison culture. 
“more and more, we hear from prisons and 
jails that want our help,” said linda mc-
Farlane, JDi ’s Deputy executive Director. 
“Advocates, inmates, and corrections of -
ficials must work together to end prisoner 
rape, making sure that no one else has to go 
through what scott did, ever again.”  ACA Conference   
continued from page 1
just detention international  and women speak of having to suffer the af -
termath of abuse in silence, due to shame and 
humiliation, fear of retaliation, or an expecta -
tion that no one will help even if they do file 
a formal complaint. 
the 216,600 estimate stands in stark contrast 
to another recent publication — also by the 
Department of Justice — of official reports of 
sexual abuse filed in prisons and jails nation -
wide in 2008: 7,444. Of these, only 931 were 
substantiated. According to this report, even 
when authorities confirmed that staff had 
sexually abused inmates in their custody, only 
42 percent of officers had their cases referred 
to prosecution, only 23 percent were arrested, 
and only 3 percent were charged, indicted or 
convicted; 15 percent were allowed to keep 
their jobs. “even one case of rape of someone in the 
government’s custody is one too many,” said 
lovisa stannow, JDi ’s executive Director. 
“twenty-five an hour constitutes a human 
rights crisis in our own country.”
Alicia DixonDawn Davison3ACA Conference   
continued from page 1action update                      
CAn y OU sPAre  a few minutes of 
your time to help end sexual violence 
in U.s. detention facilities? that’s all 
it takes to use the tools available on 
JDi’s website ( www.justdetention.org ) and 
urge the government to adopt strong national 
standards for the prevention of prisoner rape.
 
the Department of Justice has finally opened 
a public comment period on its draft of 
national standards mandated by the Prison rape elimination Act (PreA) of 2003. 
Once finalized by Attorney general holder, 
these standards will be binding on corrections facilities nationwide. the public comment 
period runs through April 4, 2011, and 
represents the last chance to weigh in on the 
standards.
“the Department needs to hear from a wide 
range of stakeholders, not just prison of -
ficials, to ensure that the final provisions 
are as strong as possible,” explained melissa 
rothstein, JDi ’s senior Program Director. 
“these national standards aren’t just another 
set of government regulations; they have the 
power to protect countless men, women, and 
children each year from the horror of rape in 
prison.” 
 
While the Department of Justice’s draft stan -
dards include several strong measures, it is, 
overall, a flawed and watered-down version 
of the standards proposed by the bipartisan national Prison rape elimination Commis
-
sion in 2009.
JDi is alarmed by the Department’s determi -
nation that the standards should not apply to 
immigration detention facilities (see adjacent 
article). JDi is also deeply concerned that the 
Department suggests allowing prisons and 
jails to place sexual abuse survivors in soli -
tary confinement against their will, increasing their trauma. the Department’s weakening 
of the recommendation that prisoner rape 
survivors be able to speak confidentially 
with a community-based victim advocate 
after reporting a sexual assault is dangerous and ill-informed; rape survivors are much 
more likely to file a formal complaint if they 
have had a chance first to speak with a trusted 
advocate. 
sadly, the Department has given in to correc -
tions pressure and removed several proposed 
limits on cross-gender pat searches and view -
ing of inmates using the toilet or shower, even 
as the same Department of Justice has docu -
mented that most abuse of inmates by staff is 
cross-gender, and that it often begins during 
pat searches (but then is not limited to such 
searches). in one area, the Department has actually in
-
troduced a standard likely to worsen the al -
ready exceptionally limited options available 
to inmates who have been abused and who 
wish to file a grievance. it has done so by 
proposing a 20-day time limit on the filing 
of an initial grievance — a timeframe that is 
shorter than limits currently in place within 
18 state prison systems. 
 
no matter how strong the final standards are, 
they will be meaningless if they do not require 
detention facilities to be subject to indepen -
dent, external oversight. the U.s. already runs 
what are widely considered the least transpar -
ent prisons in the Western world. yet, in its 
recommended standards, the Department of 
Justice proposes allowing corrections agencies 
to use an internal employee for measuring 
compliance with the standards. 
“With rampant sexual abuse in prisons and 
jails across the country, most of it committed 
by officials, it’s ludicrous to assume that 
corrections facilities are capable of policing themselves,” said rothstein.
 Please Spare a Few Minutes To 
Help End Rape in Detention
As A tr AnsgenDer WOm -
An, esmeralda soto lived in con -
stant fear in her native mexico. 
Abuse and harassment were part 
of her daily life. While in jail in the state of guerrero, esmeralda was raped. eventually, 
she made her way to the U. s., in search of 
the tolerance that had eluded her so far.
“here, i thought i would be safe. Finally 
safe,” esmeralda explained. 
she wasn’t. esmeralda was arrested and taken 
to an immigration detention facility. After 
three days in the custody of the Department 
of homeland security, while in a holding cell 
waiting to see her attorney, an officer forced esmeralda to perform oral sex on him. 
“After reporting the assault, i was treated with 
contempt and hostility by other officers,” es
-
meralda said. “ they called me a snitch. Other 
detainees also distanced themselves from me. i felt very alone and afraid.”
it isn’t only transgender inmates who are vul
-
nerable. terrified of deportation, often shar -
ing no language with their jailers, all immi -
gration detainees — many of whom have not 
been charged with a crime — are at risk.
Because they are so vulnerable, the co-spon -
sor and Congressional champion of the Prison rape elimination Act, the late sena
-
tor edward Kennedy, spoke of his particular 
satisfaction that immigration detention was 
included  in the mandate of P reA. 
the proposal to exclude immigration is es -
pecially disappointing as the Department of 
Justice itself, in its preamble to the proposed 
standards, states that “protection from sexual 
abuse should not depend on where an indi -
vidual is incarcerated: it must be universal.” Immigration Detainees 
Must Be Protected   
march 2011  | action  update
Please  take a look at JDI’s sample 
letter to the Department of Justice, 
or write your own comments using 
JDI’s talking points, by visiting  
www.justdetention.org .Just detention intern Ation Al  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
4just detention international  march 2011  | action  updateThank You for Offering Prisoner Rape Survivors a Gift of Hope  
For many of the 2.4 million people 
behind bars in the U.s., the holiday 
season is the hardest. in the letters we 
receive every day from inmates, all of 
us at JDi sense the growing desperation as the end of the year approaches. incarcerated 
sexual abuse survivors write about their lone -
liness and isolation. 
last year, we decided to ask you, our support -
ers, to help us break through the desolation 
behind bars by reaching out to a prisoner rape 
survivor with a kind word — with the gift of 
hope.  the result was simply amazing: within days, 
600 JDi supporters sent us holiday greetings, 
all of which we immediately forwarded to 
prisoner rape survivors across the country. you wrote:
“I wish you hope, healing, and support. Please 
know there are people fighting for you, even if you 
have never seen us. Know there is love.”
 
 “May you take comfort in knowing that countless 
people in the free world care deeply about you and 
will not stop fighting for justice.”
“From one survivor to another, I send you hope 
for peace of mind and heart. On both sides of the 
bars, we give one another strength to go on.”
it didn’t take long before the responses from 
prisoner rape survivors started pouring in, making clear the life-changing impact of 
these simple notes:
 “I received your letter on Friday, 12-24-10, just 
as I was having horrible thoughts of cutting this 
earth trip short. An officer said ‘Synder, you got 
mail,’ and that snapped me back from the edge. 
The holiday cards saved my life.” 
“When I read your letter and the message cards 
my heart skipped a beat and I started to cry. Yes, 
this 46-year old convict was crying. The kind 
words of encouragement, blessings, letting me 
know that I’m not forgotten from total strangers 
from far away shattered my emotions.”
“Your message offered me more than just a ‘little 
bit of hope.’ Knowing there are people such as 
yourself out there, sending out their positive 
thoughts, fills me with an enormous amount 
of hope. And I will work hard at remaining as 
strong as I can.”
“I have been down since 1998 and have not had 
a card or letter sent to me, nor a visit. To receive 
those cards has totally left me speechless. Thank 
you, thank you, thank you.”All of us at JD i agree: thank you, thank you, 
thank you to all of you who answered our call 
for compassion and humanity. you may just 
have helped save the life of a fellow human 
being.“The holiday cards saved my life.” 
Giving the gift of hope, JDI’s supporters sent 
600 of these holiday cards to incarcerated 
survivors of sexual abuse. South African Law 
Protects Inmates 
From Sexual Abuse
in February 2011, the Correctional services 
Act — the law that governs all prisons in south Africa — was amended to require 
that inmates be assessed to determine 
their vulnerability to sexual violence and exploitation. in prisons around the world, 
one of the most pivotal moments to prevent 
rape and abuse is during the classification 
process, when officials decide where and with whom to house inmates. now, for the first 
time, south African prison officials will be 
explicitly required to include a determination 
of whether someone is vulnerable to sexual 
abuse during classification. 
this reform represents a milestone in JD i’s 
long-standing effort to help end sexual abuse 
in south African prisons. Working closely 
with members of Parliament, especially mr. 
James selfe of the Parliamentary Portfolio 
Committee on Corrections, JD i helped 
draft the amendments to the Act.
By law, South African prison officials will  
now be required to assess whether an inmate is 
vulnerable to sexual abuse.
