REPORT ON TORTURE AND CRUEL, INHUMAN, AND
DEGRADING TREATMENT OF PRISONERS 
AT GUANTÁNAMO BAY, CUBA
July 2006
“You are in a place where there is no law – we are the law.”
U.S. military intelligence officers1Preface ............................................................................................................................... ...........................................1
Introduction: The Accounts from Guantánamo ........................................................................................................3
I. A Legal Black Hole ............................................................................................................................... ...................7
A. Enemy Combatants?........................................................................................................... ............................7
B. Extreme Interrogation Techniques ............................................................................................ ......................9
II. Beyond the Law: Guantánamo, the Geneva Conventions, and the War Crimes Act ........................................10
A. Abandoning the Geneva Conventions and International Humanitarian and Human Rights Law.................10B. The Army Field Manual....................................................................................................... .........................11
C. Avoiding Liability Under the War Crimes Act................................................................................. .............13
III. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment Reported at Guantánamo ......................................14
A. The Prison Camps ............................................................................................................ ............................14
B. Types of Torture and Abuse.................................................................................................. .........................15
1. Psychological Abuse......................................................................................................... .........................16
2. Physical Abuse.............................................................................................................. ............................20
3. Medical Abuse ............................................................................................................... ...........................22
4. Sexual Provocation, Rape, and Harassment .................................................................................... ..........24
5. Religious and Cultural Abuse ................................................................................................ ...................25
6. Pre-Guantánamo Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading T reatment...............................................28
IV. The Abuse Continues ............................................................................................................................... ...........29
V. Avoiding Judicial Scrutiny of Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment ...................................30
VI. Has the U.S. Been Committing Torture in Guantánamo? ................................................................................31
VII. United Nations and Committee on the Convention Against Torture
Find Torture Committed at Guantánamo ........................................................................................................33
A. United Nations Special Rapporteurs’ Report.................................................................................. ...............33
B. United Nations Committee Against Torture’s Report........................................................................... .........34
VIII. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................... ........................34
Appendix - Practices that Rise to the Level of Torture at Guantánamo .................................................................36
Chronology ............................................................................................................................... .................................38
Glossary ............................................................................................................................... ......................................40REPORT ON TORTURE
AND CRUEL, INHUMAN, AND DEGRADING TREATMENT
OF PRISONERS
AT GUANTÁNAMO BAY, CUBA
TABLE OF CONTENTSReport on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         1PREFACE
The Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR) is a non-
profit legal and educational organization dedicated toprotecting and advancing the rights guaranteed by theU.S. Constitution and International Law.
Since 1966, CCR has been litigating on behalf of vic-
tims of torture and arbitrary detention. Our work beganon behalf of civil rights activists, and over the last fourdecades CCR has played an important role in manypopular movements for social justice. Through thiswork, CCR uses litigation proactively to advance thelaw in a positive direction, to empower poor communi-ties and communities of color, to guarantee the rights ofthose with the fewest protections and least access tolegal resources, to train the next generation of constitu-tional and human rights attorneys, and to strengthenthe broader movement for constitutional and humanrights. 
Since the indefinite detentions at Guantánamo began,
CCR has been at the forefront of the fight for justice onbehalf of the prisoners. In the dark days after September11, CCR was one of the first to call for humane treat-ment and due process for those the government hadbranded “the worst of the worst.” In addition, CCR hasconsistently challenged the U.S. government’s disregardfor the rule of law and its attempts to evade judicial orpublic review of its detention and interrogation practicesused to wage the “war on terror,” both at Guantánamoand abroad.
In February 2002, CCR filed a historic case against the
U.S. government on behalf of the prisoners held atGuantánamo, Rasul v. Bush. In June 2004, the U.S.
Supreme Court issued its landmark decision in Rasul
upholding the principle that the prisoners held inGuantánamo have the right to challenge the legal and
factual basis for their detention in U.S. courts.
In the two years since the Court’s decision, the U.S.
government has employed every possible tactic to evadejudicial review of its detention and interrogation prac-tices in the “war on terror,” including allegations thatU.S. personnel subject prisoners to torture and cruel,inhuman, and degrading treatment. During this time,CCR has responded by creating a network of hundredsof attorneys who work collaboratively to represent indi-
vidual prisoners imprisoned at Guantánamo. This report
is a product of our united efforts.
This report uniquely recounts the experiences of prison-
ers inside Guantánamo Bay prison. Other reports, forthe most part, rely on the statements of released prison-ers who were willing to tell their stories. Appearing inthis report are the accounts of torture and cruel, inhu-man, and degrading treatment drawn directly fromhabeas counsels’ unclassified notes. Prisoner statementswere made to counsel during in-person interviews con-
ducted at Guantánamo beginning in the fall of 2004.Information provided to counsel through client inter-
views is presumed secret until cleared. Such informationmust be provided to a Department of Defense (DoD)privilege team for review. Once cleared, the informationcarries no restriction. All of the information reported byprisoners in this report has been cleared for publication.Some information has been taken from public sources
compiled in a separate report by the law firm ofShearman and Sterling LLP .
2
The italicized block passages in this report are excerpts
from attorney notes and summaries of prisoneraccounts. In some cases, the passages are taken fromdocuments submitted in public court filings. In mostcases, the accounts are taken verbatim from attorneysummaries; in a few instances, the accounts are para-phrased or combined from more than one document. To the extent possible, reported incidents have been cor-
roborated by other public, unclassified sources, includ-
ing government documents. Those corroboratedaccounts are also cited in this report. Prisoners’ state-ments of abuse generally correspond with descriptions ofabuse recorded in government documents releasedthrough a Freedom of Information Act suit brought bythe American Civil Liberties Union, CCR, Physiciansfor Human Rights, and Veterans for Peace.
3Sergeant
Eric Saar, a former Guantánamo military intelligence
linguist, corroborates specific accounts of abuse in hisbook Inside the Wire: A Military Intelligence Soldier’s
Eyewitness Account of Life at Guantánamo.
4Additional
corroboration can also be found in the book For God
and Country: Faith and Patriotism Under Fire written by
Captain James Yee, a former Muslim chaplain atGuantánamo who was falsely accused of spying for Al
Qaeda and later exonerated.
5
Finally, given the limitations of access to the base, this
report cannot provide a full accounting of the incidents
of prisoner abuse at Guantánamo. Rather, by offeringexamples of the abuses described to attorneys and, inmany cases, corroborated by independent government orother documents, this report compels the conclusionthat a more detailed investigation must be conductedinto the treatment of prisoners at Guantánamo.
2 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba
INTRODUCTION:
THE ACCOUNTS FROM GUANTÁNAMO
In early 2002, Americans saw photos of hooded, gog-
gled, and shackled men in bright orange jumpsuitskneeling before a wire mesh fence, their postures agrotesque parody of common Muslim prayer positions.Some of these men had been
picked up on or near the battle-fields of Afghanistan. Others wereturned over to U.S. forces fromplaces far from any battlefield –Bosnia, Zambia, and The Gambia– torn from their families, careers,and communities. They were atGuantánamo Bay Naval Base,
Cuba, in a place called Camp X-
Ray.
6
Currently, about 460 prisoners
remain at Guantánamo (often
referred to by the acronym
“GTMO”).7Approximately 200
habeas corpus petitions are pend-ing in the U.S. District Courts andthe Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia onbehalf of nearly all of the prisoners now held atGuantánamo. Those petitions invoke habeas corpus
rights, one of the most fundamental protections affordedby our Anglo-Saxon system of government. The writ of
habeas corpus was first codified in the foundational doc-ument of English law, the Magna Carta, and later pre-served in the U.S. Constitution.
8Habeas corpus protects
the right of a person not to be detained by the Executivewithout a lawful basis.
9The original right is codified in
U.S. statutory law, and it has been broadened to affordprisoners the right to challenge their custody as a viola-tion of the laws, Constitution, or treaties of the UnitedStates.
10
Petitions for habeas corpus for Guantánamo prisoners
were filed after the Supreme Court’s 2004 decision in
Rasul v. Bush, which held that aliens in military custody
at Guantánamo are entitled to test the lawfulness oftheir detention in the federal courts.
11In November
2004, District Court Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly ruledthat counsel for the prisoners could meet with theirclients at Guantánamo.
12Since then, more than 450 probono attorneys from a wide range of practices have
taken days from family and work and spent thousandsof dollars to travel to Guantánamo to meet with theirclients. Those meetings revealed not only facts suggest-ing many of the detentions were unlawful, but disturb-ing information about the conditions under which theprisoners were confined and the treatment to which they
were s ubjected.
The U.S. military has openly
acknowledged that many of themen at Guantánamo do notbelong there. In October 2004,Brigadier General Martin Lucenti,
then-deputy commander of themilitary task force that runs thedetention center at Guantánamo,stated:“[o]f the 550 [detainees]that we have, I would say most ofthem, the majority of them, willeither be released or transferred totheir own countries . . . Most ofthese guys weren’t fighting. Theywere running.”
13General Lucenti’s
comments reportedly have been
echoed by an active duty Guantánamo interrogator, whostated that “the U.S. is holding dozens of prisoners atthe U.S. Navy Base at Guantánamo who have no mean-ingful connection to al-Qaida or the Taliban and isdenying them access to legal representation. . . . Thereare a large number of people at Guantánamo whoshouldn’t be there.”
14In January 2005, Brigadier
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         3“Of the 550 [detainees]
that we have, I would say
most of them, the
majority of them, will
either be released or
transferred to their own
countries . . . Most of
these guys weren’t
fighting. They were
running. ”
Brigadier General Martin Lucenti
General Jay Hood, then base com-
mander at Guantánamo, admitted,“[s]ometimes, we just didn’t get theright folks.”
15 These statements,
and other recent findings,16contra-
dict the sweeping pronouncementsof high level U.S. officials, includ-ing President Bush and Secretary of Defense DonaldRumsfeld, that Guantánamo prisoners are the “worst of
the worst.”
17
Both present and former prisoners consistently havereported they suffered systematic abuse at the hands of
U.S. military personnel. The government has tried todismiss prisoner accounts of mistreatment by claimingthat prisoners are hardened terrorists, trained to allegetorture as part of their indoctrination by Al Qaeda, butthese claims are belied by the mounting evidence.
18 
Many in the military have objected to decisions that
resulted in prisoner abuse. Alberto J. Mora, former
General Counsel of the Navy under President George
W. Bush, made public a series of strenuous objections he
raised within the Administration concerning its depar-ture from both domestic and international law withrespect to the detention, treatment, and interrogation of
prisoners at Guantánamo.
19Echoing Mora’s concerns,
Major General Jack L. Rives, Deputy Judge Advocate
General for the Air Force, stated, “[T]he use of the more
extreme interrogation techniques simply is not how theU.S. armed forces have operated in recent history. Wehave taken the legal and moral ‘high-road’ in the con-duct of our military operations regardless of how othersmay operate.”
20
CCR calls for an immediate end to the use of anymethod or practice in connection with Guantánamoprisoners that constitutes torture. The disturbingaccounts set forth in this report support our call for anindependent commission to determine the full scope ofthe mistreatment at Guantánamo that has been relayedby the prisoners to their counsel. There is much at stake
here. The world is watching. Many of our allies, as wellas an increasing number of current and former U.S. offi-cials, call for Guantánamo to be closed immediately. Thefacts paint a picture of practices that are not only unlaw-ful and immoral, but are actively eroding our govern-ment’s commitment to the rule of law and humandignity, and potentially, the safety
of all of us. Congress must actnow to create an independentbipartisan commission that willengage in credible, effective fact-finding, end the practices of tor-ture and cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment, hold U.S. officials accountable forany unlawful conduct, make recommendations to guideU.S. officials in the future, and move with due speed toclose the prison at Guantánamo.
Mohammed Nechla and five other Bosnians were taken
into custody by Bosnian authorities in the Fall of 2001 atthe demand of the U.S., based on unsubstantiated allega-tions by the U.S. embassy that they were part of a groupplanning an attack on the Embassy. Mohammed Nechlaworked with orphans for the Red Crescent Society of theUnited Arab Emirates in Bihac, Bosnia as a social worker
when he was arrested.
The Bosnian Supreme Court ordered the six released after a
three-month investigation, which included searches of docu-ments, residences, and computers, yielded insufficient evi-dence to detain them.
21
On the night of January 18, 2002, Mr. Nechla and the
other five Bosnians were taken to the courtyard of theSarajevo jail. Mr. Nechla was given a document confirm-
ing that he was to be released. But he was not set free.
Instead, he was turned over to nine officers/soldiers, includ-
ing at least one American soldier, in full riot gear. A hoodwas placed over his head and his wrists were boundextremely tightly. The six were taken to an airport, wherethey were handed over to Americans. The Americansremoved Mr. Nechla’s hood, and placed sensory deprivation
goggles on his eyes, a surgical-type mask on his mouth, andheadphone-type coverings over his ears. 
After spending hours sitting on the ground in sub-freezing
temperatures, Mr. Nechla and the others were forced onto aplane. The pain from Mr. Nechla’s wrist restraints wasexcruciating because they were so tight; he was crying andscreaming, “My hands, my hands!” He began to feel numb-ness in his hands and arms.
He was placed in a sitting position on the floor of the plane.
If he slumped or fell, he was slammed back into the sitting
4 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba“Sometimes, we just
didn’t get the right folks. ”
Jay Hood, Commanding General,
Joint Task ForceReport on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         5position by soldiers. The flight lasted about six hours. When
the plane landed, they were in a place that was extremelycold (-20 C). Mr. Nechla believes it was Turkey orGerm any.
22Mr. Nechla heard barking and snarling dogs
very close to him, but he could not see because of the gog-
gles. He was terrified that the dogs would bite him or killhim; the soldiers taunted him in the bitter cold.
Before boarding a second plane, Mr. Nechla was given a
new article of clothing, but he could not see what it lookedlike. His hands remained in pain, and the numbness in hisarms grew. He was given no food. The plane trip lastedmany hours. Immediately before the plane landed atGuantánamo, he was given an apple—the only food he
received during his nearly two-day journey. 
After the plane landed, he was dragged to a bus, still wear-
ing the goggles, mask, and headphones. The soldiers draggedhim by his biceps, gripping him tightly and painfully. Thebus had no seats. Soldiers were screaming at him inEnglish, “Don’t move!” “Don’t talk!” repeatedly.
When the bus stopped, Mr. Nechla was pulled down the
boarding stairs, again by the upper arms. There were sever-al dogs barking very close to him, and he again feared hewould be bitten and attacked. He was dragged to an areaof gravel and placed in a painful position, with his legsplaced straight out in front of him, shackled, and his wristsstill shackled. Soldiers were screaming insults at him and about his fami-
ly. A soldier punched him around his head and shoulders.The sun pounded down on him and it was unbearably hot.He fainted. A soldier stepped forward, grabbed him, and
shoved him back into the painful seated position. Thisoccurred a few times. He was forced to sit in the intenseheat for an extended period. He was having difficultybreathing through the mask and believed he was going tosuffocate. He cried out for help. A soldier came and pulledthe mask out and let it snap against his face. He began tocry.
23He had arrived at Guantánamo.
O.K. was 15 years old when he was captured in July
2002.24Military officials at Bagram treated him roughly,
despite his young age and his poor physical condition. Hewas interrogated repeatedly by military officials, and onmany occasions was brought into the interrogation room ona stretcher. On one occasion, interrogators grabbed andpulled him, he fell and cut his left knee. On some occasions,interrogators brought barking dogs into the interrogationroom while his head was covered with a bag. On other
occasions, interrogators threw cold water on him. They alsotied his hands above the door frame and made him danglepainfully for hours at a time. While his wounds were stillhealing, interrogators made O.K. clean the floors on hishands and knees. They forced him to carry heavy buckets ofwater, which hurt his left shoulder (where he had been
Second from the left: Mohammed Nechla6 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cubashot). When he was able to walk again, interrogators made
him pick up trash, then emptied the trash bag and madehim pick it up again. During the interrogation, he was notallowed to use the bathroom, and was forced to urinate onhimself.
Around March of 2003, O.K. was taken out of his cell at
Camp Delta at approximately 12:00 – 1:00 a.m., and
taken to an interrogation room. An interrogator told O.K.that his brother was at Guantánamo, and that he should“get ready for a miserable life.” O.K. stated that he would
answer the interrogator’s questions if they brought hisbrother to see him. The interrogator became extremelyangry, then called in military police and told them to cuffO.K. to the floor. First they cuffed him with his arms infront of his legs. After approximately half an hour theycuffed him with his arms behind his legs. After anotherhalf hour they forced him onto his knees, and cuffed hishands behind his legs. Later still, they forced him on hisstomach, bent his knees, and cuffed his hands and feettogether. At some point, O.K. urinated on the floor and onhimself. Military Police poured pine oil on the floor and onO.K., and then, with O.K. lying on his stomach and hishands and feet cuffed together behind him, the MilitaryPolice dragged him back and forth through the mixture of
urine and pine oil on the floor. Later, O.K. was put backin his cell, without being allowed a shower or change ofclothes. He was not given a change of clothes for two days.
25 
Mr. Ait Idir has been in Guantánamo since January
2002; he has not seen his son Muhamed in four years.Mustafa Ait Idir asked to speak with an officer after guards
refused to turn down fans that were making prisoners cold.
He was alone in his cell at about 2 p.m. when guards
entered, saying they wanted to search his cell. He sat on thefloor as he was instructed, and his hands were securedbehind him. 
Suddenly guards grabbed him and picked him up. They
began to curse him and to say horrible things to him andabout him and his family.
The bunk in that cell was on a 3-foot high steel shelf. The
guards banged his body and his head into the steel bunk.The bunk and cell appear to be of a single piece or weldedconstruction – much like a tub and wall unit – but madeof steel.The guards then threw him on the floor and continued to
pound him and bang his head and body on the floor.
The guards then picked him up and banged his head on
the foot stirrups of the toilet unit in his cell. Mustafadescribed the toilet as like a Turkish toilet – with a holebeneath it and a sturdy place to place one’s feet and fromwhich to squat. They banged his head onto the foot holdingapparatus.
He was taken to solitary confinement after that beating.
Officers visited him twice that night to examine the bruises
covering much of his upper body.
26I. A LEGAL BLACK HOLE
Who are these men, and why have they been treated this
way? What are the implications of the U.S. government’sdecision to classify them as “enemy combatants?” Whathas occurred at Guantánamo in theabsence of public scrutiny, judicialreview, and government accounta-
bility? The American people, andthe global community, deserveanswers to these questions. Andanswers will only come to lightwhen Congress appoints an inde-pendent commission to investigateall accounts of torture and abuse atGuantánamo, to put an end to the
practices of torture and cruel,inhuman and degrading treatment,to hold government officialsaccountable, to close the detentionfacility at Guantánamo, and tomake recommendations to preventabuses in the future.
A. Enemy Combatants?
The U.S. government claims that Guantánamo prisonersare so-called “enemy combatants,” falling outside thehistorical protections provided individuals in U.S. mili-tary custody. A detention and interrogation system basedupon ad hoc Executive rules renders prisoners particular-ly vulnerable to abuse in the absence of clear guidancefor interrogators and prison guards. This new categoryof military prisoners, accompanied by the failure toadhere to traditional and long-established military law,increases the risk that some individuals imprisonedunder these conditions may be wrongfully accused ofengaging in hostilities against the U.S.
Since the “war on terrorism” began, the U.S. govern-
ment has insisted that the Executive has the sole author-ity to determine “enemy combatant” status. What is an“enemy combatant?” The term “enemy combatant,”
taken literally, has the same meaning as “enemysoldier,”
27but has no previously recognized legal signifi-
cance. It is not a “term of art” in U.S. law. The U.S. hasnot used the term in any previous armed conflict. Nointernational treaty, including the Geneva Conventions,nor any international body uses the term “enemy com-
batant.” “Enemy combatant” is solely a term coined bythe U.S. government. The U.S. government’s sleight ofhand redefinition of the term used to describe captured
war prisoners attempted to placeGuantánamo prisoners outside the
orbit of the laws of war and, morebroadly, the rule of law.
Over the past four years, the
Administration has modified the
definition of “enemy combatant”to suit its objectives; for example,the government told the U.S.Supreme Court in the Hamdi case
that an enemy combatant was aperson fighting U.S. forces inAfghanistan.
28That narrow defini-
tion would exclude many of themen at Guantánamo.
29
In Rasul v. Bush, the Supreme
Court rejected theAdministration’s assertion of unre-
viewable power to designate prisoners as so-called“enemy combatants,” although the Executive continues
to resist any judicial oversight of its conduct inGuantánamo. In the wake of that decision, Deputy
Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz issued an order
(Wolfowitz Order) in July 2004 expanding the term
enemy combatant to include:
an individual who was part of or supporting Taliban
or al Qaeda forces, or associated forces that areengaged in hostilities against the U.S. or its coalitionpartners. This includes any person who has commit-ted a belligerent act or has directly supported hostili-ties in aid of enemy armed forces.
30
The Wolfowitz definition is subject to criticism, at aminimum, because it fails to describe what it means to“support” Al Qaeda or be an “associated force.” Before a
federal judge, the U.S. government conceded that,under the Wolfowitz definition, a “little old lady inSwitzerland” could be held as an enemy combatant if
she – unknowingly – donated funds to a charity thatfunneled the money to Al Qaeda.
31In its efforts to com-
bat terrorism, the U.S. government has claimed the right
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         7Before a federal judge,
the U.S. government
conceded that, under
the Wolfowitz definition,
a “little old lady in
Switzerland” could be
held as an enemy
combatant if she –
unknowingly – donated
funds to a charity that
funneled the money to
Al Qaeda.to pick up alleged “enemy combatants” in every corner
of the world, on suspicion they are affiliated with a ter-rorist organization, and then to subject them to indefi-
nite detention without judicial review. Thisextraordinary exercise of executive power has no prece-dent in U.S. history.
Though the Administration repeatedly asserts
Guantánamo prisoners are hardened terrorists, the
accounts provided to habeas counsel and the statementsof several military officers suggest that many of the pris-oners have no connection to terrorism. Rather, there isevidence that many simply were in the wrong place atthe wrong time. The ABC News program 20/20 report-
ed, “Afghanistan was showered with U.S. offers ofmoney for turning in any al Qaeda and Taliban ‘murder-ers.’”
32Twelve Kuwaiti citizens (who also sought review
of their detention before the U.S. Supreme Court withRasul) were serving in humanitarian organizations in
Pakistan and Afghanistan when they were picked up by
local villagers who sought to recover bounties offered bythe United States.
33Sami Al-Laithi, an Egyptian, was
also sold for a bounty.34
A recent report analyzed declassified records of certainmilitary panels, the Combatant Status Review T ribunals(CSRT), mandated by the Wolfowitz Order to create avehicle to confirm the prisoners’ status as enemy com-
batants. Even though the CSRT procedures lacked mostfundamental due process protections, the records ofthose reviews still provide significant data. The reportfinds that, in fifty-five percent (55%) of the cases, pris-oners were determined not to have committed any hos-tile act against the U.S. or its coalition allies. Eighty-sixpercent (86%) were arrested by either Pakistan or theNorthern Alliance when the United States was paying
large bounties for apprehension of suspected Al Qaedaor Taliban supporters.
35Following the 2002 U.S. inva-
sion of Afghanistan, the practice of “selling” foreignnationals arrested in or near Afghanistan to the U.S.military for thousands of dollars in bounty money wascommonplace.
36
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         8
Psychological Operations (PsyOp)  
Leaflet No. TF11-RP09-1
Pamphlet distributed by
U.S. Forces in AfghanistanSenior military officials, like Steve Rodriguez, the Head
of Interrogations at Guantánamo, have questioned theintelligence value of the majority of Guantánamo pris-oners. In 2004, Rodriguez maintained that “20, 30, 40,maybe even 50 [of the Guantánamo detainees] are pro-viding critical information today.”
37Lt. Col. Anthony
Christino stated in 2004 “that there is a continuingintelligence value . . . for [s]omewhere a[round] a fewdozen, a few score at the most” of the Guantánamo pris-oners.
38At peak, the U.S. imprisoned approximately
660 men at Guantánamo.39
That innocent men may be arbitrarily imprisoned andmistreated at Guantánamo is an especially egregiousmiscarriage of justice. But even those who may havebeen involved in armed conflict against the UnitedStates or otherwise acted to harm U.S. interests should
not be disgraced, tortured, or treated inhumanely. U.S.domestic laws and international treaties to which theU.S. is a signatory absolutely prohibit such treatment.
B. Extreme Interrogation Techniques
The extreme interrogation techniques that led to theabuses at Abu Ghraib were designed and implementedfirst at Guantánamo and then exported to Iraq.
40 The
government deliberately chose Guantánamo as its prisonsite because it believed foreign citizens detained therestood beyond the reach of U.S. law, including U.S.international obligations under the Geneva Conventionsand other international humanitarian and human rightslaw. The U.S. government calculated that, atGuantánamo, a prisoner would have no remedy to con-
test his incarceration in U.S.courts.
41Legal memoranda from
2002 reveal that the White Houseand the DoD wanted to knowhow far they could “legally” go ininterrogating alleged terrorists.
42
Guantánamo was the perfect loca-
tion to test these limits.
Prisoners being interrogated at
Guantánamo have been: 
• held in solitary confinement for
periods exceeding a year;
• deprived of sleep for days and weeks and, in at least
one case, months;• exposed to prolonged temperature extremes;
• beaten;• threatened with transfer to a foreign country, for
torture;
43
• tortured in foreign countries or at U.S. military bases
abroad before transfer to Guantánamo;
• sexually harassed and raped or threatened with rape;• deprived of medical treatment for serious conditions,
or allowed treatment only on the condition that they“cooperate” with interrogators; and
• routinely “short-shackled” (wrists and ankles bound
together and to the floor) for hours and even days dur-ing interrogations.
These aggressive interrogation techniques, when coupled
with the stress of indefinite, arbitrary detention, havecaused the prisoners tremendous psychological andphysical injury. At least one prisoner nearly died duringan interrogation.
44
Most prisoners live in conditions that are debilitating.
Many have serious, untreated medical problems, often
caused by living conditions or physical punishment.Some have lost their sanity. Numerous prisoners have
tried to commit suicide, some multiple times, one inOctober 2005 during a visit by his lawyer.
45 
Prisoners have undertaken several hunger strikes to
protest conditions at Guantánamo.46The longest and
most serious hunger strike began in August 2005 andresulted in the military intranasally force-feeding over
thirty prisoners.
47When several
hunger strikers reached a life-threatening stage, the militarybegan using an “emergencyrestraint chair” during force-feed-
ings.
48
On June 10, 2006, three prisoners
were found dead in their cells. A
hunger strike is underway in theprison, as this report goes to press. 
The accounts collected in this
report lead inexorably to only one conclusion: torture
and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment is being
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         9“There is a continuing
intelligence value . . . for
[s]omewhere a[round] a
few dozen, a few score at
the most” of the
Guantánamo prisoners.
Lt. Col. Anthony Christinopracticed routinely at the
Guantánamo prison. To ensure
that these practices are prohibited,the U.S. government must under-take a detailed, independent, andtransparent investigation into allinterrogation policies and practicesin the war on terror, comprehen-sively collect and analyze the dataon the incidents and nature of abusive practices, and actto prevent such actions from occurring in the future.Finally, it must end the practice of arbitrary, indefinite
detention at Guantánamo.
On one occasion, while in the interrogation room, an MP
trained a rifle directly on Mr. Al Dossari at close range,despite the fact that Mr. Al Dossari was shackled to thefloor. On another occasion, an interrogator in civilianclothing threatened to send Mr. Al Dossari to a prison withmurderers, where he said Mr. Al Dossari would be raped.
At a subsequent interrogation, Mr. Al Dossari was told that
it was known that he was a low-level al Qaeda soldier andthat if he admitted this, he would spend five to ten years inprison. If he did not confess, Mr. Al Dossari was told, hewould spend 50 years or perhaps the rest of his life in jail.
During another interrogation, a woman Mr. Al Dossari
believes was of Egyptian originbanged Mr. Al Dossari’s head on atable. Mr. Al Dossari was shackled bya chain around his waist. The chainwas pulled so tight that it caused himto vomit.
49
II. BEYOND THE LAW:
GUANTÁNAMO, THE GENEVACONVENTIONS, AND THE
WAR CRIMES ACT
A. Abandoning the Geneva
Conventions andInternational Humanitarianand Human Rights Law
Guantánamo has been a lightning
rod for international and domestic
criticism in large part because of theU.S. government’s assertion thatGuantánamo is not only beyond the
reach of U.S. law, but that prisonerscaptured in the “war on terrorism”
are not protected by the GenevaConventions or any other interna-tional humanitarian or humanrights law.
The decision to strip Guantánamo
prisoners of the protections of theGeneva Conventions laid the
foundation for a prison beyond the law. The U.S. gov-ernment intentionally pursued this course of action inorder to avoid the specific protections those treatiesafford. To understand why, we first have to understandwhat the Conventions are and what they do.
The four Geneva Conventions are among the most uni-
versal treaties in all of international law.
50They derive
from principles that constrain the conduct of belliger-ents to an armed conflict and make clear the duties thatthose belligerents owe to anyone “outside of combat,”whether they are civilians or prisoners of war.
51The four
Geneva Conventions codify the protection of the cus-
tomary international “laws of war.” The human rightscomponent of this body of law is termed “internationalhumanitarian law.”
52Parties to armed conflicts, includ-
ing both state and nonstate actors, have observed theGeneva Conventions and the protections they codify for
the past fifty years.
The Third Convention, address-
ing prisoner of war rights, andthe Fourth Convention address-ing civilian rights, containnumerous protections for personscaptured during military hostili-ties. The Third Convention guar-antees that members of the armedforces of a state party to an inter-national armed conflict andmembers of affiliated militias areentitled to prisoner of war(POW) status upon capture. Oneof the central protections provid-ed by the Third Convention is adetainee’s right to be treated as aPOW unless and until his statusor innocence can be determinedby a “competent tribunal.”
53The
10 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaThe decision to strip
Guantánamo prisoners of
the protections of the
Geneva Conventions laid
the foundation for a
prison beyond the law. 
The Third Convention
expressly guarantees
POWs charged with
crimes fair trial rights.
These fair trial guarantees
are considered so
essential that “willfully
depriving a [POW] of the
rights of a fair and regular
trial prescribed in this
Convention” is deemed a
“grave breach” of the
convention – i.e., a war
crime.Third Convention also guarantees other basic dignities
and fundamental procedural rights, including rights to(1) humane treatment including protection from vio-lence, intimidation, insults, public curiosity, and coer-cive interrogation tactics;
54(2) due process if subject to
disciplinary or punitive sanctions;55(3) communication
with protective agencies;56(4) proper medical atten-
tion.57
The Third Convention expressly guarantees POWscharged with crimes fair trial rights.
58These fair trial
guarantees are considered so essential that “willfullydepriving a [POW] of the rights of a fair and regulartrial prescribed in this Convention” is deemed a “gravebreach” of the convention – i.e.,a war crime.
The Fourth Convention provides similar, and even more
protective, guarantees, including fair trial protections to“protected persons.” “Protected persons” under the
Fourth Convention include all those “in the hands of a
Party to the conflict” who are not prisoners of war or
wounded or sick.
59This includes not only civilian
bystanders to the conflict, but even those individuals
who may be “definitely suspected of or engaged in activ-ities hostile to the security of the State.”
60
Article 17 of the Third Convention illustrates how par-ties to the Convention intended to ensure a baseline ofhumane treatment for all persons even during times ofinternational armed conflict. While Article 17 limits themanner and extent of interrogations of prisoners ofwar,
61it does not prohibit interrogation altogether.
Rather, Article 17 forbids the use of “physical or mentaltorture” and “any other form of coercion” to secure“information of any kind whatever.”
62A country detain-
ing prisoners of war is prohibited from threatening,insulting, or exposing to unpleasant or disadvantageoustreatment of any kind “prisoners of war who refuse toanswer” questions.
63
In addition to restricting the treatment of prisoners dur-
ing interrogations, the Geneva Conventions obligate theU.S. to provide humane conditions of confinement. Themajority of Third Convention provisions (such as Article17) apply technically only to prisoners of war.
The provisions of the Fourth Convention, however,
cover all other persons who may be captured during anarmed conflict and provide even greater protections.Common Article 3 (CA3) (so-called because it is com-
mon to all four Geneva Conventions) establishes a base-line of humane treatment for prisoners, civilians, andthe sick and wounded seized during any form of armedconflict involving state or nonstate actors.
64CA3 pro-
tects all persons, no matter who they are, to ensure theyare treated humanely. It prohibits:
• violence to life and person, in particular murder of all
kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;
• outrages upon personal dignity, in particular, humiliat-
ing and degrading treatment;
• the passing of sentences and the carrying out of execu-
tions without previous judgment pronounced by a reg-ularly constituted court affording all the judicialguarantees which are recognized as indispensable bycivilized peoples.
65
Finally, CA3 requires that the “wounded and sick shall
be collected and cared for...”66
Along with the safeguards embodied in the GenevaConventions, the Guantánamo prisoners, like other cap-tured prisoners, are the beneficiaries of the protectionsof all other international human rights treaties to whichthe United States is a signatory,
67as well as the protec-
tions of customary international law.
The decision to abandon the Geneva Conventions and
other international legal requirements represented anunprecedented break with prior U.S. military policy. Inprevious armed conflicts, even those involving uncon-ventional enemies, the U.S. military adhered to the
Geneva Conventions, even when it had evidence that its
adversaries were abusing captured U.S. soldiers.
68The
United States did so on the principle that it should lead
through moral example as well as military might andthat it was putting its own soldiers in jeopardy by doingotherwise.
B. The Army Field Manual
Since 1949, when the current version of the
Conventions was adopted, the U.S. military has con-ducted its activities in accord with the Conventions. Formany years, the Army’s Field Manual 34-52 (FM 34-52)governing interrogations has been consistent withGeneva’s prohibitions on torture and degrading treat-
ment.
69
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         11The interrogation techniques outlined in the current
FM 34-52 are all psychological, not physical, methodsthat focus on developing an emotional rapport with theprisoner. Permissible techniques include:
• Incentive Approach. Giving and taking comfort
items. 
• Emotional Approach. Divining
and playing upon the dominantemotions motivating a prisoner. 
• Fear-Up Approach. Exploitation
of a prisoner’s preexisting fear.May take “harsh” (“usually a
dead-end”) or “mild” forms.
70
• Fear-Down Approach. Calming
the prisoner and assuring him hewill be properly and humanelytreated . . . . “When used with a soothing, calm toneof voice, this often creates rapport and usually nothingelse is needed to get the source to cooperate.”
71
• Pride and Ego Approach. Goading or flattering. 
• Futility. Convincing the source that resistance is futile,
and that everyone “talks sooner or later.” Most effec-tive when playing on doubts already in source’smind.
72
FM 34-52 prohibits the use of force.73Indeed, Army
interrogation experts “view the use of force as an inferiortechnique that yields information of questionable quali-ty.”
74
FM 34-52 instructs U.S. personnel to consider two teststo determine whether an interrogation technique is per-missible:
• Given all the surrounding facts and circum-
stances, would a reasonable person in the placeof the person being interrogated believe thathis rights, as guaranteed under both internation-al and US law, are being violated or withheld,or will be violated or withheld if he fails tocooperate.
• If your contemplated actions were perpetrated
by the enemy against US POWs, you would
believe such actions violate international orUS law.FM 34-52 then instructs: “If you answer yes to either
of these tests, do not engage in the contemplatedaction.”
75
The decision to abandon the Geneva Conventions anddesignate the prisoners as “enemy combatants” – ratherthan conducting the legally required GenevaConvention hearings to identify any prisoners of war
and release noncombatants –enabled DoD to evade the FieldManual’s stringent standards. The
rules of engagement in
Guantánamo for interrogating
alleged enemy combatants aredeliberately vague, go beyond thetime and battle-tested standards ofthe Field Manual, and, as a result,contribute not only to confusion
on the ground but to the sanctioning of abusive meth-ods of prisoner treatment.
76By rejecting the Geneva
Conventions and other protections, the United Statessought to exempt itself from any limits on interrogationmethods for individuals detained in the “war on terror-ism.”
The U.S. government’s efforts to avoid its Geneva obli-
gations continue.
For over a year, DoD has been drafting a new Army
Field Manual modifying instructions for prisoner inter-
rogations. DoD recently stated that the new Field
Manual would omit a key tenet of the Geneva
Convention that explicitly bans “humiliating anddegrading treatment.” DoD has acknowledged that theState Department as well as a number of senators and
senior generals vehemently oppose the change,
77observ-
ing that the proposed standards of treatment in the newField Manual would violate the anti-torture protections
advanced by Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) last year andcodified in The Detainee T reatment Act of 2005. Theseconcerns have led to delay in publication of the newmanual; as of this writing, it has not yet been issued.
As this report goes to press, the U.S. government has
indicated that it is finalizing revisions to the FieldManual. 
12 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba[T]he proposed standards
of treatment in the new
Field Manual would
violate the anti-torture
protections advanced by
Sen. John McCainMr. Omar Deghayes, a prisoner from Libya, recounts an
incident of abuse he witnessed: At the end of 2004, [anoth-er prisoner] was in my block, and he refused to give backhis paper plate as a minor protest over something. Five[military guards] came in on him and three kneed him inthe stomach until they had knocked him to the floor. Thisruptured his stomach and he suffered constant and increas-
ing pain.
He asked for medical care for several months. Finally, on
May 7, 2005, he saw a doctor, who said his situation was
very dangerous. He has to undergo an operation as a result
of this. He was kept at the hospital for only two days, andthen returned to Camp V. We have heard his screams ofpain whenever he uses the toilet.
One day he collapsed in his cell, and so
we felt forced to conduct a joint protest
on his behalf. Part of his problem isthat he does not speak English, so thatwhen he needs help, and when theMPs finally respond to his cries, theysay that there is no translator. It iscruel. Finally, we were able to pressurethe military into taking him back tothe clinic. As they took him to the clinic, he was crying outin pain, and the guards – sad to say – were laughing at him.When he came back, he was put in the cell across from me,so I would hear each time he called for help from the MPs.The MPs often refuse to respond to him, walking directly byhis cell. Last week [June 2005], he collapsed in his cell againand they took him back to the clinic. . . .
Beating him so badly was, in the first place, a vicious act for
so minor a rule violation – a rule violation committed bysomeone who is being held without being proven guilty ofany crime. He has received permanent injury from this.
78
C. Avoiding Liability Under the War
Crimes Act
Parties to the Geneva Conventions are required to crimi-
nalize “grave breaches” of the Conventions through theirdomestic laws, which the United States did by enacting18 U.S.C. § 2441, the War Crimes Act.
79The War
Crimes Act makes it a war crime to commit a “grave”
breach of the Conventions.80“Grave breaches” of the
Third Geneva Convention are defined as:Willful killing, torture or inhuman treatment, includ-
ing biological experiments, willfully causing great suf-fering or serious injury to body or health, compellinga prisoner of war to serve in the forces of the hostilePower; or willfully depriving a prisoner of war of the
rights of fair and regular trial prescribed in thisConvention.
81
The War Crimes Act also makes it a war crime toviolate CA3.
82
From the outset, the Department of Justice was con-
cerned that Administration officials could be chargedwith violations of the War Crimes Act for carrying outgovernment actions for the “war on terrorism” andlooked for ways to avoid the reach of the Geneva
Conventions.
If a determination is made that
Afghanistan was a failed State . . .and not a party to the [GenevaConvention III] treaty, variouslegal risks of liability, litigation,and criminal prosecution are mini-mized. . . . Thus, a Presidentialdetermination against [Geneva
Convention III] treaty applicability would provide thehighest assurance that no court would subsequently enter-tain charges that American military officers, intelligenceofficials, or law enforcement officials violated GenevaConvention rules relating to field conduct, detention con-duct or interrogation of detainees. The War Crimes Act of1996 makes violation of parts of the Geneva Convention acrime in the U.S.
Letter from Attorney General John Ashcroft to President
George W. Bush (Feb. 1, 2002).
83
Other Presidential legal advisors offered similar advice.84
Based on those recommendations, on February 7, 2002,
President Bush issued a memorandum exempting alleged
members of al Qaeda from all Geneva Convention pro-tections.
85President Bush determined that “none of the
provisions of Geneva apply to our conflict with al Qaedain Afghanistan or elsewhere throughout the world,” andspecifically concluded that al Qaeda detainees “do notqualify as prisoners of war” and are not protected byCA3.
86While confirming that the Geneva Conventions
applied to the U.S. conflict with the Taliban in
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         13“As they took him to the
clinic, he was crying out
in pain, and the guards –
sad to say – were
laughing at him. ” Afghanistan, President Bush nevertheless found that
CA3 also did not apply to Taliban detainees, and that“Taliban detainees are unlawful combatants,” therefore
not qualifying as “prisoners of war under Article 4 ofGeneva.”
87  As William H. Taft IV, former Legal Advisor,
Department of State, commented last year at a confer-
ence on the Geneva Conventions, the conclusions inthese memoranda “unhinged those responsible for thetreatment of the detainees in Guantánamo from thelegal guidelines for interrogation of detainees reflected inthe Conventions and embodied in the Army FieldManual for decades.”
88These conclusions, Taft asserted,
created the conditions for abusive interrogations by plac-ing prisoners (and thus their captors) outside the law.
89
According to former General Counsel of the Navy
Alberto J. Mora, the interrogation techniques permittedat Guantánamo rose to the level of torture.
90
On June 29, 2006, the Supreme Court decided the
question of CA3’s applicability to alleged members of alQaeda in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , a case challenging the
legality of the military commissions established byPresident Bush to try prisoners accused of war crimes in
the war on terror.
91Rejecting the Administration’s deter-
mination, the Supreme Court ruled that CA3 applies toprisoners detained in the conflict with al Qaeda. Thesignificance of the Court’s ruling on this and the otherissues on review in Hamdan cannot be overstated; com-
menting on the decision, former U.S. Solicitor GeneralWalter Dellinger stated, "[t]wo years ago I [said] that the
court's 2004 enemy combatant cases were historic. Andthey were. But not like today's. Hamdan is simply the
most important decision on presidential power and therule of law ever. Ever."
92This is so, in large part, because
the Court’s CA3 ruling confirms the unlawfulness of theU.S. government’s use of torture, cruel, humiliating anddegrading treatment—all prohibited by CA3—onGuantanamo prisoners, and recognizes that binding
international law places a limit on the President’s poweras Commander in Chief with respect to the treatment ofwar prisoners. Importantly, the ruling opens the door tocriminal prosecutions under the War Crimes Act ofthose who participated in such conduct.
III. TORTURE AND CRUEL, INHUMAN, AND
DEGRADING TREATMENT REPORTED ATGUANTÁNAMO
A. The Prison Camps
The chillingly-named Camp X-Ray exemplified a prison
where every aspect of a prisoners’ life was under closeobservation. A temporary camp set up until more per-manent facilities could be erected, Camp X-Ray housedprisoners, from January – April 2002, in cages (wiremesh units, with wood/metal covers and concretefloors). Without privacy, these units exposed prisoners tothe elements and to the scorpions, spiders, and bananarats that populate the island.
93
More permanent facilities for prisoners were soon built,
and, in April 2002, prisoners moved into the first build-ings at Camp Delta. Camp Delta is referred to informal-ly as “the Wire,” owing to the lengths of chain link fenceand concertina that surround it.
94At the camp’s main
gate stands a 4 x 8 foot sign, displaying the words:“Honor Bound to Defend Freedom.”
95
The actual physical layout of Camp Delta is not easy toascertain because access is tightly controlled by the mili-tary and its public affairs staff.
96What seems clear is that
Camp Delta includes five different facilities, numberingOne through Five, with the numbers based on the order
in which the camps were built.
97Together, Camps One
to Five have a capacity of over 1000.98
Camp Echo is a separate camp where a small number ofprisoners designated for military commissions once were
14 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba
housed. It has a series of small huts
with two isolation units in eachhut. The units consist of a smallcell containing a steel bed, toilet,and sink with a shower attached tothe cell. The cells are subject to 24-hour video surveillance. A small slitwindow and air conditioning werenot added until the middle of2004. When attorneys began meet-ing with clients at the base andraised objections to the impact ofthese severe isolation conditions onthe prisoners, the military movedthose prisoners out of Camp Echoand into a special block in CampDelta.
99Camp Echo continues to
be used for attorney-client meet-ings.
100
Camp Iguana has held juveniles101and, as of June 2006,
currently houses a few prisoners who DoD has admittedare not enemy combatants.
102
Camp Five, a separate state-of-the-art maximum securityfacility, comprises four wings of two stories, with 12 to14 isolation cells each. Camp Five supervision is con-ducted from “a raised, glass-enclosed centralized controlcenter that sits in the middle of the facility, giving theMPs a clear line of sight into both stories of eachwing.”
103Army National Guard Maj. Todd Berger calls
it “the nerve center of the camp.” It contains touch-screen computers that monitor and control all prisonermovement.
98The DoD claims that Camp Five houses
prisoners deemed of greatest intelligence value.105Most
continuing allegations of abuse involve prisoners housedin Camp Five.DoD is constructing an additional,
reportedly permanent prison struc-
ture called Camp Six. 
B. Types of Torture and
Abuse
Prisoners in Guantánamo have
reported being exposed to extraor-
dinary psychological and physicalabuse. In addition to abusive inter-rogation practices, prisoners report
harsh disciplinary measures. Thesereports have been corroborated by
military and news accounts. TheUnited States has systematically
applied the following techniquesto prisoners, in connection withinterrogation and disciplinary
measures, and in the context of conditions of arbitraryconfinement and detention.
FBI Observations at Guantánamo, Fall 2002
1. An FBI agent witnessed a female interrogator “appar-ently whispering in the detainee’s ear, and caressing andapplying lotion to his arms (this was during Ramadanwhen physical contact with a woman would have beenparticularly offensive to a Moslim [sic] male. On morethan one occasion the detainee appeared to be grimacingin pain.” The view of the agent was obscured by a cur-tain fixed by duct tape at the request of the interrogator,over a two-way observation mirror. The agent watched
the encounter through the surveillance camera and wasgiven to understand by a marine that the female inter-rogator had grabbed the detainee’s genitals and bent
back his thumbs. The marine then “implied that hertreatment of that detainee was less harsh than her treat-ment of others by indicating that he had seen her treat-ment of other detainees result in detainees curling into afetal position on the floor and crying in pain. . .”
2. “In September or October of 2002 FBI agents
observed that a canine was used in an aggressive mannerto intimidate detainee [redacted] and, in November2002, FBI agents observed Detainee [redacted] after hehad been subjected to intense isolation for over threemonths. During that time period, [redacted] was totallyisolated (with the exception of occasional interrogations)
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         15“The female interrogator
had grabbed the
detainee’s genitals and
bent back his thumbs.
The marine then ‘implied
that her treatment of that
detainee was less harsh
than her treatment of
others by indicating that
he had seen her
treatment of other
detainees result in
detainees curling into a
fetal position on the floor
and crying in pain. . . ’”
in a cell that was always flooded with light. By late
November, the detainee was evidencing behavior consis-
tent with extreme psychological trauma (talking to non-existent people, reporting hearing voices, crouching in acorner of the cell covered with a sheet for hours onend).”
Letter from T . J. Harrington, Deputy Assistant
Director, FBI Counterterrorism Division toMajor General Donald J. Ryder, Departmentof the Army, Criminal InvestigationCommand, July 14, 2004.
106
Mohammed al-Qahtani’s interrogation log indicates
that, after the period of isolation described, he was sub-ject to fifty days of interrogation involving severe sleepdeprivation, solitary confinement, sexual assault, physi-cal stress, and threats.
107
1. Psychological Abuse
Psychological abuse includes soli-
tary confinement, light and soundmanipulation, exposure to the ele-ments and to temperatureextremes (arguably also physicalabuse), sleep deprivation, andthreats of transfer for torture inanother country. Though govern-ment memoranda rarely commenton the rationale for these tech-niques, the CIA’s notoriousKUBARK manual on counterintel-ligence interrogation suggests suchtechniques are able to induceregression, psychic disintegration,
and feelings of helplessness thatlower prisoners’ defenses, goalswhich are consistent with themanipulation of the torturevictim.
108
There are a variety of accounts –not only from the prisoners them-selves, but also from governmentdocuments disclosed throughFOIA and statements by formergovernment personnel – indicatingthat psychological abuse atGuantánamo is unremitting andhas resulted in extraordinary damage to prisoners’ men-
tal health.
109
In the first year and a half after the prison opened,
eighteen individuals engaged in twenty-eight suicideattempts.
110Based on official U.S. government state-
ments that have not been independently verified, in2003 alone, there were 350 acts of “self-harm,” includ-ing 120 “hanging gestures.”
111In August 2003, a mass
suicide attempt took place in which twenty-three prison-ers tried to take their lives.
112Since that time, reports of
prisoner suicide attempts have grown.
On October 8, 2005, during a visit with his attorney,
Juma Al Dossari asked to use the bathroom. After a few
moments, his attorney opened the door to check on hisclient (after hearing the toilet flush). He saw Mr. Al
Dossari hanging by his neck from
the upper part of the mesh wallthat separates the cell area from themeeting area. He had cut his armand was bleeding. When Mr. AlDossari was unresponsive, his
lawyer called for help. Mr. AlDossari was taken by military per-
sonnel to a hospital atGuantánamo. Mr. Al Dossari sur-
vived this attempt and has sincebeen placed under close surveil-
lance.
113
On June 10, 2006, three prisoners
were found dead in their cells. The
DoD described the deaths as sui-
cides, and the incident is currentlyunder investigation by the NavyCriminal Investigative Services. At
the time of this writing, an inde-pendent investigation had notbegun. 
Solitary Confinement. As report-
ed by Physicians for HumanRights, individuals exposed to iso-lation for the first time develop a“predictable group of symptoms,”
including “bewilderment, anxiety,frustration, dejection, boredom,
16 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaAs reported by Physicians
for Human Rights,
individuals exposed to
isolation for the first time
develop a “predictable
group of symptoms, ”
including “bewilderment,
anxiety, frustration,
dejection, boredom,
obsessive thoughts or
ruminations, depression,
and, in some cases,
hallucination. ”Based on official U.S.
government statements
that have not been
independently verified, in
2003 alone, there were
350 acts of “self-harm, ”
including 120 “hanging
gestures. ”obsessive thoughts or ruminations,
depression, and, in some cases,hallucination.”
114Several 
Guantánamo prisoners have
reported being held in solitary
confinement for long periods,sometimes in excess of one year.
• As of February 2004, Shaker
Abdur-Raheem Aamer had
spent eight months in solitaryconfinement.
115
• Feroz Abbasi spent more than
a year in solitary confinementin Camp Echo; while atGuantánamo, he has tried to
kill himself. 
116
• David Hicks was in solitary
for almost a year in CampEcho.
117
• As of late 2005, Mr. Al
Murbati had been held in iso-
lation in Camp Five sinceapproximately May 2004.
118
• As of late 2005, Mr. Al
Dossari had been held in iso-
lation in Camp Delta, IndiaBlock, and Camp Five since
early 2004.
119
• Saber Lahmar and Belkacem
Bensayah each were held in an
isolation cell in Camp Fivefrom August 2004 until midOctober 2005. Both suffered
visual deterioration and psychological traumaas a result.
120
Perhaps the most egregious example is Moazzam Begg,
who has stated that he was detained for a year inBagram Air Force base in Afghanistan, where he was
deprived of all natural light.
121He then was transferred
to Guantánamo, where he was kept in solitary confine-ment for more than a year at Camp Echo.
122Asif Iqbal
reports that he was put in isolation for writing “have a
nice day” on a polystyrene cup because it was deemed tobe “malicious damage to U.S. gov-
ernment property.”123Among the
other prisoners reporting solitaryconfinement are Mr. Latif, Mr.Alikhil, Mr. Haji, Mr. Sahgir, Mr.Ait Idir, Mr. Lahmar, and Mr.Boumediene.
Light and Sound Manipulation.
Othman Abdulraheem
Mohammad has lived under fluo-
rescent lights twenty-four hours a
day for the last three years. Everymorning he wakes up with eyepain and dizziness.
124Belkacem
Bensayah lived under similar con-
ditions for seventeen straightmonths and can no longer look atanything for long because he seesblack spots.
125Mustafa Ait Idir was
kept in isolation for two months,during which time the lights wereeither kept at maximum intensity,even during the night, or (occa-sionally and briefly) turned offcompletely.
126Loud music is often
blared during interrogation.127Mr.
Abbasi, Mr. Al Harith, Mr.
Uthman, Mr. Begg, Mr. Al Marri,
Mr. Khan, and Mr. El-Meki areamong the other prisoners thathave experienced this form of mis-treatment.
Exposure and Temperature
Extremes. Cells are often kept
extremely hot or cold and prison-
ers are not given more than a single blanket at night.Saber Lahmar’s room was so cold on one occasion that
ice formed on the vents.
128Jamal Al Harith recalled
sleeping under a metal bed to try and protect himselffrom the cold air blowing in.
129Mustafa Ait Idir was left
shackled in a room with the air conditioning on veryhigh for 5 or 6 hours, exacerbating a kidney ailment hewas known to have. He was then placed in a solid steelisolation cell (“very cold”), and his sleeping pad wastaken away because he refused to cooperate with inter-
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         17Several Guantánamo
prisoners have reported
being held in solitary
confinement for long
periods, sometimes in
excess of one year . . .
Mr. Al Dossari has been
held in isolation in Camp
Delta, India Block, and
Camp Five since early
2004.
Asif Iqbal reports that he
was put in isolation for
writing “have a nice day”
on a polystyrene cup
because it was deemed
to be “malicious damage
to U.S. government
property. ” 
Othman Abdulraheem
Mohammad has lived
under fluorescent lights
twenty-four hours a day
for the last three years.rogators.130The juvenile O.K.
spent a month in isolation in aroom “like a refrigerator.”
131An
FBI interrogator has documentedthe use of cold temperatures andsleep deprivation by militaryguards:
On a couple of occasions, I entered interview rooms to find
a detainee chained hand and foot in a fetal position to thefloor, with no chair, food, or water. Most times they hadurinated or defecated on themselves, and had been left therefor 18, 24 hours or more. On one occassion [sic], the airconditioning had been turned down so far and the temper-ature was so cold in the room, that the barefooted detaineewas shaking with cold. When I askedthe MP’s what was going on, I wastold that interrogators from the dayprior had ordered this treatment,and the detainee was not to bemoved. On another occasion, theA/C had been turned off, making thetemperature in the unventilatedroom probably well over 100 degrees.
The detainee was almost unconsciouson the floor, with a pile of hair nextto him. He had apparently been lit-erally pulling his own hair outthroughout the night.
132
Other prisoners exposed to temper-
ature extremes are John Doe 1(Afghani), Mr. Ahmed, Mr.Ahmad, Mr. Hassan, Mr. Boudella,Mr. Lamar, Mr. Kurnaz, twelveKuwaiti prisoners, and Mr. Rasul.
Sleep Deprivation. Sleep deprivation causes deteriora-
tion in cognitive abilities, including “impairments inmemory, learning, logical reasoning, arithmetic skills,complex verbal processing, and decision making.”
133It
has been used as a frequent tactic to disorient and men-tally weaken prisoners at Guantánamo.
Prisoners have reported that they are prevented from
sleeping by loud noises, fans, soldiers making bangingnoises, and even being moved from cell to cell or toother locations in the camp. When he first arrived atGuantánamo, Belkacem Bensayah
was forced to get up and walk, andfrequently moved from cell to cellduring the night, at 30-minuteintervals for a two-month period,which completely prevented himfrom sleeping.
134Lakhdar
Boumediene was deprived of sleep
for 13 days during an intense interrogation period inearly 2002.
135During his first month at Guantánamo,
soldiers would wake Mohamed Nechla every hour andforce him to place his shoes, brush, and soap in a certainorder along the side of his cage. An hour later, theywould force him to line up the shoes, brush, and soap ina new order. This would continue all night and was
designed to prevent him fromsleeping. At times, instead ofreordering the position of his
shoes, brush, and soap, he wasordered to leave his cell while itwas searched.
136Saber Lahmar
reported similar conduct over a
period of several weeks. Perhapsone of the most severe examples ofsleep deprivation is that ofMohammed Al-Qahtani who, pur-
suant to a special “interrogationplan” approved by Secretary ofDefense Donald Rumsfeld,
137was
subjected to fifty days of sleepdeprivation. Except for one dayduring this period, Mr. Al-Qahtaniwas permitted to sleep no morethan four hours a day between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. Other prisoners whoreport experiencing sleep deprivation include Mr. Hicks,
Mr. Abbasi, Mr. Habib, Mr. Esmail, and Mr. Abd al-Malik al-Wahab.
Threatened with Transfer to Another Country, for
Torture. Interrogators have threatened to transfer pris-
oners to countries where torture is routinely practiced tointimidate prisoners into cooperating or to induce “con-fessions.” The juvenile O.K. stated that interrogatorsthreatened to send him to Egypt, Israel, Jordan, or Syriaif he did not cooperate.
138Mr. Al Murbati stated he was
told by an interrogator that if he did not cooperate he
18 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaLakhdar Boumediene was
deprived of sleep for 13
days during an intense
interrogation period in
early 2002.
Mohammed Al-Qahtani
[ ], pursuant to a special
“interrogation plan”
approved by Secretary of
Defense Donald
Rumsfeld, was subjected
to fifty days of sleep
deprivation.
Except for one day during
this period, Mr. Al-Qahtani
was permitted to sleep
no more than four hours a
day.would be transferred back to
Bahrain to be imprisoned or sent
to Saudi Arabia where “they haveno mercy.”
139Mr. Boumediene
reported that on one occasion, he
was choked by a Jordanian inter-rogator who then threatened to
send Mr. Boumediene to Jordanwhere they could “make [him]talk.”
140
Within a few days of arriving at
Guantánamo, two older interrogators
dressed in civilian clothing showedMr. Al Murbati a document. Theinterrogators told Mr. Al Murbatithat the document was a transcrip-tion of an audiotape made of a high-ranking al Qaeda member from Kuwait that described
potential targets. The interrogators asked Mr. Al Murbatiwhere the next attack would occur. When Mr. Al Murbatiwas unable to respond he was put in solitary confinementand threatened with a transfer to Egypt where, he was told,he would be tortured.
Typically, Mr. Al Murbati’s interrogations in Camp Delta
were conducted from approximately 6 a.m. until 4 p.m., or
from 10 p.m. until 4 a.m. For the entirety of most sessions,Mr. Al Murbati was made to sit on the floor with hisankles shackled to the floor and with his hands pulledunder his legs and also shackled tothe floor.
During certain interrogations, the air
conditioning was set very high, mak-ing the interrogation room quite cold.At other times, there would be no air
conditioning, making the interroga-tion room very hot.
On multiple occasions, the floor of
the interrogation room had beentreated by what appeared to be amixture of water and a powerfulcleaning agent. This mixture would be thrown on Mr. AlMurbati’s face and body, causing great irritation. Because
he would be shackled when this occurred, Mr. Al Murbatiwas unable to do anything to alleviate the irritation.Especially when the air conditioning
was turned off, the cleaning agentthat was put on the floor wouldmake breathing difficult. The clean-ing agent also caused mucous dis-charges from Mr. Al Murbati’s nose.
Several days after a contentious
interrogation, Mr. Al Murbati wastaken from Camp Three to CampOne. There, in an interrogation
room, he was shackled to the floor by
his hands and feet, with his handspulled underneath his legs. Forapproximately 12 hours, very loudmusic and white noise was playedthrough six speakers arranged closeto Mr. Al Murbati’s head.
This technique was used on multiple other occasions as
well, most of which occurred in or around Ramadan 2003
(October and November). In certain sessions, multipleflashing strobe lights were used as well; these lights were sostrong that Mr. Al Murbati had to keep his eyes closed. Theinterrogation rooms were always cold when the music andstrobe lights were employed. Generally, Mr. Al Murbati wasnot asked any specific questions during these sessions,although sometimes he was told that he needed to cooperategenerally.
When Mr. Al Murbati was not in the interrogation room
during this period, he was movedfrom cell to cell ..., typically on anhourly basis. As such, Mr. AlMurbati was never able to sleep for
more than short periods even whennot in the interrogation rooms. Mr.Al Murbati knows of at least one
other detainee (Faruk el Meki, aSaudi) who was subjected to similar
treatment with respect to the use ofmusic in the interrogation room andfrequent moves among cells.
At other times, when Mr. Al Murbati was shackled and
facing away from the door, someone would enter the roomquietly and then blow a very loud horn in Mr. AlMurbati’s ear.
141
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         19“There, in an
interrogation room, he
was shackled to the floor
by his hands and feet,
with his hands pulled
underneath his legs. For
approximately 12 hours,
very loud music and
white noise was played
through six speakers
arranged close to Mr. Al
Murbati’s head. ”
2. Physical Abuse
Numerous reports of extreme physical abuse have
emerged from Guantánamo. Physical abuse is oftenmeted out systematically by the specially trained“Immediate Reaction Force” (IRF); at other times, sol-diers have beaten prisoners for no apparent reason or inconnection with an alleged violation of a camp discipli-nary rule. Some prisoners have sustained permanentphysical injury as a result. 
Physical Beatings. Beatings are the most frequently
reported form of mistreatment, with many prisoners
providing details of such physical mistreatment.Prisoners assert that pretexts for physical punishment are
frequently devised. Mr. Al-Harith said prisoners hadbeen punished for keeping six packets of salt in their cellinstead of five and for hanging their towels throughtheir cages when they weren’t wet.
142
Military reports admit that many prisoners have been
thrown or dropped on the ground or thrown againstwalls.
143Several prisoners report that assailants jumped
on their backs or shoved their heads into hard surfaceswhile they were incapacitated and lying on theground.
144For example, Yasein Khasem Mohammed
Esmail claims that when he arrived in Guantánamo,while he was still shackled, he was thrown into the airand allowed to fall to the ground. When he lay on theground, soldiers stomped on him.
145A group of soldiers
sprayed Mr. al-Wahab with “disorienting gas,” burst inhis cell, handcuffed him, pulled him out of his cell, andpushed and rubbed his head against concrete until helost consciousness.
146Mustafa Ait Idir sat down on the
floor when guards, angry because he had asked to see anofficer, told him to; the vindictive guards tied his handsbehind his back, picked him up and banged his bodyand head into the side of his steel bunk. They threw himdown and pounded his head into the floor.
147
Many other prisoners describe frequent and vicious beat-
ings. Lakhdar Boumediene described several occasions inearly 2002 when guards returned him to his cell follow-ing interrogation, grabbed him under his armpits, liftedhim up, and threw him to his cage floor repeatedlywhile his wrists were shackled to his waist and his feetwere shackled to an anchor in the floor of his cage.
148
Mr. Boumediene also stated that on one occasion, a sol-
dier pushed him to the ground, put his knee behind Mr.Boumediene’s knee, and ground Mr. Boumediene’s knee
into the floor. He now has a scar he attributes to thatbeating.
149
Sami Al-Laithi, a pro-democracy English teacher who
was determined to be “no longer an enemy combatant”on May 10, 2005, and was later released, is now con-fined to a wheelchair as a result of beatings by the U.S.military.
Sami Al-Laithi was a teacher at Kabul University. He
taught Arabic and English. Mr. Al-Laithi spent 17 yearsteaching English in Pakistan and Afghanistan, believingthat he was helping the cause of the U.S. He has never beenan opponent of the U.S., but says he has “always believedin U.S. ideology” of democracy and rule of law. 
Mr. Al-Laithi is not, and never has been, an Islamic
extremist. He was interested only in teaching and in play-ing football. He opposed the T aliban, because he believes indemocracy, freedom, and open elections. These are the samereasons for his consistent opposition to the repressive regime
of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
As a result of his criticism of the Mubarak regime, he was
pursued by Egyptian agents intent on kidnapping or mur-dering him. He then fled to Pakistan and Afghanistanwhere he has lived and worked for 17 years.
150
Though a healthy man when taken into U.S. custody, Mr.Al-Laithi is now confined to a wheelchair with two broken
vertebrae. He attributes his current infirmity to severe beat-
ings that he received soon after arriving at GTMO.
“Once they stomped my back,” Al-Laithi wrote [in an affi-
davit filed recently with the district court]. “An MP threwme on the floor, and they lifted me up and slammed meback down. A doctor said I have two broken vertebrae andI risk being paralyzed if the spinal cord is injured more.”
151
Al-Laithi said his neck is also permanently damaged
because IRF teams repeatedly forced him to bend overtoward his knees. While many prisoners have had theiranuses probed during strip searches, Mr. Al-Laithi alsoalleges that the military forced a large object into his anuson the pretext of doing a medical exam.
“I am in constant pain,” he continued. “I would prefer to
be buried alive than continue to receive the treatment Ireceive. At least I would suffer less and die.” 
152
20 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaA military spokesperson indicates that the military takes no
responsibility for Mr. Al-Laithi’s condition, saying that the
fractured vertebrae are the result of a degenerative disease.153
Short-Shackling and Stress Positions. Short-shackling –
a very painful technique in which a prisoner’s arms andlegs are shackled together and to the ground, forcing himinto a stooped position, often for many hours at a time –was routinely employed at Guantánamo until April 2003,but sporadic reports of its use persist. Reports of short-shackling include the following: Abdullah Majed SayyahHassan Al Noaimi was shackled for hours in a room that
had been made frigid by an air conditioner.
154Tarek
Dergoul was short shackled in an interrogation room
alone for eight hours and eventually urinated on him-self.
155Shafiq Rasul was also left short shackled for long
periods of time and would often miss meals andprayers.156Murat Kurnaz was short shackled to the floor
for almost 24 hours and forced to urinate on himself.157
As a result of being held in stress positions for extendedperiods of time in short-shackles or other restraints, pris-oners have reported suffering from permanent back,knee, and other joint injuries.
158
The Immediate Reaction Force (IRF). Some of the
most severe physical abuse reported at Guantánamo isattributed to the IRF .
159Comparable to a riot squad, the
IRF functions as a disciplinary force within the camps.As documented by the former military intelligence lin-guist, Sergeant Eric Saar, military police (MP) rotate onand off IRF duty and may not always be trained ade-quately for the job.
160MPs carry Plexiglas shields and
frequently use tear gas or pepper spray. Though domes-
tic and international law forbid the use ofphysical force to punish, rather than restrain,prisoners, Guantánamo prisoners are fre-quently IRF’d as punishment.
161Because of
the acronym IRF , “being IRF’d” isGuantánamo-speak for being beaten by a
group of military guards.
162
These incidents are usually videotaped, butthe U.S. military has closely guarded thetapes and so far asserts they are exempt fromFOIA review.
163However, in June 2004, the
U.S. Southern Command issued a shortreport after viewing 20 of 500 hours of then-
available IRF videos. The report concludedthat the tapes raised questions about abuseand misconduct. In one video, the IRFpunched a prisoner “on an area of his bodythat seemingly would be inconsistent withstriking a pressure point.” In another, an IRFguard repeatedly sprayed pepper spray on aprisoner and taunted him. In a third, guardstied a prisoner to a gurney for interroga-tion.
164
Mr. Al Dossari returned to his cell and saw thatthe few items that had been in his cell had beenremoved. The MP on duty, named Webster,
pushed him to the ground of the cell and cursed athim. Mr. Al Dossari yelled in response. The MPcalled for the Immediate Reaction Force (IRF).
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         21
DoD internal investigation memorandumWhen the IRF team arrived, it
found Mr. Al Dossari lying on hisstomach with his hands on his back.
Nonetheless, an MP named Smith
burst into the cage and jumped onMr. Al Dossari’s back wearing fullriot gear. According to otherdetainees who viewed this incident,Smith weighed approximately 240
pounds. At least two other men heldMr. Al Dossari by the legs. MPSmith began to choke him with his
hands, while another repeatedly hithis head on the floor. While beingbeaten, Mr. Al Dossari lost con-sciousness.
Former Guantánamo detainees from
the United Kingdom who witnessedthe incident later told Mr. AlDossari that the IRF team held his
face on display for the video cameraafter he had lost consciousness.
When the cage was hosed down later,
the water ran red with blood. Mr.Al Dossari later asked Smith why
Smith had beaten him. Smith
replied, “because I’m Christian.”
165
The force used by the IRF is illus-
trated by an injury sustained by anAmerican soldier who was orderedto act as a prisoner in a “training”exercise. Because the guardsbelieved they were restraining anactual prisoner, not a U.S. soldier,they used the force regularly usedagainst prisoners, slamming thesoldier’s head into the floor andgrinding his temple into the steel.He suffered a traumatic brain
injury and now has epilepsy, withup to 12 seizures a day. The U.S.military reports that the video ofthis episode is “missing.”
1663. Medical Abuse
Doctors’ Involvement in
Interrogations. Doctors and psy-
chologists have reportedly beenactively involved in abuse andinterrogation at Guantánamo. InJuly 2005, the New England
Journal of Medicine published a
report criticizing Guantánamo
medical personnel for violatingmedical ethics by sharing confi-dential medical records with inter-rogators.
167The report noted that,
while the “laws of war defer tomedical ethics,” the American mil-itary was requiring its medical per-sonnel, as a matter of policy, toviolate those ethics.
168For exam-
ple, the report documents thatmedical personnel shared prison-ers’ medical records with interroga-tors from the very beginning,though initially the ostensible pur-pose was to limit interrogationtechniques based on prisoners’health status. An August 6, 2002,DoD memorandum expressly
required military medical person-
nel at Guantánamo to breachpatient confidentiality and com-
municate medical information tonon-medical military personneland to volunteer information con-sidered of value.
169
Prisoners report that information
is the camp currency, and inter-rogators control access to medical
care based on prisoners’ level ofcooperation in interrogations.Othman Abdulraheem
Mohammad reported that he had
a rash on his back and was told itwould not be treated until hecooperated with interrogators.
170
22 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaThe force used by the IRF
is illustrated by an injury
sustained by an American
soldier who was ordered
to act as a prisoner in a
“training” exercise.
Because the guards
believed they were
restraining an actual
prisoner, not a U.S.
soldier, they used the
force regularly used
against prisoners,
slamming the soldier’s
head into the floor and
grinding his temple into
the steel. He suffered a
traumatic brain injury and
now has epilepsy, with up
to 12 seizures a day. The
U.S. military reports that
the video of this episode
is “missing. ”
In July 2005, the New
England Journal of
Medicine published a
report criticizing
Guantánamo medical
personnel for violating
medical ethics by sharing
confidential medical
records with
interrogators.Mr. Boumediene relayed that for an extended period,
every time he made a request, for example, for medica-tion, he was told to ask his inter-rogator. Interrogators controlled
his access to medical treatment,and access to that treatment wasgranted or denied based on theinterrogator’s assessment of hislevel of cooperation.
170
Medical records obtained in FOIA
litigation brought by counsel forthe Bosnian prisoners confirm thatmedical staff were sometimes pres-ent during prisoner interrogationsand authorized interrogations toproceed. On one occasion, Mr.Boumediene complained of stom-ach pain while being interrogated.Medical personnel entered the
interrogation room, examined Mr.Boumediene, and “cleared” him for“interrogation and all otherdetainee things.”
172Medical per-
sonnel monitored Mohammed alQahtani’s interrogation during a
period of nearly two months ofsevere sleep deprivation and physi-cal stress. At one point, they rushedhim to the base hospital when hisheart rate dropped dangerouslylow. After stabilizing him, theyreturned him for further interroga-
tion the following day.
173
Withholding Medical Care or
Conducting Unnecessary MedicalProcedures. The military has been
accused of withholding neededmedical care that has resulted inpermanent injuries and disabilities,in addition to furthering prisoners’pain or suffering. In other cases,prisoners have described doctors performing unnecessaryprocedures.
Even minor conditions, if neglected, can develop into
permanent or life-endangering illnesses, yet the UnitedStates, at times, has refused to provide necessary treat-
ment. Mr. Ruhel Ahmed, one of the British prisoners
who first called attention to abuseat Guantánamo, had a need forcorrective lenses because of an eyeproblem that, left untreated,would cause permanent damage.He did not receive the lenses for
one and a half years and, when hedid, he was not given solution torinse them.He now has permanentsevere damage to his eyes.
174
In other instances, prisoners have
reported that doctors forced, or
attempted to force, unnecessaryamputations.
175Omar Deghayes
describes how even prisoners whohave had limbs removed do notreceive the treatment they need.
The plight of the people who have
had limbs amputated is among thesaddest of the conditions of this ugly
camp. I have twice been housed nextto prisoners with prosthetic limbs. Itwas one of the most depressing expe-riences I have endured. The prisonerswere effectively blackmailed by their
interrogators who said that they hadto cooperate in order to get their pros-thetic devices back. They are deniedthe toilet chairs, the sticks they needto walk and even the cream theyneed to ensure that the wound willnot become infected and inflamed.The pain is apparently particularlygreat when they are denied the neces-sary prosthetic socks, so that thewounds are exposed to the extremecold of the cells.
176
BSCT Teams. In addition to par-
ticipation in medical abuse and neglect, psychiatrists andpsychologists also assisted in designing the extremeinterrogation techniques discussed above, as part of theBehavioral Science Consultation Team (BSCT, pro-
nounced “Biscuit”).
177In late 2002, BSCT was tasked
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         23Medical personnel
monitored Mohammed al
Qahtani’s interrogation
during a period of nearly
two months of severe
sleep deprivation and
physical stress. At one
point, they rushed him to
the base hospital when
his heart rate dropped
dangerously low. After
stabilizing him, they
returned him for further
interrogation the following
day.
“The prisoners were
effectively blackmailed by
their interrogators who
said that they had to
cooperate in order to get
their prosthetic devices
back. They are denied the
toilet chairs, the sticks
they need to walk and
even the cream they
need to ensure that the
wound will not become
infected and inflamed. ”with developing new strategies to
“improve” the productivity ofinterrogations. Other medical per-sonnel were apparently drawn intothe execution of these extremeinterrogation techniques. Mr. AitIdir observed that medical person-
nel also have played a role in disci-pline. If the guards claimed aprisoner had misbehaved, regardless of whether the alle-gation of misbehavior was true, a medical staff memberwould “determine” that the prisoner had “mental prob-lems.” After such a determination was made, everything,except underwear and the Qur’an, was removed fromthe cell as a way of punishing the prisoner.
178
Dr. Robert Jay Lifton, an authority on the participation
of doctors in torture, says of the role Guantánamo andAbu Ghraib doctors have played: “The doctors thus
brought a medical component to . . . an ‘atrocity-pro-ducing situation’ – one so structured, psychologicallyand militarily, that ordinary people can readily engage inatrocities. . . . [In such situations, t]he participation ofdoctors can confer an aura of legitimacy and can evencreate an illusion of therapy and healing.”
179
4. Sexual Provocation, Rape, and Harassment
Photographs of military personnel sexually abusing pris-
oners at Abu Ghraib published in 2004 sent shockwaves around the world. The use of sexual degradationand humiliation techniques was developed atGuantánamo and then exported to Iraq. Prisoners report
an alarming incidence of sexual abuse, particularly byinterrogators. Mr. Al Noaimi said that female MPs fre-quently searched him and other prisoners, touchingtheir bodies.
180An incident where a female interrogator
smeared fake menstrual blood on a prisoner has beenwidely reported in the press; the intent of this appallingtreatment was to make the prisoner feel so unclean thathe would not be able to pray.
181In many respects, this
abuse has both a particular religious as well as a sexualcomponent. After witnessing one such incident, formermilitary intelligence linguist Sergeant Saar relates that hesaid to himself:
Had someone come to me before I left for Gitmo
and told me that we would use women to sexuallytorment detainees in interrogations
to try to sever their relationshipwith God, I probably would havethought that sounded fine. And ifsomeone had spelled out for methe details of the interrogation Ihad just participated in, I probablywould have approved.
But I hated myself as I walked out of that room, even
though I was pretty sure we were talking to a piece ofshit in there. I felt as if I had lost something. We lostsomething. We lost the high road. We cashed in ourprinciples in the hope of obtaining a piece of infor-mation. And it didn’t even fucking work.
182
A document produced pursuant to the FOIA includes adescription of an interrogation that resembled a fraterni-ty party.
At this point in time the session advanced into what can
only be described as the proverbial “strip club lap dance.”The ICE personnel [redacted] removed her overblousebehind the individual and proceeded stroking his hair andneck while uttering sexual overtones and making commentsabout his religious affiliation. The session progressed towhere she was seated on his lap making sexual affiliatedmovements with her chest and pelvis while again speakingsexual [sic] oriented sentences. This then progressed to theindividual being placed on the floor with her straddlinghim, etc. Needless to say many inappropriate commentswere made during this time concerning the session and the
area had the atmosphere of a party. During this period, Ibecame very uncomfortable and departed the monitoringare[a]. I went to the MP monitoring area where I foundapproximately 4-6 personnel watching the session as well.Again derogatory comments flourished. I witnessed [redact-
ed] as well as a “guard” watching for any officer personnel.
ACS Defense Analyst, Memorandum for Record re: Possible
Inappropriate Activities (26 April 2003). 
183
Prisoners report that sex frequently is used to harass
them. Women wearing bikinis and lingerie sexuallytaunted Murat Kurnaz on two occasions and suggestedthey would do sexual favors in return for cooperation.When he pushed away a woman who placed her handdown his shirt, he was beaten by an IRF team and leftshackled for about 20 hours.
184Sexual provocations by
24 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaWhen he pushed away a
woman who placed her
hand down his shirt, he
was beaten by an IRF
team and left shackled for
about 20 hours.female interrogators carried this distinctly religious
dimension, as Islam places restrictions on physical con-tact between unrelated men and women.
185
On another occasion . . . Al Dossari was taken to an inter-
rogation room in the Orange Building in Camp Delta.
Adjacent to this interrogation room was a computer room.
The door to the computer room was open when Mr. AlDossari was brought into the interrogation room and
shackled to the floor. Through the door Mr. Al Dossari sawa man and woman who were naked and having sex on atable in the computer room. The MPs who brought Mr. AlDossari into the interrogation room observed this as well
although they quickly left after shackling Mr. Al Dossari.After several minutes, the man got up from the table andremoved a condom that he had been wearing. He gave Mr.
Al Dossari a “thumbs-up” gesture and asked “good?” The
man and woman then dressed and came into the interroga-tion room. The man showed Mr. Al Dossari pictures of peo-ple wearing traditional Saudi dress. He asked if Mr. AlDossari could tell him anything
about the people in the pictures. Hesaid that if Mr. Al Dossari providedany information Mr. Al Dossaricould have sex with his “girlfriend”and indicated the woman. Mr. AlDossari did not respond and after
approximately 30 minutes of furtherquestioning the man and womanleft. Mr. Al Dossari had never seenthese individuals before this incidentand has not seen them since.
186
Not all sexual abuse occurs in connection with interro-
gation or is heterosexual. The released British prisonersallege that several young prisoners said they were takento isolated sections of the prison and raped by guards.
187
These prisoners also said that an Algerian man was“forced to watch a video supposedly showing two pris-
oners dressed in orange, one sodomizing the other, andwas told that it would happen to him if he didn’t coop-erate.”
188One of the twelve Kuwaiti prisoners was
shown a packet of condoms and told that if he didn’ttalk, the condoms would be used on him.
189On one
occasion, while Mr. Al Noaimi was in his cell, an MPfrom Unit 94 threatened to rape him and taunted himby winking and blowing kisses at him. The MP attempt-ed to enter the cell while another MP stood lookout, but
either due to a fear of detection or a change of mind, heleft the cell and did not carry out his threat.
190Mr.
Boumediene reported that his interrogators threatenedto send him to an American prison where he would beraped; they also threatened to shave his beard and applylipstick to him.
191
5. Religious and Cultural Abuse
Guantánamo techniques include conduct intended to
“soften up” prisoners by abusing items or disrupting rit-
uals known to have particular importance for Muslims.
Desecration of the Qur’an. The statements of prisoners
to their attorneys indicate that desecration of the Qur’anis widespread. Many prisoners describe guards and inter-rogators as regularly defiling the Qur’an by touching it
intentionally, dropping it, stepping on it, and throwingit on the ground. In the early days of Camp X-Ray, sol-diers repeatedly threw copies of the Qur’an on the
ground.
192Mr. Ait Idir witnessed a
guard throw a Qur’an on theground and place underwear ontop of it,
187and he saw a supervi-
sor order a soldier to search theQur’an, even after the soldier said
that he was not supposed to touchit.
194The mass suicide attempted
in the summer of 2003 was organ-ized to protest abuse of the Qur’anafter an interrogator had thrown aprisoner’s Qur’an on the floor,
“stepped on it, and kicked it across the room.”
195
Abuse of the Qur’an also appears to be used to provoke
the prisoners to anger, after which the IRF is called toforcibly punish them. James Yee, the former militarychaplain at Guantánamo, describes MPs purposely treat-ing the Qur’an with disrespect:
The most contentious issue . . . was the way many MPs
handled the detainees’ Qur’ans. This is an extremely sensi-tive practice, as the Qur’an is the most respected book inIslam. Muslims believe that the Qur’an contains the actual
words of God and therefore is to be treated with the utmostrespect. Muslims keep the Qur’an in a high place inside our
homes as a show of respect and would never allow it totouch the floor or any place that is even slightly dirty.
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         25The released British
prisoners allege that
several young prisoners
said they were taken to
isolated sections of the
prison and raped by
guards.Muslims also believe that a condition for handling the
Qur’an is cleanliness and ritual purity. Some stricter inter-
pretations of Islamic law even consider a non-Muslim han-dling the Qur’an as sacrilegious.
Guards understood this but didn’t respect it. They claimed
detainees might be hiding a weapon inside their Qur’an,and in plain view of the prisoners MPs would violentlyshake the Qur’an, looking for something to drop out. They’dbreak the binding and drop the Qur’an on the floor. Inever heard of an incident where a detainee hid anythingdangerous in the Qur’an – doing so would be considered aninsult. The detainees would become outraged when theguards touched their holy books, and this behavior often ledto some of the worst clashes on the blocks. Once a femaleMP was being particularly roughwith a prisoner she was escorting tothe showers. He spat at her and theIRF team was summoned. After hehad been taken to MSU, she wasassigned to clear out his cell and takeaway all of his personal items. Withthe other detainees watching, shetook the prisoner’s Qur’an and threwit forcefully down into the bag at herfeet. She knew what she was doing.The detainees who saw this becameenraged and a massive riot ensued,in which she was drenched withwater. She later told Eke that shehad deliberately provoked it. “Youshould have seen how nuts it got,”she told him.
. . . I frequently had to replace
Qur’ans when pages were ripped and
bindings broken as the MPs searchedthem.
196
Religious Humiliation and
Interference with Religious Practices. Prisoners report
additional abusive practices targeted specifically tohumiliate them as Muslims or to interfere with theirability to practice Islam. For example, prisoners were fre-quently shaved as punishment. Lakhdar Boumedienesaid that growing a beard is a form of Muslim religiousexpression but “the U.S. thinks it marks a terrorist.”
197
Fahmi Abdullah Ahmed Al Towlaqi has had his headshaved three times by Military Personnel; one time he
was shaved so that he was left with a cross-shaped patchof hair.
198Other prisoners have stated that some guards
mock the call to prayer by barking like dogs ordonkeys.
199An oft-reported form of punishment at
Guantánamo also included transferring a prisoner to
“Romeo” block where guards would remove the prison-er’s pants.
200 This prevented the prisoner from praying
because a Muslim man cannot pray unless his waist andlegs are covered.
201
Mustapha Ait Idir described in detail how he was severe-
ly injured trying to resist an orchestrated instance of col-lective religious-physical abuse that took place at RomeoBlock.
202
Knowing that Arab men are
required to be clothed while praying,
military police ordered all 48 pris-oners in Romeo Block to give uptheir pants. Mr. Ait Idir told theguards that, as a Muslim, he wouldbe unable to pray without his pantson, and so he begged them not toforce him to undress. He offeredthem his shoes only. The guardsthreatened to use force.
A colonel – with a flower on his hat
– spoke with him and demandedthe pants. The officer told him theIRF would forcibly take the pants.The Colonel would make no accom-modation to allow Mustafa to prayin his pants. Mr. Ait Idir offered togive up the pants if the officer prom-ised to return them for prayers. Theofficer said the pants would not bereturned for prayers.
When the officer left to summon the IRF , Mr. Ait Idir
feared the soldiers would leave him naked. He tore off aportion of his pants and left it in a corner of his cell. Healso put on his short pants underneath so he would not beleft naked if they took his pants.
As threatened, the IRF came. Before entering, they sprayed
tear gas into his cell. He shielded his face behind his sleepingpad. After the spraying stopped, the IRF – in full protective
26 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba“With the other
detainees watching, she
took the prisoner’s Qur’an
and threw it forcefully
down into the bag at her
feet. She knew what she
was doing. The detainees
who saw this became
enraged and a massive
riot ensued, in which she
was drenched with water.
She later told Eke that
she had deliberately
provoked it. ‘You should
have seen how nuts it
got, ’ she told him. ”gear – charged into the cell. He struck
defensively at the first soldier – whocarried a shield. Mr. Ait Idir, a for-mer demonstration team Karatechampion, knocked the soldier back,and all 5 IRF members retreated .
The colonel returned and again
demanded the pants. Mr. Ait Idirpleaded that he could not give up hispants or he could not pray. A fewminutes later the IRF resumed teargas spraying. By then many interneesnear him . . . were yelling, encourag-ing him to surrender his pants so hewould not be injured.
The IRF charged into his cell again.
Mr. Ait Idir again assumed a defensive posture and man-aged to drive them out of his cell.
The officer again approached and asked Mustafa to surren-
der his pants. Other internees were by then pleading withhim to give up his pants. Mr. Ait Idir again offered hispants, if he could have them back when he needed them topray. He was told the pants would be taken away and hewould not get them back to pray.
The third spray event was much more prolonged and
intense than the first two. His cage was so filled with spraythat he could not see. When the IRF entered, Mr. Ait Idiragain defended his pants. He knocked the first IRF enforcerto the side. By then, a second IRF enforcer was in the cell.He and Mr. Ait Idir were wrestling
with each other.
The second IRF enforcer grabbed Mr.
Ait Idir’s legs and wrapped them in atight hug, trying to knock him over.Mr. Ait Idir struggled to knock theenforcer away. His eyes were blurryand stinging from the spray. The leadIRF enforcer ran back from the walland grabbed Mr. Ait Idir’s testiclesand squeezed.
Mr. Ait Idir was in intense pain. He
feared he would be crippled and laydown in a fetal position. The IRFenforcers jumped on him. The first
team member landed on his backwhile he was face down; the seconddid the same. Both landed on theirpadded knees. Mr. Ait Idir’s handsnow were behind his back, securedin restraints by the IRF enforcers. 
While the two enforcers pinned him
down – after he had stopped resist-ing and his hands were tied, andafter he was fully in their control,one of the guards slowly bent hisfingers back until one of thembroke. The pain was excruciating,but he was afraid that if hescreamed the IRF would react by
injuring him further.
203He was not given medical treat-
ment for his fingers despite many requests and the cleardeformity of his hand.
Religious abuse at Guantánamo is systematic, calculated,
and part of the disciplinary system. Prisoners are pun-ished for infractions, such as refusing to talk, by havingtheir religious items taken from them. When a prisoneris “reclassified” from level one to level two, he loses hisprayer mat; at level three, he loses his beads, and soon.
204Religious abuse has been used to coerce interroga-
tions, including at Ramadan when guards have withheldfood at the break of fast.
205Moazzam Begg observed: “it
is the faith of the detainees that is targeted: the religionof Islam.”
206
Mr. Ait Idir’s resistance during theepisode of religious-physical abusedescribed above led to a further,unprovoked attack, which ulti-mately resulted in partial facialparalysis and a life-long disability.One day shortly after the pants-
related beating, guards told him
they wanted to search his cell.There had been no interveningdisciplinary issues. He sat on thefloor as instructed. Despite his fullcooperation, he was sprayed in theface with chemical irritant, andput into restraints. Guards then
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         27The second IRF enforcer
grabbed Mr. Ait Idir’s legs
and wrapped them in a
tight hug, trying to knock
him over. Mr. Ait Idir
struggled to knock the
enforcer away. His eyes
were blurry and stinging
from the spray. The lead
IRF enforcer ran back
from the wall and
grabbed Mr. Ait Idir’s
testicles and squeezed.
Then a soldier jumped on
the left side of his head
with full weight, forcing
stones to cut into Mr. Ait
Idir’s face near his eye.
. . . As a result of this
incident, the left side of
Mr. Ait Idir’s face became
paralyzed for several
months.slammed him head first into the
cell floor, lowered him, face-firstinto the toilet and flushed the toi-let – submerging his head. He wasthen carried outside and thrownonto the crushed stones that sur-round the cells. While he was
down on the ground, his assailantsstuffed a hose in his mouth andforced water down his throat.Then a soldier jumped on the leftside of his head with full weight,forcing stones to cut into Mr. Ait Idir’s face near his eye.The guards twisted his middle finger and thumb on hisright hand back almost to the point of breaking them.The knuckles were dislocated. As a result of this inci-dent, the left side of Mr. Ait Idir’s face became paralyzedfor several months. The symptoms from that attack con-tinue to plague him two years later.
207
Cultural Abuses. Cultural insult also is a feature of pris-
oner life at Guantánamo. Mr. Al Qosi saw prisonersbeing wrapped in Israeli flags during interrogations.
208
FBI Deputy Director T.J. Harrington corroborates thisaccount in a memo released through FOIA litigation.
209
The U.S. Southcom report reviewing a small number ofselected IRF videos confirms that on some occasions theIRF teams have been all-female. Stopping short of draw-ing the conclusion that military officials intended tooffend Muslim men, who are forbidden to be touchedby women who are not their wives, the report noted, “A
detainee appears to be genuinely traumatized by afemale escort securing the detainee’s leg irons,” andcalled the use of an all-female IRF team “inexplicabl[e].”Tellingly, the report recommended “talking points” to
“refute or diminish the charge that we use women
(against) the detainees’ culture or religion.”
210
6. Pre-Guantánamo Torture and Cruel,
Inhuman and Degrading Treatment
Horrific as is the treatment alleged at Guantánamo, pris-
oners have reported that what happened to them beforetheir arrival there was in many cases even worse.
211Mr.
Al Dossari, the prisoner who recently tried to commitsuicide during his lawyer’s visit, described exceptionalabuse while in U.S. custody in Kandahar. He alleges thatU.S. soldiers urinated on prisoners and burned themwith cigarettes and that he was
made to walk barefoot over brokenglass and his head was pushed intothe ground, into the glass. Mr. AlDossari further reports that during
an interrogation, interrogatorsshocked him with an electricdevice and poured a hot liquidover his head. When he asked for a
doctor, they spat on him andreplied, “We brought you here to
kill you.” At night, he said the sol-
diers would line him up with other prisoners and threat-en to shoot them if any moved. If they did move,though not shot, prisoners were beaten. In addition, heclaims he saw an American soldier throw a Qur’an intoa bucket used as a collective toilet for prisoners in histent.
212
Murat Kurnaz reports that while in Kandahar, his head
and upper body repeatedly were submerged in water tothe point of near drowning, a practice called water-boarding,
213and he had electric shocks applied to his
feet. He was hung by his hands and left for days at atime, sometimes without food.
214Also in Kandahar, a
Kuwaiti prisoner was allegedly beaten by US forces, sus-
pended upside down and beaten again. They squeezedhis testicles, made him strip, and screamed, “You’re amember of Al Qaeda!”
215Abdulsalam Ali Abdulrahman
Al Hela describes a detention facility in Kabul, where hesays prisoners were kept completely isolated anddeprived of light, in a place they called “prison of dark-ness.”
216
Australian Mamdouh Habib, who was released from
Guantánamo in January 2005, has alleged incidents of
highly sophisticated methods of torture while he washeld in Egypt and Pakistan, where U.S. authorities hadtaken him before they removed him to Guantánamo:
On another occasion, Mr. Habib was suspended from hooks
on the wall, with his feet resting on the side of a largecylindrical drum. Down the middle of this drum ran ametal rod, with wires attached at both ends. The wires ranto what appeared to be an electric battery. When Mr.Habib did not give the answers his interrogators wanted,
they threw a switch and a jolt of electricity ran through therod, electrifying the drum on which Mr. Habib stood. The
28 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaAl Hela describes a
detention facility in Kabul,
where he says prisoners
were kept completely
isolated and deprived of
light, in a place they
called “prison of
darkness. ”action of Mr. Habib “dancing” on the drum forced it to
rotate, and his feet constantly slipped, leaving him suspend-
ed by only the hooks on the wall. The instinctive struggle toregain his balance forced him to place his feet back on the
drum, which of course only sent another excruciating jolt ofelectricity into his feet. Eventually, Mr. Habib was forced toraise his legs, leaving him to hang by his outstretched arms
until he could stand it no longer and, exhausted, hedropped his legs back onto the electrified drum. This ingen-ious cruelty lasted until Mr. Habib finally fainted.
217
IV. THE ABUSE CONTINUES
Abusive treatment continues at Guantánamo. Though
some practices, such as short-shackling, may have beenofficially discontinued, manipulation of light and physi-cal abuse remain severe problems.
218Allegations of sexu-
al humiliation and abuse of the Qur’an continue.219
Sleep deprivation in Camp Five remains a serious
issue.220
As recently as August 2005, Hisham Sliti, while inshackles, was severely abused during an “interrogation.”He reported that the interrogator
threw a chair at him and severelyinjured his eye.
221The interrogator
also threw a mini-refrigerator athim, and then MPs appeared andbeat Mr. Sliti further.
222
In response to these abuses, prison-
ers began hunger strike protests inJune 2005. Initially called off when
camp officials negotiated with pris-oners and promised to bring thecamps into compliance with theGeneva Conventions, the hunger
strike was reinstated in August 2005after officials reneged on theirpromises.
223Prisoners who were des-
ignated as Prisoners Council innegotiations were put into isolation.
224
Prisoners on the August 2005 hunger strike made four
demands: 
• Release or prosecution of real charges • Immediate release of those determined to be innocent
by CSRTs • Removal of juveniles from Camp Five
• End of religious abuse
225
The United States has maintained that hunger-striking
prisoners received medical care, but attorneys for 21-year-old hunger-striker, Yousef Al-Shehri, described him
as “visibly weak and frail,” wincing in pain from a nasaltube, and requiring the support of a “walker.”
226He had
difficulty speaking because of lesions in his throat causedby involuntary force-feeding, administered without anes-
thesia.
227His sickening descriptions of how hunger-strik-
ing prisoners are treated, with the approval of medicalpersonnel, allege disturbing, serious abuse.
These large tubes – the thickness of a finger, he estimated –
were viewed by the detainees as objects of torture. They were
forcibly shoved up the detainees’ noses and down into theirstomachs. No anesthesia or sedative was provided to allevi-ate the obvious trauma of the procedure. Yousef said that hecould not breath with this thick tube inserted into his nose(which was so large it caused his nostril to distend). When
the tube was removed, it was evenmore painful, and blood camegushing out of him. He fainted,and several of the other detaineesalso lost consciousness. Thedetainees were told by the guards:“we did this on purpose to make
you stop the hunger strike.” They
were told that this tube would be
inserted and removed twice a day,every day until the hunger strikeended. Yousef described the pain as“unbearable.”
Yousef explained that doctors were
present as the Initial Reaction Forceforcibly removed these [nasal gas-tric] tubes by placing a foot on oneend of the tube and yanking the
detainee’s head back by his hair, causing the tube to bepainfully ejected from the detainee’s nose. When thedetainees saw this happening, they begged to have the tubesremain, but the guards refused and continued to forcibly
remove the tubes.
Then, in front of the Guantánamo physicians – including
the head of the detainee hospital – the guards took nasal
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         29The United States has
maintained that hunger-
striking prisoners
received medical care,
but attorneys for 21-year-
old hunger-striker, Yousef
Al-Shehri, described him
as “visibly weak and frail, ”
wincing in pain from a
nasal tube, and requiring
the support of a “walker. ”gastric tubes from one detainee, and with no sanitization
whatsoever, re-inserted it into the nose of a differentdetainee. When these tubes were re-inserted, the detaineescould see the blood and stomach bile from other detaineesremaining on the tubes. A person the detainees only know
as “Dr. [name redacted]” stood by and watched these proce-dures, doing nothing to intervene.
228
Yousef, who was a juvenile at the
time of capture, relayed that guardstold him that a U.S. court hadordered the force-feeding and thatwas the only reason that he andother prisoners complied with theforce-feeding. He was “greatly dis-turbed,” according to his attorneys,to find out that no such order hadbeen given and that he had beenlied to. When his attorneys tried tomeet with him a second time, theywere told that he had removed his
nasal gastric tube and was encour-aging other prisoners to do thesame.
229
In January 2006, the military sub-
jected over thirty prisoners tointranasal force-feeding. When sev-eral prisoners reached a life-threat-ening stage, the military turned tothe use of an “emergency restraintchair” to immobilize prisoners dur-ing several hours of force-feedingevery day. According to one prison-er’s legal challenge to this practice,the military grossly misused the emergency restraintchair:
U.S. government officials immobilized the hunger strikers’
heads by strapping them in the restraint chair, restrainedtheir hands, inserted feeding tubes in their noses, and forcefed them large bags of liquid nutrients. The account furtherdescribe hunger strikers bleeding and vomiting from theseactions, and urinating and defecating on themselves becauseRespondents had denied them access to a bathroom.
230
Once the military began using the emergency restraint
chair, all but three prisoners ended their hunger strikedue to the pain and humiliation.The U.S. courts have not addressed the prisoners’
request to ban the use of the emergency restraint chair.
In June 2006, the military acknowledged that over
eighty prisoners had begun another hunger strike and atleast six were swiftly subjected to force-feeding.
V. AVOIDING JUDICIAL SCRUTINY OF  TOR-
TURE AND CRUEL, INHUMAN, AND DEGRAD-
ING TREATMENT
The U.S. government has stead-
fastly declared that the prisoners inGuantánamo are treated humane-
ly, that any isolated incidents ofabuse occurred long ago, and theindividual soldiers involved repri-manded. The government pointsto the fact that none of the investi-gations undertaken so far “foundthat any governmental policydirected, encouraged or condonedthese abuses.”
231The government’s
self-serving reliance on the conclu-sions of its own investigations
highlights the urgent need for anindependent investigation of pris-oner treatment and conditions ofconfinement. The U.S. govern-ment has failed to provide theprisoners with any means toaddress and remedy their allega-tions of torture and cruel, inhu-man and degrading treatment.Neither the military proceedings
in Guantánamo nor the federalcourts in the United States have
held the U.S. government accountable for the conductin Guantánamo or prohibited these practices. As theprisoners enter their fifth year of detention, not a singlefederal habeas hearing has been held to challenge a pris-oner’s “enemy combatant” status, and mistreatment inGuantánamo and continued arbitrary confinement.
CSRTs. In June 2004, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in
Rasul v. Bush that U.S. federal courts have jurisdiction to
hear Guantánamo prisoners’ habeas cases. Within aweek, the July 7, 2004 Wolfowitz Order established
Combatant Status Review T ribunals (CSRTs) that pur-ported to provide a process for confirming that each
30 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaThe government’s self-
serving reliance on the
conclusions of its own
investigations highlights
the urgent need for an
independent investigation
of prisoner treatment and
conditions of confinement. “U.S. government
officials immobilized the
hunger strikers’ heads by
strapping them in the
restraint chair, restrained
their hands, inserted
feeding tubes in their
noses, and force fed
them large bags of liquid
nutrients. ”prisoner correctly had been determined to be an enemy
combatant. The CSRTs, however, provided nothingmore than an administrative “rubberstamp” of previous-ly made determinations. The CSRTs did not occur untilsome prisoners had already been in custody for two andone-half years, prisoners were denied access to counsel,and secret evidence frequently formed the basis for theCSRT determinations.
Despite complaints raised by numerous prisoners, the
CSRTs failed to investigate and remedy allegations thatstatements obtained under torture or abuse were usedagainst the prisoners by the U.S. military.
The government argues . . . that this Court must
accept the validity of CSRTs without undertakingfactual or evidentiary review. The government doesnot deny that the CSRTs would be inconsistent withdue process if they relied on statements obtained bytorture, but simply asserts as a factual matter that theCSRTs did not rely on coerced statements and askedthis court to take it at its word.
232
Detainee Treatment Act. On June 15, 2005, the U.S.
Senate, in response to widespread criticism at home and
abroad, including concerns about torture and abuse doc-umented by the FBI,
233opened hearings regarding the
Guantánamo prisoners.234Six months later, Congress
passed the Detainee T reatment Act (DTA), which is thefirst legislation explicitly related to the Guantánamoprisoners. The President signed the DTA into law onDecember 30, 2005.
The DTA expressly prohibits “cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment” of American captives. However, anamendment introduced by Senators Lindsey Graham,Carl Levin, and Jon Kyl (Graham-Levin-Kyl amend-ment) deprives courts of the ability to enforce that banon behalf of Guantánamo prisoners.
235The Graham-
Levin-Kyl amendment provides that “no court, justice,or judge shall have jurisdiction to hear or consider”applications for habeas corpus or “any other action
against the U.S.” brought by aliens detained at
Guantánamo.
The Bush Administration has asserted the DTA as a
defense against claims of torture by Guantánamo prison-ers. In March 2006, Administration lawyers contendedin federal court and in legal filings that MohammedBawazir, a Yemeni national held since May 2002, cannot
claim protection under the Act’s anti-torture provisionsbecause that prohibition does not apply to people heldat Guantánamo.
236Bawazir’s attorneys have contended
that “extremely painful” new tactics used by the govern-ment to force-feed him and end his hunger strikeamounted to torture. U.S. District Judge Gladys Kesslersaid in a hearing on March 2, 2006, that she found alle-gations of aggressive U.S. military tactics used to breakthe prisoner hunger strike “extremely disturbing” andpossibly against U.S. and international law.
237However,
government lawyers argued that even if the tactics didviolate the Act’s anti-torture ban, under the DTA, pris-oners at Guantánamo have no recourse to challenge thatban in court.
238
Perhaps the most hotly contested issue concerning the
DTA is whether it applies to deprive the courts of juris-diction to hear pending habeas cases brought by theGuantánamo prisoners. The U.S. government contends
that it does; through the DTA, the government onceagain is seeking to place prisoners in a legal black hole atGuantánamo, so it may continue its detention opera-
tions outside the supervision of U.S. courts. The U.S.Supreme Court’s June 29, 2006, decision in Hamdan v.
Rumsfeld unambiguously rejected that position, holding
that the DTA does not strip federal court jurisdiction tohear habeas claims in pending cases.
239
VI. HAS THE U.S. BEEN COMMITTING TOR-
TURE IN GUANTÁNAMO?
Only an independent commission can fully address the
nature and extent of the use of torture againstGuantánamo prisoners. Yet, the evidence assembled in
this report clearly points to a pattern and practice of tor-ture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment thatimplicates a policy encouraging its use. Given the limita-tions on access to the prisoners and the extreme condi-tions at Guantánamo, the facts uncovered thus fardemand immediate examination of these most seriousallegations.
The definitions of torture and cruel, inhuman, and
degrading treatment are found in several sources ofstatutory and treaty law. Foremost is the ConventionAgainst Torture (CAT), which provides a definition oftorture, requires state parties not to return a person to aplace where he will be subject to torture and prohibits
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         31the use of statements obtained under torture in legal
proceedings.240The United States was one of the main
proponents of the treaty and is a signatory to it.
Article 1 of the CAT defines torture as:any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether
physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a per-son for such purposes as obtaining from him or athird person information or a confession, punishinghim for an act he or a third person has committed oris suspected of having committed, or intimidating orcoercing him or a third person . . .
241
The CAT flatly prohibits torture. 
Article 2 provides:
No exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a
state of war or a threat of war, internal political insta-bility or any other public emergency may be invokedas a justification of torture.
242
The United States ratified the CAT in 1994, subject tocertain conditions, known as Reservations, Declarationsand Understandings (RUDs).
237For example, the United
States limited its obligation under Article 16. Article 16
provides that “[e]ach State Party shall undertake to pre-vent in any territory under its jurisdiction other acts of
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishmentwhich do not amount to torture as defined in article 1 .. . under color of law.
244The United
States declared that “cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment” be conso-nant with the prohibition of “cruel,unusual and inhumane treatment orpunishment” under the Fifth, Eighth,and/or Fourteenth Amendments ofthe U.S. Constitution.
245It also stat-
ed an understanding that torture is“an act . . . specifically intended to
inflict severe physical or mental painor suffering.”
246Finally, because the
CAT did not define “mental pain orsuffering,” the United States definedit in terms of its objective causes rather than its subjec-tive qualities. Despite these RUDs the U.S. is bound byits treaty obligations not to engage in torture at anytime.
247The United States also refused to opt into CAT’s indi-vidual complaint mechanism that allows individual vic-tims of torture, after exhausting domestic remedies, tofile a complaint directly with the Committee AgainstTorture.
248The United States further declared that CAT
was non-self-executing, which means that the UnitedStates must pass implementing legislation to codify cer-
tain provisions of the treaty. Further, it means that thetreaty itself is not an independent basis to bring a law-suit for violations of its provisions.
249To implement its
obligation under CAT to criminalize torture, the UnitedStates passed 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340 – 2340A, which makes
it a crime for a U.S. national to commit torture outsideof the U.S.
280
18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A defines “torture” as:
an act committed by a person acting under the color
of law specifically intended to inflict severe physicalor mental pain or suffering (other than pain or suf-fering incidental to lawful sanctions) upon anotherperson within his custody or physical control;
251
“Severe mental pain and suffering” is further defined as:
prolonged mental harm caused by or resulting from –(A) the intentional infliction or threatened infliction
of severe physical pain or suffering;
(B) the administration or application, or threatened
administration or application, ofmind-altering substances orother procedures calculated todisrupt profoundly the senses orthe personality;
(C) the threat of imminent
death; or
(D) the threat that another per-
son will imminently be subject-ed to death, severe physical painor suffering, or the administra-tion or application of mind-altering substances or other
procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the sens-es or personality.
252
Plainly, many Guantánamo prisoners report being sub-
ject to treatment that falls within these definitions of
32 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba“No exceptional
circumstances
whatsoever, whether a
state of war or a threat of
war, internal political
instability or any other
public emergency may be
invoked as a justification
of torture. ”torture. The appendix included at the end of this report
illustrates specific conduct, keyed to the definitions oftorture banned by U.S. and binding international law.CCR believes that U.S. government conduct atGuantánamo has resulted in numerous violations of the
prohibition against torture and cruel, inhuman anddegrading treatment.
VII. UNITED NATIONS AND COMMITTEE ON
THE CONVENTION AGAINST TORTURE FINDTORTURE COMMITTED AT GUANTÁNAMO
A. United Nations Special
Rapporteurs’ Report
After eighteen months of study,
UN investigators released a reportcondemning U.S. treatment ofprisoners held at Guantánamo andconcluding that certain practices atGuantánamo amounted to
torture.
253The fifty-four page
report, released on February 16,
2006, disclosed an alarming num-ber of practices at Guantánamothat violate human rights andinternational humanitarian treaties and standards towhich the United States is a party, including theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), the CAT, the International Convention onthe Elimination of All Forms ofRacial Discrimination (ICERD),and the International Covenant onEconomic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR).
254
One of the UN’s main human
rights monitoring bodies, theUnited Nations High
Commissioner on Human Rights(UNHCHR) first began monitor-ing the prisoners’ situation in January 2002.
255After two
and one-half years of continued allegations of humanrights violations, a group led by five UNHCHR man-date holders (the Chairperson of the Working Group onArbitrary Detention, and the Special Rapporteurs on theIndependence of Judges and Lawyers; Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading T reatment orPunishment; Freedom of Religion or Belief; and Right
of Everyone to the Enjoyment of the Highest AttainableStandard of Physical and Mental Health) conducted an
in-depth investigation and evaluation of U.S. treatmentof Guantánamo prisoners. The investigators reviewedpublicly available information and interviewed formerGuantánamo prisoners. The investigators were denied
the opportunity to interview current prisoners firsthand.
256
The UN report criticized theUnited States for denying
Guantánamo prisoners many basic
rights and, above all else, personalliberty.
257The report found that
interrogation techniques, condi-tions of detention, the use ofexcessive violence, and transfer ofprisoners to countries that pose aserious risk of torture violate thebasic human right to be free fromtorture.
258The report criticized the
United States for failing to provide
trial by an independent tribunal
and adequate healthcare and for persecuting prisonersbecause of their Muslim faith.
259The report concluded
that the United States should close “the Guantánamodetention facilities without further delay.”
260
The response of world leaders tothe UN Report was immediate;many called for the closure ofGuantánamo, including British
Prime Minister Tony Blair,
German Chancellor Angela
Merkel, UN Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, and Archbishop
Desmond T utu.
261Recently, British
Attorney General Lord Goldsmith
issued one of the strongest condemnations of the U.S.detention center at Guantánamo to date from a Britishgovernment official:
The existence of Guantánamo remains unacceptable.
It is time, in my view, that it should close. Not only
would it, in my personal opinion, be right to closeGuantánamo as a matter of principle, I believe it
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         33After eighteen months of
study, UN investigators
released a report
condemning U.S.
treatment of prisoners
held at Guantánamo and
concluding that certain
practices at Guantánamo
amounted to torture.
The UN report concluded
that the United States
should close “the
Guantánamo detention
facilities without further
delay. ”34 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cubawould also help to remove what
has become a symbol to many –right or wrong – of injustice.The historic tradition of theU.S. as a beacon of freedom,liberty and of justice deservesthe removal of this symbol.
262
B. United Nations’
Committee AgainstTorture Report
On May 19, 2006, the United
Nations Committee Against
Torture, the treaty body charged
with monitoring contracting states’compliance with the CAT, issued ascathing and thorough critique ofthe U.S. record on torture. TheCommittee called upon the UnitedStates to close all secret prisons,
hold both military and civiliansenior officials accountable fortheir role in acquiescing to acts of torture committed bytheir subordinates, and end its practice of transferringprisoners to countries with known torture records. Ofparticular note, the Committee expressly rejected theU.S. government’s contention that the CAT did notapply to U.S. personnel acting outside of the U.S. orduring wartime, and called for the immediate cessationof the indefinite detention of prisoners at Guantánamoand closure of the facility.
263
VIII. CONCLUSION
As William H. Taft, former Legal Advisor, Departmentof State in the George W. Bush Administration, has stat-ed, “How our government treats people should never, atbottom, be a matter merely of policy, but a matter oflaw.”
264The government’s unilateral decision to abandon
our obligations under the Geneva Conventions andinternational humanitarian and human rights law tar-nishes the reputation of the U.S. as a country commit-ted to the rule of law, sets a poor example for othernations, gives human rights abusing regimes justificationto follow suit, and endangers U.S. troops abroad.Fundamentally, these practices cause substantial physical
and psychological injury to the men imprisoned inGuantánamo and have a ripple
effect upon the lives of the men’sfamilies throughout the world.
The lesson of this report is that
widespread abuses have occurred,are now occurring, and will con-tinue to occur at Guantánamo.The report reveals patterns andsystematic practices that implicatenot the idiosyncratic predilectionsof sadistic soldiers and interroga-tors but policies approved at thehighest level of the U.S. govern-ment. Independent and transpar-ent investigation into the sourcesand planning of these practices is apre-requisite to answering thequery: how could these abusesoccur and how can they bestopped?
The abuses easily can give rise to rage and resentment in
the Muslim world and elsewhere. The alleged use of reli-gious and cultural abuse at Guantánamo, if not con-demned in the strongest terms, may validate Muslimconcerns that the United States is hostile to the religionof Islam. How the United States is treating prisoners inthe “war on terrorism” should be the subject of a search-ing and self-reflective national debate.
Investigations conducted to date – largely by DoD itself
– have failed to hold accountable those responsible forimplicitly or explicitly authorizing torture and cruel,inhuman and degrading treatment at Guantánamo.
265
This atmosphere of impunity only deepens the fear andpsychological trauma of the prisoners.
The United States is violating the human rights of
Guantánamo prisoners by holding them indefinitely
without charge and without a fair process for determin-ing whether their imprisonment is lawful. The accountsof torture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatmentpresented in this report show that the prisoners are sub-ject to countless acts of mistreatment and abuse, both ininterrogation and as part of their daily lives atGuantánamo.The lesson of this report
is that widespread
abuses have occurred,
are now occurring, and
will continue to occur at
Guantánamo. The report
reveals patterns and
systematic practices that
implicate not the
idiosyncratic predilections
of sadistic soldiers and
interrogators but policies
approved at the highest
level of the U.S.
government.All mistreatment of Guantánamo prisoners must imme-
diately end. CCR calls on Congress to take all necessarysteps to appoint an independent bipartisan commission,modeled on the 9/11 Commission, to investigate thor-oughly all incidents of torture and abuse at Guantánamoand other detention facilities and to analyze the natureand extent of such practices. This commission shouldalso be charged with holding government officialsaccountable who have violated domestic and interna-tional law in allowing these abuses to occur and withmaking specific policy recommendations designed toprevent any such abuses in the future.
35 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaAPPENDIX
PRACTICES THAT RISE TO THE LEVEL OF TORTURE AT GUANTÁNAMO
The definitions in both the CAT and U.S. statute define the following practices, which routinely occur at
Guantánamo, as torture.
36 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba• David Hicks was beaten during interrogations and
interrogated at gunpoint.266
• IRF incidents, such as assaults on Messrs. Al-Laithi
and Al Dosari.267
• David Hicks was injected with unknown medica-
tions and struck while under the influence ofsedations that were forced upon him.
269
• O.K. has found partially dissolved tablets and/or
powder in the bottom of a glass given to him byhis captors. The pills produce various effects:sleepiness, dizziness, alertness.
270
• Mr. Abd al-Malik al-Wahab states that detainees
deemed uncooperative are injected with heavytranquilizers that sedate them for a month andleave some addicted.
271
• Other prisoners have had teeth broken for refus-
ing injections, and then as punishment they aresedated. 
272
• Instance of prolonged sleep deprivation, as
reported by Messrs. Al-Qahtani, Boumediene,
and Nechla.273
• Instances of prolonged solitary confinement, as
reported by Messrs. Lahmar and Bensayah.274• IRF incidents, such as assaults on Messrs. Ait Idir
and Al-Shehri.268“PHYSICAL PAIN OR SUFFERING”
“SEVERE MENTAL PAIN AND SUFFERING”
defined as “prolonged mental harm caused by or resultingfrom-
“(A) the intentional infliction or threatened infliction
of severe physical pain or suffering;
“(B) the administration or application, or threatened 
dministration or application, of mind-altering substancesor other procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the
senses or the personality;PRACTICES PRISONER ASSERTIONSReport on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         37• Mr. Abd al-Malik al-Wahab was threatened with
torture and execution.275
• Moazzam Begg was threatened with summary trial
and execution.276
• In Afghanistan, an MP loaded a rifle and aimed it
at Murat Kurnaz’s head.277
• Mr. Abd al-Malik al-Wahab was sleep deprived and
forced to spend long hours in cold temperatures,while threatened with torture and execution andtold harm would befall his family.
278
• A female soldier informed Mr. Al Noaimi that she
was from Virginia and had learned he had familymembers there. She threatened to kill them.
279“(C) the threat of imminent death; or
“(D) the threat that another person will imminently be
subjected to death, severe physical pain or suffering, or theadministration or application of mind-altering substancesor other procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the
senses or personality.”PRACTICES PRISONER ASSERTIONSSeptember 11, 2001 Al Qaeda attacks the United States.
September 18, 2001 Congress passes the AUMF . 
October 7, 2001 Ground war in Afghanistan begins.  
November 13, 2001 President Bush authorizes trials by military commission.
December 27, 2001 Defense Secretary Rumsfeld announces plan to send prisoners to GTMO.
December 28, 2001 Legal advisors inform President Bush GTMO is probably beyond reach of federal courts.
January 6, 2002 Construction of temporary facility, Camp X-Ray, begins; first troops [JTF-160] arrive at GTMO.
January 9, 2002 Legal advisors inform William Haynes, Defense Department General Counsel, laws of war do not
restrain President Bush, and Geneva Conventions do not protect prisoners seized during war on
terror.
January 11, 2002 First planeload of 20 prisoners arrives at Camp X-Ray.
February 7, 2002 President declares Geneva Conventions do not apply to AQ, and Taliban fighters are not eligible
for POW status.  
February 18, 2002 U.S. Southern Command authorizes JTF-170 to conduct interrogations at GTMO. 
February 19, 2002 Habeas litigation on behalf of GTMO prisoners commences. 
February 27, 2002 Camp Delta expansion begins; prisoners begin first hunger strike.
April 5, 2002 First prisoner released from GTMO.
April 29, 2002 Prisoner transfer to Camp Delta completed; Camp X-Ray closed.
Summer 2002 Gen. Jack Keane, Vice Chief of Staff for the U.S. Army, visits GTMO; finds quality of intelli-
gence gathered unsatisfactory; recommends intelligence and military functions be combined under
unified command. 
August 1, 2002 President Bush’s legal advisors narrow definition of torture and conclude President Bush, as
Commander in Chief, can authorize any interrogation technique, even if contrary to domestic
statute against torture.
October 9, 2002 Brig. Gen. Rick Baccus leaves GTMO after being relieved of his duties as commander.
October 11, 2002 Maj. Gen. Michael Dunlavey, head of interrogations at GTMO, requests permission to use
tougher interrogation techniques.
November 4, 2002 Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller takes over command at GTMO; JTF-160 and JTF-170 merge to form
JTF- GTMO.
December 2, 2002 Rumsfeld formally approves use of coercive interrogation techniques, including stress positions;
deprivation of light and auditory stimuli; isolation up to 30 days; hooding; forced grooming;
removal of clothing; removal of comfort items (including religious items).  
December 2002 Navy officials threaten to pull Navy interrogators out of GTMO after chief Navy psychologist
calls the techniques used “abusive” and “coercive.”  
January 15, 2003 Rumsfeld rescinds 12/2/02 approval of coercive interrogation techniques and orders a working
group to assess legal, policy, and operational issues relating to interrogations.
April 2, 2003 Medium-security prison completed.
April 4, 2003 Working Group on Detainee Interrogations issues final report recommending use of 35 interroga-
tion techniques, including 9 to be used only subject to limits, including whether prisoner is “med-
ically and operationally evaluated as suitable.”
April 16, 2003 Rumsfeld approves 24 techniques and requires prior authorization for coercive techniques.
April 22, 2003 Department of Defense independent contractor reports witnessing MPs slamming prisoner vio-
lently into floor.
May 2, 2003 Maj. Gen. Miller discontinues use of “fear up” techniques.  
July 3, 2003 Military commissions process commences. 
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         38Chronology of EventsAugust 18-26, 2003 23 prisoners undertake mass suicide attempt to protest Koran abuse; military does not confirm
until January 24, 2005.
August 31 – September 9, 2003 Miller sent to Iraq to review interrogation and prison operations; conducts assessment using JTF-
GTMO procedures and interrogation authorities as baseline.    
March 24, 2004 Brig. Gen. Jay Hood assumes command at GTMO.
April 2004 Construction of Camp Five completed.
June 28, 2004 Supreme Court holds in Rasul v. Bush that GTMO prisoners are entitled to a hearing on the mer-
its of their habeas claims in U.S. federal court.
June 28, 2004 Supreme Court holds in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld that alleged enemy combatants entitled to minimum
due process rights.
July 7, 2004 Deputy Secretary of Defense Wolfowitz establishes Combatant Status Review T ribunals (CSRTs)  
July 26, 2004 3 released British prisoners issue lengthy statement accusing United States of severe mistreatment. 
July 31, 2004 13 habeas petitions, representing 60 prisoners, pending in federal court.   
August 31, 2004 First habeas counsel visits base.
October 4, 2004 Government moves to dismiss habeas cases arguing prisoners have no rights.
December 20, 2004 ACLU releases FBI e-mails concerning torture and abuse during interrogations.
January 11, 2005 Government announces Australian Mamdouh Habib will be released, five days after his allegations
of torture are made public in court proceedings.  
January 19, 2005 Judge Leon rules prisoners have no constitutional rights and dismisses two habeas cases.
January 26, 2005 Prisoner Habib freed and returned to Australia.  
January 31, 2005 Judge Green rules prisoners have constitutional rights, and CSRTs violate due process.
February 9, 2005 Government notices appeal of Judge Green’s ruling.
February 22, 2005 Petitioners notice appeal of Judge Leon’s ruling.
June 3, 2005 Brig. Gen. Hood concludes inquiry on Koran abuse at GTMO.
June 9, 2005 Pentagon releases “Schmidt Report” on interrogations at GTMO confirming most FBI allegations
of abuse, concluding interrogation of Mohammed al Qahtani was “abusive and degrading,” andrecommending reprimand of Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller for failing to supervise the interrogation.
Recommendation overruled by General Bantz Craddock, Commander of the U.S. Southern
Command.
Late June 2005 Hunger strike begins.  
July 28, 2005 Prison officials agree to bring GTMO into compliance with Geneva Conventions; hunger strike
ends.
August 8, 2005 Hunger strike resumes when GTMO officials fail to honor agreement with prisoners and place
prisoners’ representatives in segregation.   
September 8, 2005 Oral Argument before DC Court of Appeals in consolidated Green/Leon appeals.
November 7, 2005 Supreme Court decides to rule on the constitutionality of the military commissions process in
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld .
November 10, 2005 Senate passes amendment by Senator Lindsey Graham stripping the federal courts of jurisdiction
to hear habeas petitions.  
December 21, 2005 Congress passes a compromise amendment sponsored by Senators Graham, Levin, and Kyl and an
amendment sponsored by Senator McCain, banning cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment of
anyone in United States custody.
December 30, 2005 President Bush signs into law the Graham-Levin-Kyl and McCain amendments, together known
as the Detainee T reatment Act of 2005, with qualification that he will construe the McCainamendment “in a manner consistent with constitutional authority of the President . . . as
Commander in Chief.”  
39 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaACLU – American Civil Liberties Union
ACS De fense – an independent defense contractor
working with the Department of Defense.
Abu Ghraib – prison in Iraq where American soldiers
abused imprisoned Iraqis. 
Al Qaeda – terrorist group headed by Osama Bin Laden
that attacked the U.S. on September 11, 2001.
Article 17 – article of Third Geneva Convention pro-
hibiting torture and coercion during interrogation ofprisoners of war.
BSCT – Behavioral Science Consultation Team.
Bagram – as used in this report, U.S. Air Force Base in
Afghanistan.
CA3 – Common Article Three of the Geneva
Conventions, providing for a baseline of humane treat-ment for any person detained during military conflict. 
CAT – Convention Against Torture; international treaty
U.S. has signed prohibiting torture and cruel, inhuman,and degrading treatment of persons in custody.  
CIA – Central Intelligence Agency.
Camp Echo – special prison at GTMO housing prison-
ers to be tried before military commissions if theSupreme Court finds the military commissions process
constitutional.
Camp Delta – main prison at GTMO; Camp Delta
includes Camps 1-4.
Camp Five – maximum security prison at GTMO.
Camps 1-4 – (see Camp Delta).
Camp X-Ray – original, temporary facility composed of
wire cages for GTMO prisoners.
DoD – Department of Defense.
Detainee – government’s term for prisoners held indefi-
nitely at GTMO.
Detainee Levels 1-4 – government designation of
detainees based on level of  cooperation with military, 1being most cooperative, 4 being least.  
Donald Rumsfeld – Secretary of Defense.Enemy Combatant – in general, the government’s term
for persons not belonging to the regular army of anynation who allegedly have harmed, or intend to harm,U.S. persons or interests.  The government’s definitionof the term has been inconsistent since 2002.  It wasmost recently and broadly re-defined in Secretary ofDefense Paul Wolfowitz’s order establishing the Combat
Atatus Review T ribunals (CSRTs).
Eric Saar – former soldier in military intelligence at
Guantanamo. 
FBI – Federal Bureau of Investigation.
FM 34-52 – Field Manual 34-52; army guidelines on
interrogation.
FOIA – Freedom of Information Act.
Geneva Conventions – international humanitarian
treaties signed in 1949, in part successors to the HagueConvention, codifying the laws of war regarding treat-ment of captured persons.
George W. Bush – President of the United States.
GTMO (or Gitmo) – acronym for Guantánamo Bay,
Cuba.
Habeas corpus – fundamental right requiring the
Executive to demonstrate the legal grounds for impris-
oning a person; empowers courts to order release ifdetention is unlawful.
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld – Supreme Court decision holding
that a U.S. citizen “enemy combatant” has right of dueprocess.
Hunger strike – refusal to take in nourishment, often
undertaken by prisoners to protest detention or condi-tions.
ICE – Interrogation Control Element.
Interrogation – formal process of questioning prisoners
for information, in the past conducted according toArmy Field Manual 34-52 guidelines.
IRF– Immediate Reaction Force (sometimes referred to
as “Extreme Reaction Force”), team of military guardstrained to respond to disturbances with force.
40 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaGlossary IRF’d – GTMO slang for being “worked over” by
the IRF .
JTF-GTMO -- Joint Task Force, Guantánamo; name of
military task force in charge of overseeing detention andinterrogation operations in GTMO; joint because it iscomposed of units from the different armed services .  
James Yee – former Muslim chaplain at GTMO;
accused of spying for Al Qaeda and later exonerated.
Koran (or Qu’ran) – Muslim holy book.
KUBARK – CIA cryptonym (code name) for CIA itself.
Kandahar – as used in this report, U.S. Air Force Base
in Southern Afghanistan.
MP– military police.
NG – nasal-gastric; tubes used for force-feeding hunger
strikers.  
NLEC – No Longer Enemy Combatant; a status classifi-
cation assigned to prisoners whose CSRTs determinedthem not to be enemy combatants.
PHR – Physicians for Human Rights.
POW, PW – prisoner of war.
Paul Wolfowitz – former Deputy Secretary of Defense
(see Wolfowitz Order).
Prisoner – detainee whose detention is potentially
indefinite.
Rasul v. Bush – Supreme Court decision holding that
writ of habeas corpus extends to prisoners inDepartment of Defense custody at GTMO and that
prisoners are entitled to a hearing on the merits of theirclaims.Reservation – (see interrogation) military slang for
interrogation.
Sensory deprivation – coercive interrogation technique
involving isolation.  
Short-shackling – stress position in which a prisoner’s
arms and legs are shackled together and to the ground,forcing him into a stooped position.
Sleep deprivation – coercive interrogation technique
usually accomplished through use of light and sounddisturbances or by moving the prisoner repeatedly fromcell to cell during the night.  
Solitary confinement – isolation of prisoner as form of
extreme interrogation technique.
Taliban – conservative Muslim political-religious group
controlling government of Afghanistan when Al Qaedaattacked the U.S.
Qu’ran (see Koran). 
War Crimes Act – U.S. law making certain violations of
Geneva Conventions a criminal offense. 
Wolfowitz Order – directive from Deputy Secretary of
Defense Wolfowitz on July 7, 2004 that established
CSRT process and defined “enemy combatant” in broadterms; set down just two weeks after the SupremeCourt’s decision in Rasul v. Bush that federal courts con-
sider prisoners’ claims.  
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         411 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Hadj Boudella
(on file with author) (statement made by U.S. military intelligenceofficers to prisoner Hadj Boudella). 
2 See Cecili Thompson Williams & Kristine A. Huskey, Detention,
Interrogation, and Torture at Guantánamo Bay: Materials and Case
Files (Oct. 2005) [hereinafter Shearman Sterling Report] (on file with
author).
3 ACLU v. De p’t of Def. 406 F .Supp.2d 330 (S.D.N.Y. 2005).
Documents produced as a result of this litigation will be referred to as
“FOIA Documents.”
4 SeeERIC SAAR & VIVECA NOVAK, INSIDE THE WIRE: A
MILITARY INTELLIGENCE SOLDIER’S EYEWITNESSACCOUNT OF LIFE AT GUANTÁNAMO (2005).
5 JAMES YEE & AIMEE MOLLOY, FOR GOD AND COUNTRY:
FAITH AND PATRIOTISM UNDER FIRE (2005). For a review, see
Joseph Lelyveld, The Strange Case of Chaplain Yee, N.Y. REV. OF
BOOKS, Dec. 15, 2005, available at www.nybooks.com/arti-
cles/18550 (last visited June 20, 2006). The formal charges against Mr.Yee included mishandling of classified documents and adultery. 
6 The United States originally acquired Guantánamo in 1898 when it
militarily occupied Cuba during the Spanish-American War. WhenCuba became independent in 1903, the United States was “granted” a
perpetual lease on the land occupied by the Base. The terms of thetreaty provided that the United States “shall exercise complete jurisdic-tion and control,” while Cuba retains “ultimate sovereignty.” Lease ofLands for Coaling and Naval Stations, art. III, T.S. 418. A subsequenttreaty in 1934 continued the terms of the lease agreement signed in1903 and provided that “[s]o long as the United States of Americashall not abandon the said naval station of Guantánamo or the twoGovernments shall not agree to a modification of its present limits,”
the arrangement could continue. T reaty Between the United States ofAmerica and Cuba Defining Their Relations art. 3, U.S.-Cuba, May29, 1934, 48 Stat. 1682 (1934).
7 SeePress Release, U.S. Dep’t of Def., Office of Public Affairs
Detainee Transfer Announced (May 18, 2006) available at
http://www.defenselink.mil/releases/2006/nr20060518-13076.html(last visited June 20, 2006).
8 MAGNA CARTA [CONSTITUTION], paras. 38-39 (Eng.); U.S.
CONST. art. 1, § 9, cl.2. 
9 See id.
10 28 U.S.C. § 2241(c)(1)(c)(3).
11 542 U.S. 466 (2004). The litigation before the Supreme Court
involved two consolidated cases; Rasul v. Bush, No. 03-334, was spear-
headed by Joseph Margulies and the Center for Constitutional Rightsand Al Odah v. United States, No. 03-343, by the law firm of
Shearman and Sterling. Anticipating the litigation culminating in
Rasul v. Bush in December 2001, the DoD asked the Department of
Justice (DOJ) for its legal opinion concerning the question of whether
federal courts would have jurisdiction to hear habeas petitions from
aliens held at Guantánamo. SeeMemorandum from Patrick F . Philbin,
Deputy Assistant Att’y Gen. Dep’t of Justice & John Yoo, Deputy
Assistant Att’y Gen. Dep’t of Justice, to William J. Haynes II, GeneralCounsel, Dep’t of Def. (Dec. 28, 2001), in THE TORTUREPAPERS: THE ROAD TO ABU GHRAIB 29 (Karen J. Greenberg &
Joshua L. Dratel eds., 2005) [hereinafter THE TORTURE PAPER]
(concluding federal courts probably could not assert jurisdiction butsome litigation risk existed). 12 Al Odah v. United States, 346 F . Supp.2d 1 (D.D.C. 2004).
13 Mark Huband, U.S. Officer Predicts Guantánamo Releases, FIN.
TIMES (LONDON), Oct. 4, 2004.
14 Samara Kalk Derby, How Expert Gets Detainees to T alk THE CAPI-
TAL TIMES (Madison, Wis.), Aug. 16, 2004, at 1A; see also SAAR,
supra note 4, at 149 (“From what I was seeing in the files . . . detainees
with valuable information weren’t the norm. I was amazed that someof the files I was looking at were so thin – sometimes just a mug shot,an ID number from Bagram, and a summary of the detainee’s initialinterrogation, which might say that he had maintained he was afarmer, that he denied any connection to terrorism, and claimed tohave been picked up by the Northern Alliance or the Pakistanis.”).
15 Christopher Cooper, Detention Plan: In Guantánamo, Prisoners
Languish in a Sea of Red T ape, WALL ST. J., Jan. 26, 2005.
16 See infra Part I.A (discussing study of the Combatant Status Review
Tribunals’ records). 
17 For a selection of statements made by U.S. officials in early 2002
about the prisoners in Guantánamo, see DAVID ROSE,GUANTÁNAMO: THE WAR ON HUMAN RIGHTS 8 (2004)quoting Vice-President Dick Cheney: “These are the worst of a verybad lot. They are very dangerous. They are devoted to killing millionsof Americans, innocent Americans, if they can, and they are perfectlyprepared to die in the effort” Cheney’s remarks were made on FoxNews Sunday, Fox News, T ranscript: Cheney on Guantánamo
Detainees (Jan. 27, 2002), available at
http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,44082,00.html (last visitedJune 20, 2006).
18 The excerpt from the Al Qaeda training manual posted on the DOJ
website does call for torture to be brought to the attention of the court
if a “brother” is on trial. It does not instruct members to make up alle-gations of torture but appears to assume that torture will occur as amatter of course, perhaps because terrorism suspects were likely to behanded over to human rights abusing regimes where prisoners are rou-tinely tortured. SeeAl Qaeda T raining Manual, Lesson Eighteen,
available at www.fas.org/irp/world/para/manualpart1.html (last visited
June 20, 2006).
19 Jane Mayer, The Memo, NEW YORKER (Feb. 27, 2006), available
athttp://www.newyorker.com/fact/content/articles/060227fa_fact (last
visited June 20, 2006). The original memo is available athttp://www.newyorker.com/images/pdfs/moramemo.pdf (last visitedJune 20, 2006).
20See, e.g., Memorandum from Maj. Gen. Jack L. Rives, Deputy
Judge Advocate General of the U.S. Air Force, on Final Report and
Recommendations of the Working Group to Assess the Legal, Policy
and Operational Issues Relating to Interrogation of Detainees Held bythe U.S. Armed Forces in the War on Terrorism (Feb. 5, 2003) (on filewith author). This memorandum was made public by Senator LindseyGraham on July 25, 2005. 
21Decision and Order of the Supreme Court of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, No. Ki-1001/01 (Sarajevo, Jan. 17, 2002)(emphasis supplied). 
[The] Office of Federal [sic] prosecutor has with document no.
KT-115/01 from 17 January 2002 informed [the] investigativejudge that [his] opinion is that there are no further reasons or cir-cumstances based upon which this measure for ensuring [the] pres-ence of [the] accused in criminal procedure was ordered.Therefore[,] the measure of the detention can be terminated to allaccused persons and they can be released from detention.
42 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaReviewing [the] suggestion of [the] Deputy Federal prosecutor and
[the] status of [the] investigation [sic] case, [the] investigativejudge agreed with this suggestion and since the reasons based upon
which [the] detention was ordered and extended, article 189, para [.]1 and 2 of the Law on Criminal Procedure, do not exist any more, ithas been decided as in declaration of this decision.
In 2004, the Federal Prosecutor dropped all charges related to the
alleged plot and closed the criminal investigation. SeeLetter from
Zdravko Knezevic, Federal Chief Prosecutor, to UN HighCommission for Human Rights (Nov. 8, 2004) (on file with author).
22Documents produced by the U.S. government in FOIA litigation
have subsequently confirmed that the plane took off from the T uzlaAir Force base in Bosnia and landed at the U.S. Air Force base atIncirlik, T urkey, en route to Guantánamo. FOIA Documents 3506-
3562 (on file with the author).
23 Melissa Hoffer, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mohammed
Nechla (on file with author). 
24 O.K. v. Bush, 377 F . Supp.2d 102, 103 (D.D.C. 2005).
25 Exhibit A to Motion for Preliminary Injunction at 4, O.K. v. Bush,
377 F . Supp.2d (D.D.C. 2005) (No. 04-1136).
26 Robert Kirsch, unclassified attorney notes regarding Mustafa Ait Idir
(on file with author).
27 See, e.g., Ex Parte Quirin, 317 U.S. 1 (1942); Madsen v. Kinsella,
343 U.S. 341 (1952). 
28 Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U.S. 507, 516 (2004).
29 Compare News Briefing on Military Commission by Donald H.
Rumsfeld, Sec’y of Def., Gen. Peter Pace, Vice Chairman, Joint Chiefs
of Staff, Douglas Feith, Under Sec’y of Def., and William J. Haynes II,General Counsel of the Dep’t of Def. (March 21, 2002),
http://www.defenselink.mil/transcripts/2002/t03212002_t0321sd.html (last visited June 23, 2006) (Guantánamo prisoners are “enemy com-batants that we captured on the battlefield seeking to harm U.S. soldiers
or allies”), with Memorandum from William J. Haynes II, General
Counsel, Dep’t of Def., to Members of the ASIL-CFR Roundtable(Dec. 12, 2002),http://www.cfr.org/pub5312/william_j_haynes/enemy_combatants.php# (last visited June 23, 2006) (“An ‘enemy combatant’ is an individ-ual who, under the laws and customs of war, may be detained for the
duration of an armed conflict. In the current conflict with al Qaida[sic] and the Taliban, the term includes a member, agent, or associate of
al Qaida or the T aliban”) (emphasis added). 
30 Memorandum to the Sec’y of the Navy from Paul Wolfowitz,
Deputy Sec’y of Def. (Jul. 7, 2004),
http://www.defenselink.mil/news/Jul2004/d20040707review.pdf (lastvisited June 23, 2006).
31 Transcript of Oral Argument at 25-26, In re Guantánamo Detainee
Cases,355 F . Supp.2d 443 (D.D.C. 2005) (Nos. 02-CV-0299, et al.).
At that hearing, counsel for the government also admitted that the
definition was broad enough to include “a resident of Dublin, England[sic] who teaches English to the son of a person the CIA knows to be amember of Al-Qaeda,” or “a Wall Street Journal reporter, working inAfghanistan, who knows the exact location of Osama bin Laden butdoes not reveal it to the U.S. government in order to protect hersource.” Id.at 27, 29-30.
32 Transcript, ABC NEWS, 20/20, Guantánamo, June 25, 2004, at 2
[hereinafter ABC News] (on file with author). 33 Rasul v. Bush, Nos. 03-334 & 03-343, slip op. at 3 n.4 (D.C. Cir.
June 28, 2004).
34 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Barring the Government from
Rendering Sami Al-Laithi to Egypt to Face Persecution, or Revealing
to the Egyptian Government Additional Facts Concerning HisOpposition to the Repressive and Undemocratic Regime of Hosni
Mubarak at 5, Sliti v. Bush, (D.D.C. 2005). 
35 Id.at 2-3.
36 See, e.g., Nancy Gibbs with Viveca Novak, Inside “The Wire”
Security breaches. Suicidal detainees. A legal challenge heading to the
Supreme Court. Welcome to Guantánamo, TIME December 8, 2003, at
40. (“U.S. officials concluded that some detainees were there becausethey had been kidnapped by Afghan warlords and sold for the bountythe U.S. was offering for al-Qaeda and Taliban fighters. ‘Many wouldnot have been detained under the normal rules of engagement,’ thesource concedes”).
37 ABC NEWS, supra note 32 at 13.
38 Id.Lt. Col. Christino has also said that President Bush and
Secretary Rumsfeld have “wildly exaggerated” the intelligence value of
Guantánamo prisoners and that the “screening process” in Afghanistan
for deciding which prisoners to send to Guantánamo was “hopelesslyflawed from the get-go.” Martin Bright, Guantánamo Has ‘Failed to
Prevent T error Attacks,’ OBSERVER (U.K.), Oct. 3, 2004, available at
http://observer.guardian.co.uk/uk_news/story/0,6903,1318633,00.html (last visited June 23, 2006).
39 Based on government figures, CCR estimates this was the peak
number. SeePress Release, U.S. Dep’t of Def., T ransfer of Guantánamo
Detainees Complete (Nov. 24, 2003),
http://www.defenselink.mil/releases/2003/nr20031124-0685.html (lastvisited June 23, 2006). As of October 1, 2005, the total number ofmen who have ever been detained in GTMO according to DoD fig-ures was approximately 752. SeePress Release, U.S. Dep’t of Def.,
Detainee T ransfer Announced (Oct. 1, 2005),
http://www.defenselink.mil/releases/2005/nr20051001-4826.html (lastvisited June 23, 2006). The United States has made it difficult, if notimpossible, to compile accurate statistics about the number of individ-uals detained in Guantánamo. The DoD and other agencies haverefused to release publicly the name, citizenship, or place of seizure of
anyone in Guantánamo. It is only through sporadic letters from pris-oners to their families and meetings between prisoners and their habeas
attorneys that any specific details about the prisoners are made public.The DoD limits its public statements to the approximate number ofprisoners detained at any given time. However, as a result of a lawsuitbrought by the Associated Press, the DoD released two list of names:the first was of all Guantánamo prisoners who were the subjects ofCombatant Status Review T ribunals. This included approximately 560names. The second was a list of all persons ever incarcerated onGuantánamo. It included over 700 names. The absolute reliability of
these two lists is not known. Even less information is available aboutthe Central Intelligence Agency’s (CIA) activity at Guantánamo. TheCIA has refused to confirm or deny allegations that at Guantánamo itwas holding individuals as “ghost” prisoners, or prisoners unlisted onany prisoner records, and it has denied access to InternationalCommittee of the Red Cross inspectors. John Hendren & MarkMazzetti, Pentagon Reportedly Aimed to Hold Detainees in Secret, L.A.
TIMES, July 9, 2004 (noting that only prisoners in DoD custody arerequired, under the Wolfowitz Order, to have yearly reviews of their
status).
40 See, e.g., SEYMOUR M. HERSH, CHAIN OF COMMAND:
THE ROAD FROM 9/11 TO ABU GHRAIB 1-20 (2004); Josh
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         43White, Abu Ghraib T actics Were First Used at Guantánamo, WASH.
POST, July 14, 2005, at A1. 
41 SeeCol. Daniel F . McCallum, Why GTMO? 6, available at
http://www/justicescholars.org/pegc/archive/Journals/McCallum_why_gtmo.pdf (last visited June 25, 2006).
42 The two most notorious discussions were addressed to Alberto R.
Gonzales, Counsel to the President. 9 Memorandum from Jay S.
Bybee, Assistant Att’y Gen., U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to Alberto R.
Gonzales, Counsel to the President (Aug. 1, 2002), inTHE TOR-
TURE PAPERS, supra note 11, at 172; Letter from John C. Yoo,
Deputy Assistant Att’y Gen., U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of Legal
Counsel, to Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President (Aug. 1,2002), in id. at 218. 
43 “Extraordinary rendition” refers to transferring a prisoner without
legal process to another country for interrogation, often where thetransferee country has a dubious human rights record. See, e.g., Jane
Mayer, Outsourcing Torture, NEW YORKER, Feb. 14, 2005, available
athttp://newyorker.com/printables/facts/050214fa_fact6 (last visited
June 23, 2006).
44 This was Mohammed al-Qahtani, the alleged twentieth hijacker. See
Adam Zagorin & Michael Duffy, Inside the Interrogation of Detainee
063, TIME, June 20, 2005. It appears that Mr. al-Qahtani nearly died
while undergoing interrogation in early December 2002. His heartrate slowed to 35 beats per minute and he was taken to the militaryhospital for a CT scan and stabilizing. For this story, Timeobtained a
leaked copy of the interrogation log for al-Qahtani. Personal commu-nication from Adam Zagorin. This was not the first time al-Qahtanihad been taken to the hospital during his interrogations. GitanjaliGutierrez, Unclassified Attorney Notes (on file with author). 
45 Josh White, Guantánamo Desperation Seen in Suicide Attempts,
WASH. POST, Nov. 1, 2005, at A1 (recounting suicide attempt two
weeks earlier and quoting Lt. Col. Jeremy Martin, spokesman for Joint
Task Force Guantánamo, on the total number of attempts (36 by 22
different prisoners)). The government’s estimates have not been inde-pendently corroborated.
46 SeeCenter for Constitutional Rights, The Guantánamo Prisoner
Hunger Strikes & Protests: February 2002 – August 2005, September
2005, available at http://www.ccr-
ny.org/v2/legal/september_11th/docs/Gitmo_Hunger_Strike_Report_Sept_2005.pdf (last visited June 23, 2006). 
47 See infra Part IV (detailing treatment of prisoners during hunger
strike).
48 See id.
49 Guantánamo Bay Detainee Statements, Jum’ah Mohammed
AbdulLatif Al Dossari, Isa Ali Abdulla Al Murbati, Abdullah Al
Noaimi and Adel Kamel Abdulla Haji 5 (May 2005) (Joshua
Colangelo-Bryan) [hereinafter Guantánamo prisoner Statements].
50 SeeInternational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), 1949
Conventions & Additional Protocols,http://www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/CONVPRES?OpenView (last visited June25, 2006).
51 Geneva Convention (no. III) relative to the treatment of prisoners
of war, Aug. 12, 1949, 6 U.S.T. 3316, 75 U.N.T.S. 135 [hereinafterGC III]
52 SeeInternational Committee of the Red Cross, supra note 50.
53 SeeGC III, supra note 51, art. 5.54 Id.arts. 13, 17, 18 & 19.
55 Id.arts. 99-108.
56 Id.arts. 8-11.
57 Id.art. 15.
58 Id.arts. 99 and 103-07 guarantee the rights not to be tried or sen-
tenced for acts not forbidden by law at the time; not to give coercedconfessions; the right to a defense and to assistance of a qualified advo-cate or counsel; the right to a speedy trial; limits on pretrial confine-ment; timely notice of charges; the right to call witnesses; the right toan interpreter if necessary; the right to private communicationsbetween advocate or counsel and the accused; and the right of appealin the same manner as for members of the armed forces of the detain-ing power. Id.arts. 99, 103-107.
59 Geneva Convention (No. IV) Relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of Warrant art. 4, Aug. 12, 1949.
60 Id.art 5.
61 GC III, supra note 51, art. 17. 
62 Id. 
63 Id.
64 CA3 provides that “[p]ersons taking no active part in the hostilities,
including. . . those placed ‘hors de combat’ by sickness, wounds, detention,
or any other cause, shall in all circumstances be treated humanely, with-
out any adverse distinction founded on race, color, religion or faith,sex, birth or wealth, or any other similar criteria” (emphasis added).E.G., G.C III, supra note 51, art. 3(1). 
65 Id.art. 3(1)(a),(c)-(d). 
66 Id.art. 3(2).
67 These include the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, the Convention Against Torture, and the Convention AgainstAll Forms of Racial Discrimination.
68 JOSEPH MARGULIES , Guantánamo and the Abuse of Presidential
power (2006).
69 U.S. Army, Field Manual 34-52: Intelligence Interrogation at iv.-v.
(1992) [hereafter FM 34-52] (“These principles and techniques ofinterrogation are to be used within the constraints established by thefollowing: . . . Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of theWounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949, .
. . Geneva Convention Relative to the T reatment of Prisoners of Warof August 12, 1949, . . . Geneva Convention Relative to theProtection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of August 12,
1949…”).
70 Id.at 3-14 to 3-17.
71 Id.
72 Id.at 3-18 to 3-19. Other techniques in FM 34-52 include both
psychological ruses and varied forms of questioning: “We Know All”(appearing to know everything a source might be concealing); “Fileand Dossier” (appearing to have all information about a source);“Establish Your Identity” (convincing the source you have mistakenhim for someone else); “Repetition” (repeating a question over andover again); “Rapid Fire” (interrupting the source with unrelated ques-
tions); “Silent” (maintaining eye contact while not speaking); “Changeof Scene” (getting source away from atmosphere of interrogationroom). Id.at 3-19 to 3-20.
44 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba73 Working Group Report on Detainee Interrogations in the Global War
on T errorism: Assessment of Legal, Historical, Policy, and OperationalConsiderations, Draft (Mar. 6, 2003), in THE TORTURE PAPERS,
supra note 11, at 241, 285.
74 Id.
75 FM 34-52, supra note 69, at 1-9 (emphasis added).
76 Capt. Ian Fishback, Op-Ed, A Matter of Honor, WASH. POST,
Sept. 28, 2005, at A21; see also SAAR, supra note 4, at 225 (“[I]f we
felt queasy about what was happening, it wasn’t because we thoughtwe were breaking any rules. That Geneva Convention meeting had
blurred all the lines”). 
77 Eric Schmitt, Pentagon Rethinking Manual with Interrogation
Methods , N.Y.Times, June 14, 2006.
78 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Concerning Conditions of
Confinement at 17, Sliti v. Bush (D.D.C. 2005) (No. 05-CV-429)
(citing Unclassified Memorandum re: Omar Deghayes (July 19, 2005),at 3-4). 
79 18 U.S.C. § 2441. The statute also criminalizes violations of certain
other treaties related to the laws of war. See18 U.S.C. § 2441(c)(2). 
80 18 U.S.C. § 2441(c)(1).
81 GC III, supra note 51, art. 130. 
82 18 U.S.C. § 2441(c)(3).
83 Letter from John Ashcroft, Att’y Gen. to George W. Bush, President
(Feb. 1, 2002), inTHE TORTURE PAPERS, supra note 11, at 126,
available athttp://news.findlaw.com/wp/docs/torture/jash20102ltr.html (last visit-ed June 23, 2006). 
84 SeeDraft Memorandum from John Yoo, Deputy Assistant Att’y
Gen., Dep’t of Justice & Robert J. Delabunty, Special Counsel, Dep’t
of Justice, to William J. Haynes II, General Counsel, Dep’t of Def.(Jan. 9, 2002), inTHE TORTURE PAPERS, supra note 11, at 38,
50; Memorandum from Jay S. Bybee, Assistant Att’y Gen., Dep’t ofJustice, to Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President & William J.
Haynes, II, General Counsel, Dep’t of Def. (Jan. 22, 2002), inTHE
TORTURE PAPERS, supra note 11 at 81, 95.
85 Memorandum from George W. Bush, President, to the Vice
President of the United States Sec’y of State, et al. (Feb. 7, 2002), in
THE TORTURE PAPERS, supra note 11 at 134-35 (asserting the
Geneva Conventions did not apply to terrorist organizations like Al
Qaeda and that the Taliban were unlawful combatants).
[Memorandum from Sec. of Def. to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs ofStaff (Jan. 19, 2002) (“The United States has determined that Al
Qaida and Taliban individuals . . . are not entitled to prisoner of war
status for purposes of the Geneva Conventions of 1949.”]
86 Id.
87 Id.
88 Taft Speech, available at
http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/uslaw/pdf/taft-amer-uni-32405.pdf(last visited June 23, 2006).
89 Taft Speech supra notes 88.
90 Memorandum from Dep’t of the Navy to the Inspector General,
Dep’t of the Navy, Statement for the Record: Office of General
Counsel, Involvment in Interrogation Issiues (July 7, 2004) available
athttp://www.newyorker.com/images/pdfs/moramemo.pdf (last visitedJune 23, 2006).
91 Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , -S.Ct. - , 2006 WL1764793 at *7-11.
92 Walter Dellinger, A Supreme Court Conversation, SLATE,
http://www.slate.com/id/244476/entry/2144826/ (last visited July 5,2006).
93 Guantánamo Prisoner Statements, supra note 49 at 3.
94 Ted Conover, In the Land of Guantánamo, N.Y. TIMES, June 29,
2003.
95 Id. 
96 SeeROSE, supra note 17 at 54-55 (comparing the GTMO that
reporters see with a “Potemkin” village).
97 SeeU.S. Army, Joint Task Force Guantánamo Bay Press Kit
Commissions [hereinafter JTF-GTMO Press Kit], available at
www.defenselink/mil/news/Aug2004/d20040818PK.pdf. 
98 Id.
99 Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 344 F . Supp. 2d 152, 152, 172 (D.D.C.
2004).
100 JTF-GTMO Press Kit, supra note 97. 
101 The youngest prisoner detained at Guantánamo was approximately
ten-years-old. Alex Belida, 3 Afghan Children Released from
Guantánamo Bay Detention Camp, VOICE OF AMERICA NEWS,
http://www.globalsecurity.org/security/library/news/2004/01/sec-040129-voa03.htm. 
102 Conover, supra note 94 (“The juvenile enemy combatants live in a
prison called Camp Iguana”). Current information provided by SabinWillett after a January 2006 visit to that camp.
103 Kathleen T. Rhem, Detainees Living in Varied Conditions at
Guantánamo, American Forces Information Service (Feb. 16, 2005),
available athttp://www.defenselink.mil/news/Feb2005/n02162005_2005021604.html (last visited June 23, 2006).
104 Id.
105 Id.
106 FOIA Documents 4622-24,
http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI_4622_4624.pdf (last vis-ited June 25, 2006). 
107 Zagorin & Duffy, supra note 44. 
108 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, KUBARK COUNTER-
INTELLIGENCE INTERROGATION (1963),http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB122/#kubark (lastvisited June 25, 2006); Id.at 88 (“[A] person cut off from external
stimuli turns his awareness inward, upon himself, and then projectsthe contents of his own unconscious outwards, so that he endows hisfaceless environment with his own attributes, fears, and forgottenmemories.”); Id.at 103 (“The interrogatee’s mature defenses crumbles
[sic] as he becomes more childlike.”).
109 For a more detailed summary of psychological abuse at
Guantánamo (as well as Afghanistan), see PHYSICIANS FOR
HUMAN RIGHTS, BREAK THEM DOWN: SYSTEMATIC USEOF PSYCHOLOGICAL TORTURE BY U.S. FORCES (2005)[hereinafter PHR], available at http://www.phrusa.org/research/tor-
ture/pdf/psych_torture.pdf (last visited June 25, 2006). 
110 Carlotta Gall & Neil A. Lewis, Threats and Responses: Captives –
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         45Tales of Despair from Guantanamo, N.Y. TIMES, June 17, 2003, at A1.
111 PHR, supra note 109, at 53-54 n.293 (citing BBC News, Mass
Guantánamo Suicide Protest Jan. 25, 2005,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/420427.stm (last visited June 25,2006) (quoting Army spokesman Lt. Col. Sumpter)).
112 Id.
113 White, supra note 45, at A1.
114 PHR, supra note 109, at 10 (quoting Brief of Professors and
Practitioners of Psychology and Psychiatry as Amicus Curiae in Support
of Respondent at 12-13, Wilkinson v. Austin, 545 U.S. 209 (2005)
(No. 04-495)).
115 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 8. 
116 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 9. 
117 Hicks Aff. at 4-5, Hicks v. Bush, 397 F . Supp.2d 36 (D.D.C. 2005)
(No. 02-299).
118 Joshua Colangelo-Bryan, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding
Isa Ali Abdulla Al Murbati (on file with author). 
119 Joshua Colangelo-Bryan, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding
Jum’ah Mohammed AbdulLatif Al Dossari (on file with author). 
120 Stephen Oleskey, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Saber
Lahmar (Dec. 2004, Oct. 2005) (on file with author); Robert Kirsch& Stephen Oleskey, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding BelkacemBensayah (Dec. 2004 and Oct. 2005, respectively) (on file with
authors). 
121 Letter from Moazzam Begg to U.S. Forces Administration (July 12,
2004), available at
http://news.bbc.co.uk/nol/chared/bsp/hi/pdfs/01_10_04.pdf (last visit-ed June 25, 1006).
122 Id.
123 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 40.
124 Mark Falkoff, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Othman
Abdulraheem Mohammad (on file with author); see also FOIA
Document 4585,
http:/www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI_4585.pdf (last visitedJune 25, 2006) (“BAU personnel witnessed sleep depravation [sic] . . .
and utilization of loud music/bright lights/growling dogs in theDetainee interview process by DoD representatives”).
125 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Belkacem
Bensayah (on file with author). 
126 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa Ait
Idir (on file with author). 
127 According to Sergeant Saar, Mr. Al-Qahtani “was subjected to
strobe lights; a loud, insistent tape of cats meowing (from a cat foodcommercial) interspersed with babies crying; and deafening loudmusic,” often with repeated violent lyrics. SAAR, supra note 4 at 164.
Dogs were also used to threaten Mr. Al-Qahtani. Id. 
128 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Saber
Lahmar (on file with author). 
129 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 16.
130 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa Ait
Idir (on file with author). 
131 Richard J. Wilson & Muneer Ahmad, Unclassified Attorney NotesRegarding O.K. (on file with authors). 
132 FOIA Document 5053,
http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI_5053_5054.pdf (last vis-ited June 25, 2006).
133 PHR, supra note 109 at 11. Menachem Begin, a former Israeli
Prime Minister, describes his experience with sleep deprivation while
being held in a Soviet prison:
In the head of the interrogated prisoner a haze begins to form. His
spirit is wearied to death, his legs are unsteady, and he has one soledesire: to sleep, to sleep just a little, not to get up, to lie, to rest, toforget. . . . Anyone who has experienced this desire knows that noteven hunger or thirst are comparable with it. . . . I came acrossprisoners who signed what they were ordered to sign, only to getwhat the interrogator promised them. He did not promise themtheir liberty. He promised them—if they signed—uninterruptedsleep!
Tom Malinowski, The Logic of Torture, WASH. POST, June 27, 2004,
at B7. 
134 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Belkacem
Bensayah (Feb. 2005) (on file with author); Sergeant Saar witnessed
prisoners being taken on late-night “walkabouts.” SAAR, supra note 4,
at 174, 217. 
135 Melissa Hoffer, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Lakhdar
Boumediene (on file with author). 
136 Melissa Hoffer, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding
Mohammed Nechla (on file with author). 
137 Michael Scherer & Mark Benjamin, What Rumsfeld Knew?
SALON.COM Apr. 14, 2006, http//:www.salon.com/news/fea-ture/2006/04/14/rummy (last visited June 25, 2006). 
138 O.K. v. Bush, 377 F . Supp.2d 102, 107 (D.D.C. 2005). 
139 Guantánamo Prisoner Statements (Colangelo-Bryan) supra note
49, at 14.
140 Stephen Oleskey, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Lakhdar
Boumediene (on file with author). 
141 Guantánamo Prisoner Statements, supra note 49 at 11-12.
142 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 16.
143 An “ACS Interrogator” filed an allegation of inhumane treatment
regarding an incident that occurred on April 22, 2003, in which the
use of military guards during interrogations was described in somedetail. In a memorandum for Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller regardingthe results of an inquiry into an allegation of inhumane treatment of[name of prisoner redacted], the staff JAG lawyer quoted from theallegation: “. . . they [MPs] pushed in the back of the detainee’s kneeswith their knees, taking the detainee to his knees. Then holding thedetainee by his upper arms they slammed his upper body to the floor.”FOIA Documents 1318-22,http://action.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/072605 (last visited June 25,2006). The memorandum said further that the complaining interroga-tor stated that this procedure was repeated 25-30 times and with suchforce that the floor and a booth next door were shaking. The inter-rogator stated that when the prisoner was pushed to the floor, he
turned his head so that the side of his face was hitting the floor andthat such force was used the interrogator feared for the prisoner’s safe-ty. The complaining interrogator’s supervisor (the name is redacted)corroborated the details of this allegation and the degree of force andmoreover added that either the MPs or the military interrogators (thenames are redacted) were laughing while this activity was taking place.
46 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, CubaId. at 1319. The military downplayed these concerns by saying that
the shaking of the floor was caused by guards stomping on the floorwith their boots as they pushed the prisoner down and that the guardshad “constant control” of the prisoner at all times. Id.at 1319-20. In a
memorandum from an ACS defense analyst, the April 22 incident isdescribed as one that was “totally inappropriate and bordered on crim-inal.” FOIA Document 1333,http://action.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/072605 (last visited June 25,2006).
144 A FOIA Document recording a “Narrative Medical Summary” for
a prisoner says that the prisoner “reports that Reservation has ‘draggedme across the floor’ resulting in scrapes on his feet, jerked on thechains which have caused marks on his wrists, gripped the cuffs so thatthey tightened excessively causing marks on his wrists, lifted him upthen ‘slammed’ him down on his knees, made his mouth such that hewas spitting up blood, made a tooth loose, bruised several areas of hisupper arms and torso, and created pain on his lower ribs. He deniestrauma to the rib area but does not know how that area is causing himso much pain. He felt so bad last night that he tried to ‘cut’ the arteryin his neck with his fingernails.” FOIA Documents 1347-50,http://action.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/072605/1243_1381.pdf (lastvisited June 25, 2006). The author of the medical summary noted:“Stated source of injury for the various areas is consistent with theinjuries noted today.” Id.at 1349. Reservation is the term used within
the camps in Guantánamo to refer to interrogations. Cf. YEE, supra
note 5 at 77 (“We never used the word ‘interrogation’ on the blocks,saying instead that the detainees were going to ‘reservation.’”).
145 Mark Falkoff, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Yasein
Khasem Mohammed Esmail (on file with author). 
146 Mark Falkoff, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Abd al-Malik
al-Wahab (on file with author). 
147 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa Ait
Idir (on file with author). 
148 Melissa Hoffer, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Lakhdar
Boumediene (on file with author). 
149 Id.
150 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Barring the Government from
Rendering Sami Al-Laithi to Egypt to Face Persecution, or Revealing
to the Egyptian Government Additional Facts Concerning HisOpposition to the Repressive and Undemocratic Regime of Hosni
Mubarak at 2-3, Sliti v. Bush, No. 05-CV-0429 (D.D.C. 2005). 
151 Carol D. Leonnig, Guantánamo Detainee Says Beating Injured
Spine, WASH. POST, Aug. 13, 2005, at A18.
152 Id.
153 Id.
154 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 21.
155 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 29.
156 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 50.
157 Baher Azmy, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Murat Kurnaz
(on file with author). 
158 SHAFIQ RASUL, ASIF IQBAL, & RHUHEL AHMED, COM-
POSITE STATEMENT: DETENTION IN AFGHANISTAN ANDGUANTANAMO BAY (2004), http://www.ccr-ny.org/v2/legal/sep-tember_11th/docs/Guantanamo_composite_statement_FINAL.pdf(last visited June 25, 2006).159 The designation ERF (Extreme Reaction Force) is sometimes also
used. 
160 SAAR, supra note 4 at 96-99.
161 SeeYEE, supra note 5 at 109 (“IRFing should have been kept to
the bare minimum and carried out only when necessary, but therewere weeks when it occurred every day”).
162 SeeSAAR, supra note 4 at 102.
163 Paisley Dodds, Tapes Show Guantánamo Squads’ T actics, ASSOC.
PRESS, Feb. 1, 2005.
164 Id.
165 Guantánamo Prisoner Statements, supra note 49 at 3-4. This inci-
dent is corroborated by several sources. A substantially similar descrip-tion is reported by Shafiq Rasul, Asif Iqbal, and Rhuhel Ahmed.SHAFIQ RASUL, ASIF IQBAL, & RHUHEL AHMED, supra note
158 ¶ 167. What appears to be the same incident is also the subject ofan FBI memo (dated June 7, 2002, but referring to an incident thatoccurred “three or four weeks ago”). The FBI memo notes that theprisoner “had what appeared to be a recent wound on the bridge of hisnose.” FOIA Document 3855,http://aclu.org/turturefoia/released/05/25/05 (last visited June 25,2006). Mr. Al Dossari’s lawyer corroborates that the prisoner has “aprominent scar” on his nose that is consistent with his account. 
166 CBS News, G.I. Attacked During Training, Nov. 3, 2004. 
167 M. Gregg Bloche & Jonathan H. Marks, Doctors and Interrogators
at Guantánamo Bay, 353 NEW ENG. J. MED. 6, 6-8 (2005).
168 See id. at 7 (“Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions pro-
vides that medical personnel ‘shall not be compelled to perform acts orto carry out work contrary to the rules of medical ethics.’ Althoughthe protocol has not been ratified by the U.S., this principle hasattained the status of customary international law.”). 
169 Id. at 6 (“[C]ommunications from ‘enemy persons under U.S. con-
trol’ at Guantánamo ‘are not confidential and are not subject to theassertion of privileges’ by detainees.”) (quoting Memorandum fromRichard A. Huck, Chief of Staff, U.S. Southern Command, on U.S.Southern Command Confidentiality Policy for Interactions Between
Health Care Providers and Enemy Persons (Aug. 6, 2002)). 
170 Mark Falkoff, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Othman
Abulraheem Mohammad (on file with author). 
171 Melissa Hoffer, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Lakhdar
Boumediene (on file with author). 
172 Chronological Medical Record for Lakhdar Boumediene (Feb. 20,
2003), Bates No. OLE 00826 (released as a result of FOIA litigationby Boumediene petitioners, Oleskey v. U.S. Dept. of Defense, U.S. Dept.
of Justice, No. 05-10739 (D. Mass 2005)).
173 Interrogation Log for Detainee 063, TIME,
http://www.time.com/time/2006/log/log.pdf (last visited June 25,2006). 
174 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2 at 11. 
175 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Requiring that Respondents
Provide His Counsel with a Complete Copy of His Own Medical
Records, and Cease Their Practice of Intentional Medical Malpractice
Against Him at 20, Sliti v. Bush, No. 05-CV-0429 (D.D.C. 2005). 
176 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Concerning Conditions of
Confinement at 24, Sliti v. Bush, No. 05-CV-429 (D.D.C. Aug. 9,
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         472005) (citing Unclassified Memorandum re: Omas Deghayes (July 19,
2005). Lawyers for Abdulla Thani Faris Al-Anazi, a double amputee,believe he is receiving “inadequate medical care”; his lawyers haverequested that his defective prostheses be repaired and that he be given
treatment for the lesions they cause. SeeLetter to Lt. Comdr. De
Alicante on Medical T reatment for Prisoner Abdulla Thari Faris Al-Anazi (Aug. 29, 2005) (Anant Raut).
177 New Yorker reporter Jane Mayer has detailed efforts of military
behavioral scientists to “reverse-engineer” harsher interrogation tech-niques drawn from a classified military program called Survival,Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE). During the SERE program,
U.S. military personnel are taught to survive extreme and aggressiveinterrogation tactics. Behavioral scientists have drawn from the SEREprogram to develop tactics that prisoners cannot withstand. See JaneMayer, The Experiment, NEW YORKER, July 11 & 18, 2005; see also
Bloche & Marks, supra note 166 at 7-8. 
178 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa Ait
Idir (on file with author). 
179 Robert Jay Lifton, Doctors and Torture, 351 NEW ENG. J. MED.
415, 416 (2004). 
180 Joshua Colangelo-Bryan, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Al
Noaimi (on file with author); see also FOIA Document 00002,
http://action.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/062405 (last visited June 25,2006) (stating that a female interrogator who wiped dye from redmagic marker on prisoner’s shirt after prisoner spit on her “received averbal reprimand for inappropriate contact/interrogation technique”).
181 One prisoner reported that menstrual blood was smeared on a pris-
oner’s chest during interrogation. Mark Falkoff, Unclassified AttorneyNotes (on file with author); see also SAAR, supra note 4 at 225-28
(describing an incident corresponding to this allegation). 
182 SAAR, supra note 4 at 228. 
183 FOIA Document 1333,
http://action.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/072605 (last visited June 25,2006).
184 Baher Azmy, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Murat Kurnaz
(on file with author). 
185 Cf. YEE, supra note 5 at 110 (“Female guards were often used to
provoke the detainee. Knowing that physical contact between unrelat-ed men and women is not allowed under Islamic law, the female MPswould be exceptionally inappropriate in how they patted down theprisoners and how they touched them on the way to the showers orrecreation. Detainees often resisted and then were IRFed.”).
186 Guantánamo Prisoner Statements, supra note 49 at 7-8.
187 Carol D. Leonnig, Further Detainee Abuse Alleged, WASH. POST,
Dec. 26, 2004, at A01.
188 Id. 
189 Thomas B. Wilner, Neil Koslowe, Kristine Huskey, Jared
Goldstein, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding 12 Kuwaiti
Prisoners (on file with authors). 
190 Guantánamo Prisoner Statements supra note 49 at 17. 
191 Stephen Oleskey, Melissa Hoffer, Unclassified Attorney Notes
Regarding Lakhdar Boumediene (on file with authors). 
192 Melissa Hoffer & Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes
Regarding Hadj Boudella (on file with authors). 
193 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa AitIdir (on file with author).
194 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa Ait
Idir (on file with author).
195 YEE, supra note 5 at 115.
196 Id.
197 Stephen Oleskey, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Lakhdar
Boumediene (on file with author). 
198 Neha Gohil, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Fahmi
Abdullah Ahmed Al Towlaqi (on file with author); see also FOIA
Document 1379, available at
http://action.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/072605 (last visited June 15,2006) (“documenting case in which a Camp barber intentionally gavetwo unusual haircuts, in an effort to frustrate detainee requests forsimilar haircuts, as a sign of detainee unity”).
199 Neha Gohil, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Fahmi
Abdullah Ahmed Al Towlaqi (on file with author).
200 Seeinfra note 202 and accompanying text.
201 Fiqh-us-Sunnah, Volume 5: Tawaf or Circumambulation around
Ka'bah,http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/law/fiqhussunnah/fus5_76.html (lastvisited June 25, 2006).
202 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Concerning Conditions of
Confinement at 22, Sliti v. Bush (D.D.C. 2005) (No. 05-CV-429)
(citing Unclassified Memorandum re: Omar Deghayes (July 19, 2005)at 5). The memo describes Camp Romeo Block as a special discipli-nary block where prisoners are frequently made to strip and are heldonly in their shorts. 
203 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa Ait
Idir (Feb. 2004) (on file with author). This account is corroborated by
Fahmi Abdullah Ahmed Al Towlaqi, who states that he witnessed MPs
bend back a prisoner’s finger so far that it broke. Neha Gohil,Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Fahmi Abdullah Al Towlaqi
(on file with author). Mr. Ait Idir’s GTMO medical records confirmthat his finger was broken. The records fail to reflect that it was theIRF that broke his finger. Lakhdar Boumediene also witnessed MustafaAit Idir’s finger being bent back. Stephen Oleskey, UnclassifiedAttorney Notes Regarding Lakhdar Boumediene (Feb. 2005) (on file
with author). See also FOIA Documents 4622-24,
http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI_4622_4624.pdf (last vis-ited June 15, 2006) (describing a similar incident in which a femaleinterrogator bent back prisoner’s thumbs). 
204 Interview with Marc Falkoff, Attorney, Covington & Burling,
broadcast by Nasseb Vibes (Feb. 15, 2005), available at
www.naseeb.com/naseebvibes/interview-detail.php?aid=3526 (last visit-ed June 21, 2006). 
205 Hicks Aff., supra note 117 at 3:20.
206 REPORT INTO THE SYSTEMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL-
IZED U.S. DESECRATION OF THE QUAR’AN AND OTHERISLAMIC RITUALS: TESTIMONIES FROM FORMERGUANTÁNAMO BAY DETAINEES 2,www.cageprisoners.com/downloads/USQuranDesecration.pdf (last vis-ited June 15, 2006) (statement by Moazzam Begg).
207 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa Ait
Idir (on file with author).
208 Shearman Sterling Report, supra note 2, at 13; see also FOIA
Document 4737.
48 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cubahttp://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI_4737_4738.pdf (last vis-
ited June 15, 2006); Othman Abdulraheem Mohammed describesinterrogators wrapping Qur’ans in Israeli flags, throwing them on theground, and stomping on them. Mark Falkoff, Unclassified AttorneyNotes Regarding Othman Abdulraheem Mohammed (on file with
author).
209 FOIA Document 4737-38,
http:www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI.121504.4737-1738.pdf(last visited June 30, 2006). 
210 CBS News Video Shows Gitmo Abuse” Feb. 1, 2005
www.cbsnews.com/stories/2005/02/04/terror/main671682.shtml (lastvisited June 15, 2006). 
211 The heightened severity of pre-Guantánamo abuse accounts is pro-
bative of the truth of prisoner allegations, since it may be reflective ofan awareness on the military’s part that, whatever the precise status ofGuantánamo, its actions there are more constrained.
212 Joshua Colangelo-Bryan, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding
Jum’ah Mohammed Abdul Latif Al Dossari (on file with author). 
213 “Waterboarding” entails the use of a “wet towel and dripping water
to induce the misperception of suffocation.” Memorandum fromDept. of Def. on Counter-Resistance Techniques at 6 (Nov. 27, 2002).
Typically, “The prisoner is bound to an inclined board, feet raised and
head slightly below the feet. Cellophane is wrapped over the prisoner’sface and water is poured over him.” Brian Ross & Richard Esposito,CIA Harsh Interrogation Techniques Described, ABC N
EWS, May 19,
2006.
214 Baher Azmy, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Murat Kurnaz
(on file with author). 
215 Thomas B. Wilner, Neil Koslowe, Kristine Huskey, Jared
Goldstein, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding 12 Kuwaiti
Prisoners (on file with authors). 
216 Mark Falkoff, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Abdulsalam
Ali Abdulrahman Al-Hela (on file with author). 
217 Decl. of Joseph Margulies at para. 12, Habib v. Bush, (D.D.C. Apr
27, 2005) (No. 02-CV-1130).
218 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Concerning Conditions of
Confinement 16-17, Sliti v. Bush (D.D.C. 2005) (No. 05-CV-429)
(citing Unclassified Memorandum re: Omar Deghayes (July 19, 2005)at 3-4). 
219 Id.at 5, 7 (cited in id.at 22-23, 26). 
220 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Concerning Conditions of
Confinement 16, Sliti v. Bush (D.D.C. 2005) (No. 05-CV-429) (citing
Unclassified Memorandum re: Omar Deghayes (July 19, 2005) at 3).
“The lights are some of the worst tools used against us. They are neon,
two and a half metres long, glaring 24 hours a day. They are fitteddirectly above the concrete tomb that is meant to be our bed. They arenever dimmed. Have you ever lived in bright lights for 24 hours a day,every day? It is a constant struggle to get any sleep at all. Many in thecamp suffer mentally from sleep deprivation.” Id.
221 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Concerning Conditions of
Confinement at 12-13, Sliti. v. Bush (D.D.C. 2005) (No. 05-CV-429)
(citing Memo on Conditions in Guantánamo Bay 3 (Aug. 13, 2005).
The incident was corroborated by Saber Lahmar. Melissa Hoffer,Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Saber Lahmar (Aug. 2005) (on
file with author).
222 Id.223 SeeMotion for a Preliminary Injunction Concerning Conditions of
Confinement 3-4, Sliti v. Bush (D.D.C. 2005) (No. 05-CV-429) (cit-
ing unclassified statement of Binyam Mohammed). 
224 Motion for a Preliminary Injunction Concerning Conditions of
Confinement 13, Sliti. v. Bush (D.D.C. 2005) (No. 05-CV-429) (cit-
ing Shaker Aamer Statement). 
225 Id.at 14-15. 
226 Decl. of Julia Tarver, Majid Abdulla Al Joudi v. Bush, Civ. No. 05-
0301, at para. 7 (Oct. 14, 2005).
227 Id.
228 Id.at paras. 14-16. 
229 Id.at para. 9, n 1.
230 Emergency Motion for Injunction Against Further Torture of
Mohammed Bawazir, Al-Adahi v. Bush (D.D.C. No. 05-280 (GK))
(citation omitted).
231 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE, SECOND PERIODIC
REPORT OF THE U.S. OF AMERICA TO THE COMMITTEEAGAINST TORTURE, Annex I, Part I (2005), available at
www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/45738.htm (last visited June 23, 2006). TheSecond Periodic Report substantiates only 10 minor episodes of mis-
conduct at GTMO, such as: a female interrogator sitting in a prison-er’s lap and running her fingers through his hair; an interrogator usingduct tape to tape shut the mouth of a prisoner who was not cooperat-ing; an interrogator bruising a prisoner’s knees by repeatedly directingMPs to force him into and out of a prone position; and an MPassaulting a prisoner by spraying him with a hose after the prisonerhad thrown a foul-smelling liquid on the MP . Id. 
232 Brief of Petitioner-Appellees/Cross-Appellants at 14-15, Fawzi
Khalid A.F . Al Odah v. U.S., 05-5064, 05-5095-05-5116 (Cir. C.D.
June 28, 2005).
233 See generally FBI documents released under the Freedom of
Information Act, available at
http://action.aclu.org/site/PageServer?pagename=torturefoia (last visit-ed June 23, 2006).
234 SeeU.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Notice of Committee
Hearing (June 8, 2005), available at http://judiciary.senate.gov/hear-
ing.cfm?id=1542 (last visited June 22, 2006). 
235 SeeJudith Resnik, Opening the Door, Court Stripping:
Unconscionable and Unconstitutional?, SLATE
http://www.slate.com/id/2135240 (last visited June 23, 2006).
236 SeeJosh White & Carol Leonnig, U.S. Cites Exception in Torture
Ban; McCain Law May Not Apply to Cuba Prison, WASH. POST, Mar.
2006, at A04. 
237 Id. 
238 Id.
239 - S.Ct. - , 2006 WL 176473.
240 See infra notes 241-252 and accompanying text.
241 Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading T reatment or Punishment, Art. 1, Dec. 10, 1984, Senate
Treaty Doc. No. 100-20, 1465 U.N.T.S. 85 [hereinafter CAT]. 
242 Idart. 2(2). The CAT prohibits not only torture but “cruel, inhu-
man or degrading treatment or punishment.” Idart. 16(1). Article 16
provides that “[e]ach State Party shall undertake to prevent in any ter-
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         49ritory under its jurisdiction other acts of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment which do not amount to torture as definedin article 1…” under color of law. Id.The CAT does not define “cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” 
243 U.S. Reservations, Declarations and Understandings, Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading T reatmentor Punishment, Cong. Rec. S17486-01 (Oct. 27, 1990) (establishingthose reservations that modify the CAT). A reservation modifies theterms of a treaty with respect to the country making the Reservation;the Reservation will be deemed invalid if deviates from the object, pur-poses and substance of the treaty term. An understanding announceshow a ratifying country “understands” or interprets a treaty. 
244 Idart. 16.
245 Id.at I(1). This understanding arguably binds the United States to
the same standards of behavior as those adhered to in its domesticcriminal justice system. Through this understanding, the Constitutionand its judicial interpretation appear to become the measure by whichU.S. compliance with its treaty obligations under Article 16 of theCAT will be judged. At a minimum, violations of the EighthAmendment prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment aredeemed by the U.S. as equivalent to an Article 16 violations. However,U.S. officials conducting the “war on terrorism” appear to disagreeabout the precise reach of this prohibition. Compare U.S. DEPT. OF
DEF ., WORKING GROUP REPORT ON DETAINEE INTERRO-GATIONS IN THE GLOBAL WAR ON TERRORISM: ASSESS-MENT OF LEGAL, HISTORICAL, POLICY, ANDOPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 36 (2003), available at
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/nation/documents/040403dod.pdf (last visited June 22, 2006)(“The standards of the Eighth Amendment, however, are relevantbecause of the U.S. Reservation to the Torture Convention’s definitionof cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment”), with Gonzales testimo-ny, Hearing Before the Committee on The Judiciary, U.S. Senate,109th Cong. 10 (2005) (Statement of Alberto R. Gonzales) (“as adirect result of the reservation the Senate attached to the CAT, theDepartment of Justice has concluded that under Article 16 there is no
legal prohibition under the CAT on cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment with respect to aliens overseas”).
246 U.S. RUDs, supra note 243, at II(1)(a).
247 See id.
248 SeeCAT, supra note 241, art. 22(4)(b). The Committee Against
Torture is the treaty body, created by the CAT, tasked with overseeing
the implementation of the treaty.
249 U.S. RUDs, supra note 243, at III(1) and (2). 
250 18 U.S.C. 2340, 2340A. The United States later passed another
crucial piece of implementing legislation. The CAT requires that “noState Party shall expel, return (“refouler”) or extradite a person to
another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that hewould be in danger of being subjected to torture.” CAT, supra note
241, art. 3. The Congress required the Immigration andNaturalization Service to promulgate regulations to insure U.S. com-
pliance with this proscription. SeeForeign Affairs, Reform and
Restructuring Act of 1998, P .L. 105-227, 112 Stat. 2681-82. The reg-
ulations were issued and went into effect in 1999. They elaborate thedefinition of torture, as understood by the United States on signingthe CAT. See8 CFR § 208.18 et. seq.
251 18 U.S.C. 2340.
252 Id. 253 U.N. Econ. & Soc. Council [ECOSOC], Situation of Detainees at
Guantánamo Bay at 6, U.N. Doc., Future E/CN.4/2006/120 (Feb. 15,
2006)http://www.ohchr.org/english/bodies/chr/docs/62chr/E.CN.4.2006.120_.pdf. (last visited June 25, 2006).
254 Id.at 7-8. 
255 The UNCHR is supported, in large part, by U.S. funding.
Between January 1, 2006 and April 30, 2006, the United States donat-
ed $216,796,577 to the UNCHR. Government of the United Statesof America – UNHCR Donor Profile and Donor Historyhttp://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/home/opendoc.htm?tbl=PART-NERS&page=home&id=3b9f6316a (last visited June 23, 2006).
256 ECOSOC, supra note 253.
257 Id.at 11-21.
258 Id.at 21-27.
259 Id.at 11-21 27-38.
260Id.at 38-39.
261 DemocracyNow.org, Archbishop Desmond Tutu on Guantánamo,
President Bush and the Invasion of Iraq Oct. 5th, 2004
http://www.democracynow.org/article.pl?sid=04/10/05/1411259.
262 BBC News, UK calls for Guantánamo Closure May 10, 2006
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/4759317.stm (last visitedJjune 25, 2006).
263 Sam Cage, UN Urges US to Shut Guantánamo Prison ASSOC.
PRESS May 19, 2006.
264 Taft Speech, supra note 88. When asked during his tenure at the
U.S. State Department to comment on prisoner status, Taft recom-mended that prisoners be treated in accordance with the GenevaConventions. SeeWilliam H. Taft IV, Memorandum Regarding
President Counsel’s Paper on the Geneva Convention (Feb. 2, 2002),
available athttp://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB127/02.02.02%20DOS%20Geneva.pdf (last visited June 22, 2006) (noting that “theU.S. bases its conduct not just on its policy preferences but on itsinternational legal obligations”). 
265 SeeVICE ADM. ALBERT T. CHURCH, NAVAL INSPECTOR
GEN., EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF REPORT TO SEC. OFDEFENSE ON INTERROGATION OPERATIONS (2005)www.defenselink.mil/news/Mar2005/d20050310exe.pdf (last visitedJune 25, 2006). This report into abuse at Guantánamo, as well as Iraq
and Afghanistan, found that, as of September 30, 2004, only eightincidents occurred at Guantánamo and “all . . . were relatively minorin their physical nature.” Id. Only three of these incidents were related
to interrogation, and two of the three involved sexually provocativebehavior. Id.at 14. According to the Executive Summary, the report
only looked at interrogation technique policy and not at the overallclimate of misbehavior fostered by the abrogation of the GenevaConventions. See also ARMY REGULATION 15-6, EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY OF FINAL REPORT, INVESTIGATION INTO FBIALLEGATIONS OF DETAINEE ABUSE AT GUANTÁNAMOBAY, CUBA DETENTION FACILITY (2005)www.defenselink.mil/news/Jul2005/d20050714report.pdf (last visitedJune 25, 2006) (reporting the results of another investigation into FBI
allegations of abuse at Guantánamo and finding that interrogators hadcreatively interpreted FM 34-52 interrogation technique guidelines toinclude rubbing perfume on a prisoner and impersonating officialsfrom the FBI). 
50 |         Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba266 Hicks Aff., supra note 117 at paras. 5-6.
267 Guantánamo Prisoner Statements, supra note 49 at 3-4.
268 Robert Kirsch, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Mustafa Ait
Idir (on file with author), Decl. of Julia Tarver, supra note 226. 
269 Hicks Aff., supra note 117 at paras. 13.
270 Richard J. Wilson & Muneer Ahmad, Unclassified Attorney Notes
Regarding O.K. (on file with authors). 
271 Mark Falkoff, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Abd al-Malik
al-Wahab (on file with author). 
272 SeeMotion for a Preliminary Injunction Requiring that
Respondents Provide His Counsel with a Complete Copy of His Own
Medical Records, and Cease Their Practice of Intentional Medical
Malpractice Against Him at 11-12, Sliti v. Bush (No. 05-CV-0429)
(D.D.C. 2005). 
273 Melissa Hoffer, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Lakhdar
Boumediene (on file with author), Melissa Hoffer, UnclassifiedAttorney Notes Regarding Mohammed Nechla (on file with author).
274 Stephen Oleskey, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Saber
Lahmar (Dec. 2004, Oct. 2005) (on file with author); Robert Kirsch& Stephen Oleskey, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding BelkacemBensayah (Dec. 2004 and Oct. 2005, respectively) (on file with
authors). 
275 Mark Falkoff, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Abd al-Malik
al-Wahab (on file with author). 
276 Letter from Moazzam Begg to U.S. Forces Administration, supra
note 121. 
277 Baher Azmy, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Murat Kurnaz
(on file with author). 
278 Mark Falkoff, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding Abd al-Malik
al-Wahab (on file with author). 
279 Joshua Colangelo-Bryan, Unclassified Attorney Notes Regarding
Abdullah Al Noaimi (on file with author).
Report on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment of Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba         |         51