ANNUAL REPORT  
July 1, 2012 - June 30, 20131
OUR MISSION
The Center for Justice and Accountability is  
an international human rights organization 
dedicated to deterring torture and other 
severe human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek 
truth, justice, and redress.
CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators  
individually accountable for human rights 
abuses, develop human rights law, and  advance the rule of law in countries  
transitioning from periods of abuse.
2
MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIR AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
We are pleased to present you with this report of our July 2012 through  
June 2013 activities.
Now, more than ever, CJA’s work is making an impact. 
As the leading U.S.-based organization pursuing cases against human rights abusers,  
we now represent over 200 survivors from twenty different countries. We work side by  side with our partners throughout the world to hold abusers accountable and to heal  and empower survivors and their communities. CJA’s cases address signature human  rights atrocities from the Accomarca Massacre in Peru to the Second Khmer Rouge Trial which seeks to address abuses by a regime responsible for the death of over 1.7 million  people. We are working in five different legal systems: Cambodia, Guatemala, Peru, Spain  and the U.S. 
Two particularly poignant victories for CJA this year involved human rights abuses  
committed in Somalia. General Samantar, the former Minister of Defense, was ordered  to pay $21 million in damages to CJA’s clients, marking the first time that any Somali  government official has been held accountable for the atrocities perpetrated under the  Siad Barre regime. Additionally, Colonel Magan, the former head of the National Security Service Department of Investigations, was found liable for his role in the unlawful arrest and torture of constitutional law scholar Professor Abukar Ahmed.
The most far reaching victory was the genocide conviction of former Guatemalan military 
dictator General Ríos Montt. This was the first time that a former head of state has been  convicted of genocide by a national court. Unfortunately, against a background of intense  political lobbying, the verdict was overturned just ten days later. Nonetheless, Ríos Montt  remains under house arrest, and the face of impunity in Guatemala has changed forever.  CJA worked closely with the prosecutors on the development of the case, the indictment,  and preparation of a dozen expert witnesses who testified at trial. 
Pamela Merchant
Executive Director
Wilma WallaceBoard Chair
3CJA client Sophany Bay became the first Cambodian American to testify in the Second Khmer Rouge Trial, 
providing crucial evidence. In The Jesuits Massacre Case, former Salvadoran Colonel Inocente Montano, was found guilty of immigration fraud in the U.S. for lying about his role in human rights abuses. And we drafted an amicus brief to support the prosecution of Jean Claude “Baby Doc” Duvalier in Haiti that was signed by 27 NGOs from around the world. 
The U.S. Supreme Court’s decision to revisit the extraterritorial reach of the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) in  
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Shell Petroleum has created challenge and uncertainty in our work. Overturning more 
than 30 years of precedent, the Court ruled that the ATS does not apply to human rights violations com-mitted in other countries, unless there is a strong connection to the U.S. We will press ahead with Torture Victim Protection Act claims in our cases – which are unaffected by Kiobel – and will continue to argue that Kiobel permits ATS claims to proceed against human rights abusers who seek safe haven in the U.S.
In May, 350 of us came together at our Annual Dinner to honor Guatemalan Attorney General Claudia Paz y Paz, Haitian human rights activist Robert Duval, and Egyptian human rights activist Ahmed Salah. We also honored our pro-bono partner Latham & Watkins and heard from CJA clients Kelvin So and  Aziz Deria.
Needless to say, none of this work would be possible without our committed staff, board of directors,  
pro bono partners, volunteers and supporters. With your continued support, we look forward to serving new communities around the world who have been denied access to justice.
Sincerely,
Wilma Wallace   Pamela Merchant
Board Chair   Executive Director   
4bACk GROUND ON CjA
OUR WORK
CJA is part of the global movement for justice for 
those who have been tortured or subjected to other severe human rights abuses. CJA was founded on the principle, first used during the Nuremberg trials after World War II, that certain crimes are so egregious that they represent offenses against all humankind. These crimes include genocide, crimes against humanity, extrajudicial killing, and torture. Such crimes are subject to universal jurisdiction under international law. Centuries ago, under this principle, pirates could be brought to justice in whatever port they were found. Like the pirates of old, today’s torturers and war criminals can be held criminally or civilly liable wherever they are found, no matter where the crime occurred, and regardless of the victim’s or the perpetrator’s nationality.
CJA makes this promise of global justice a reality 
by pursuing human rights litigation across borders. In the United States, we use two civil laws to hold perpetrators of human rights abuses accountable: the Alien Tort Statute and the Torture Victim Protec-tion Act. We also practice human rights litigation in foreign jurisdictions such as Spain and Cambodia, and work on transitional justice initiatives around the world. 
CJA has pioneered a survivor-centered approach to 
the quest for justice. Working with partner organiza-tions, we combine legal representation with medical and psycho-social services to both empower and heal torture survivors and their communities. 
In addition to our staff of attorneys, CJA lever-
ages resources by partnering with pro bono law firms, investigators, and expert witnesses to help litigate our cases. We have built a unique network of partners that includes in-country human rights defenders, medical professionals, therapists, military and forensic experts, refugee groups, law school clinics, and other human rights non-governmental organizations.
OUR GOALS
Deterring Human Rights Abusers
Real deterrence can only be achieved through accountability. By exposing human rights abusers and hauling them into court, CJA’s cases provide a critical deterrent. A generation ago, perpetrators often traveled with impunity and moved assets freely. At home, they seek shelter in amnesty laws and inadequate justice mechanisms. Today, we work to ensure that the prospect of travel carries the risk of ruinous civil liability or arrest and prosecution. We also encourage governments in transitioning coun-tries to open their courts to survivors and prosecute perpetrators.
Healing Survivors
A key part of CJA’s mission is to heal and empower survivors and the families of those who were killed.  
5
OUR PROGRAMS      
Human Rights Litigation
Ending impunity and seeking redress for survivors in courts around the world.
Amicus briefs
Advancing human rights  jurisprudence in domestic,  foreign and international courts.
Transitional justice
Supporting efforts to prosecute human rights crimes and repair post-conflict societies.
Outreach and Education 
Supporting survivor communities and training the next generation of human rights attorneys and advocates.
Extradition, Removal, and  
U.S. Human Rights PolicyBuilding the political will and  legal framework for human rights  enforcement in the United States.  Each survivor’s experience is unique.  But for many 
of our clients, confronting abusers and exposing the truth is an essential part of the healing process.  Participating in accountability can overcome a sense of powerlessness.  CJA’s cases help survivors experience a sense of justice and meaning in their survival and a tremendous satisfaction in knowing that they have brought dignity to themselves and the memories of those who were killed or tortured.
 
Seeking Truth
Revealing the truth about periods of human rights 
abuses is also integral to our mission. Our investiga-tions uncover facts and witnesses that are crucial, not just for building legal accountability, but also for producing a historical record.
Supporting Transitional justice
CJA’s cases support transitional justice, creating the vehicles for a broad range of organizations and activists to work together for accountability and civil society renewal. We work closely with in-coun-try partners, country experts, survivor coalitions, accountability organizations, and local community groups to build our cases. We engage with torture survivor and refugee communities to ensure that the survivor’s voice is a core component of the liti-gation. By generating legal and media attention, our cases also serve as platforms for the public dialogue needed to repair the social fabric of communities riven by conflict or abusive governments.   
6CJA’s current litigation docket includes 15 civil, criminal, and administrative  
cases against 45 human rights abusers from six countries: Cambodia,  Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, and Somalia. We represent 200 clients, 
including 178 torture survivors and 22 relatives of people who were tortured  
or disappeared. Our clients come from a total of 21 countries. In addition,  we are pursuing over a dozen confidential investigations of suspected human rights abusers that may lead to litigation or referral to government prosecutors. 
7
HUMAN RIGHTS LITIGATION: HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2012-2013
GUATEMALA
Ríos Montt Prosecution
Since 2006, CJA has been lead counsel in a Spanish 
criminal case first initiated by Nobel Laureate  
Rigoberta Menchú Tum and others against former 
President General Efraín Ríos Montt and other senior Guatemalan officials.  The defendants are charged with terrorism, genocide and systematic torture in the massacre of over 200,000 Mayans.  The Guatemalan Genocide Case in Spain was always intended to support a national court prosecution in Guatemala.  In 2011, CJA was invited to partner with 
Guatemalan Attorney General Claudia Paz y Paz 
to support a genocide case against Ríos Montt in Guatemala.  We shared key documentary evidence and testimony from our case in Spain.  In January 2012, Paz y Paz indicted Ríos Montt for his role in the “scorched earth” campaign during the country’s civil war in the 1980s. CJA continued to work closely with the prosecutors throughout the year. We coordinated a team of  four international attorneys who, among other things, assisted the prosecution in the preparation of 20 expert witnesses. 
 The historic trial against Ríos Montt began on 
March 19, 2013 in Guatemala.  In addition to expert testimony, many of the documents that CJA  introduced in the case in Spain were introduced 
into evidence including the military document known as Plan Sofia and film footage of Ríos Montt admitting that he had command responsibility  over the troops responsible for the genocide.  In all, over one hundred witnesses testified.  CJA also organized an international delegation that traveled to Guatemala in April 2013 to provide international support for the prosecution.  On May 10, 2013, the three-judge panel led by Judge Yasmín Barrios found Ríos Montt guilty of genocide and sentenced him to 80 years in prison. This was the first time that a former head of state has been convicted of genocide by a national court.  It was, for everybody in the human rights world, a very special moment and one that changed Guatemala forever. 
Sadly, this victory was short-lived.   Despite the strides made by civil society and the office of the Attorney General in Guatemala, the Constitutional Court remains vulnerable and highly political.  Against a backdrop of intense political lobbying, the verdict was overturned  just ten days later.  A date for a new trial has been set for February 2015.  While it is difficult to predict whether the retrial will proceed free from political interfer-ence, it is clear that Ríos Montt will be remembered as the person most respon-sible for the genocide of the Mayans.Former President of Guatemala General José Efraín  
Ríos Montt in the courtroom while on trial for genocide. 
Inside the courtroom at the Ríos Montt genocide trial.8
HUMAN RIGHTS LITIGATION: HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2012-2013
    SOMALIA
Y ousuf v. Samantar
Defense Minister General Samantar  
Ordered to Pay $21 Million
After more than eight years of protracted litigation 
– including a trip to the U.S. Supreme Court – on August 28, 2012, a federal judge in Virginia ordered former Somali General, Mohamad Ali Samantar, to pay $21 million in damages to CJA clients Bashe Yousuf, Buralle Mohamoud, Ahmed Gulaid and  Aziz Deria. 
The long-awaited opinion tells a harrowing story 
of unspeakable abuses our clients suffered: from torture and years spent in solitary confinement,  to narrowly escaping summary execution. It also confirms, once and for all, Samantar’s leadership role in ordering the 1988 bombing of Hargeisa,  during which at least 5,000 citizens were killed and half a million displaced. This judgment marks the first time that anyone has been held to account  anywhere in the world for atrocities committed  under the Siad Barre regime, the military dictator-ship that ruled Somalia for over 20 years. When he heard the verdict, CJA client Aziz Deria expressed great hope, shared by many:  “Holding Samantar formally accountable for atrocities in  Somalia’s civil war is the best way for Somalia to move forward. Clan retribution can be set aside when people can be assured of justice through  the legal system. I hope that this case can highlight to the Somali people that justice is attainable. This  is the civilized way of dealing with criminals.”  
We would like to thank pro bono co-counsel  
with Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP for their dedication and commitment to this landmark case.
     
Ahmed v. MaganFormer Secret Police Chief Liable  
for Torture and Arbitrary Detention
In another victory for accountability in Somalia, 
in November 2012 a federal court in Ohio found former Somali Colonel, Abdi Aden Magan, liable for torture, arbitrary detention and cruel treatment. Magan was head of the notorious and widely  feared National Security Service’s Department 
Outside of the federal courthouse in Ohio.  L-R: Nushin Sarkarati (CJA Staff Attorney), Kathy Roberts (CJA Legal Director),  
Professor Abukar Hassan Ahmed (CJA Client), Christina Hioureas (pro bono co-counsel, Chadbourne & Parke LLP), Katya Cronin (pro bono co-counsel, Latham & Watkins LLP).9of Investigations (NSS). The NSS was responsible  
for falsely imprisoning and torturing thousands dur-ing the Siad Barre regime including our client, Abu-kar Hassan Ahmed. Professor Ahmed, an Amnesty International Prisoner of Conscience, was a consti-tutional law professor and human rights advocate who was arrested because he was an outspoken critic of the brutal dictatorship. We would like to thank pro bono co-counsel Latham & Watkins LLP and Chadbourne & Parke for their dedication and commitment on this important case.
“The dictators and  
their thugs think that justice  
has geographical limitations,  
but justice is universal. Justice 
does not belong to any particular 
nation, race or gender. It belongs 
to all humanity.”  
– Professor Ahmed   L-R Sophany Bay (CJA client) and Nushin Sarkarati  
(CJA Staff Attorney) outside of the Extraordinary  Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia.
CAMBODIA 
Second khmer Rouge Trial
CJA client Sophany Bay became the  
first Cambodian American to testify before the Extraordinary Chambers  in the Courts of Cambodia in June  2013. Mrs. Bay, who lives in San Jose, California, was a teacher in Phnom  Penh until the Khmer Rouge invaded the city in 1975, forcing her to evacuate with her three small children. Two of  her young children died due to the cruel conditions of the forced labor camps under the Khmer Rouge, and  her baby was murdered by a Khmer Rouge soldier. Mrs. Bay provided  crucial evidence on the lasting harms suffered by the Cambodian population as a result of the atrocities committed during the Khmer Rouge regime.  She highlighted the fact that even though the  war ended over 30 years ago, Cambodian survivors still suffer from physical and psychological harm  and that these harms are pervasive, even for  Cambodians who fled the country. 
In addition to Mrs. Bay, CJA represents 44 other 
survivors from the U.S. Cambodian diaspora in the Second Khmer Trial against two surviving senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge on charges of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. From  1975 to 1979, the leadership of the Khmer Rouge subjected the people of Cambodia to mass atrocities that claimed the lives of an estimated 1.7 million.
Photos of the victims of the Khmer Rouge at Tuol Sleng Prison, Cambodia.10
AMICUS bRIEFS
U.S. SUPREME COURT
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Shell Petroleum II
Brought by Nigerian refugees in the U.S. against 
Shell Oil, this lawsuit alleges that the multinational 
corporation helped the Nigerian military to sys-
tematically torture and kill environmentalists in the 1990s. This case was originally on appeal on the issue of whether corporations are immune from suit for international law violations such as torture (Kio-bel I). After oral argument on the first case, the Court took the unusual step of ordering supplemental briefing on the question of whether, and under what circumstances, the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) ap-
plies extraterritorially. As a result, the viability of the 
cases that CJA brings against individual perpetra-tors under the ATS was at issue. 
CJA and pro bono co-counsel Jeffrey Fisher and 
Pamela Karlan of the Stanford Supreme Court Clinic submitted an amicus brief that argued that ATS suits for atrocities committed abroad are essential to our country’s commitment to deny safe haven to human rights abusers. With so much at stake, CJA also took on a leading role in coordinating amici curiae and public outreach campaigns.
On April 17, 2013, overturning more than 30 years 
of precedent, the Court ruled that the ATS does not apply to human rights violations committed in other countries, unless there is a strong connection to the United States. Just how strong that connection must be remains a question for further litigation. While the decision was disappointing, CJA will continue to litigate claims of torture and extrajudicial killing under the Torture Victim Protection Act (TVPA): the Kiobel decision does not affect the rights of our cli-ents to seek redress under the TVPA. We also believe the Court has left the courthouse doors open to ATS claims involving genocide, crimes against humanity and other severe abuses where the defendant has a sufficient link to the United States. 
Setting a defiant tone on the day of decision, CJA 
organized a joint media campaign with counsel for the Kiobel petitioners, amici, and other human rights NGOs, including a press briefing attended by major international news outlets. 
Outside of the Supreme Court after oral arguments in Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Shell Petroleum. CJA was represented by  
Beth Stephens (Former CJA Board Member), Ralph Steinhardt (CJA Founding Board Member), Carlos Mauricio (CJA client), Pamela Merchant (CJA Executive Director), Scott Gilmore (CJA Staff Attorney) and Yonina Alexander (CJA Legal Fellow).11
TRANSITIONAL jUSTICE
“Transitional justice” refers to a range of strate-
gies that permit a country to recover from a legacy of human rights abuses and armed conflict. These strategies share several goals: to hold those with responsibility for abuses legally accountable; to repair social divisions caused by conflict; to provide survivors with a full accounting and acknowledge-ment of the abuses that occurred; to offer material and moral reparations to survivors; and to ensure that the pattern of human rights violations is not repeated by reforming key state institutions,  including the military, police, and judiciary. 
In addition to our work on the Ríos Montt prosecu-
tion in Guatemala and the Duvalier prosecution in Haiti, CJA worked on transitional justice projects and strategies in eight countries. For example, •   In Cambodia we are working with local  accountability groups to develop appropriate reparations vehicles for survivors and memorials before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia. 
•    In El Salvador we are working with local  partners to put pressure on the government  to repeal the amnesty law.
•    In Peru  we are assisting in the criminal prosecu-
tion of Telmo Hurtado and Juan Rivera Rondón for their role in the Accomarca Massacre. 
HAITIAN COURT OF APPEALS 
baby Doc Duvalier Prosecution
In February 2013, our longstanding partners in Haiti, the Bureau des Avocats Internationaux, asked CJA to author an amicus brief in the prosecution of for-mer dictator Jean-Claude “Baby Doc” Duvalier. Baby Doc Duvalier is one of the most notorious dictators of the 20th Century and served as “President for Life” of Haiti from 1971–1986 following the death of his father, François “Papa Doc” Duvalier. Under his command, hundreds of political prisoners were held in a network of three prisons known as the “triangle of death,” many of whom were tortured and killed. 
After 25 years in exile, Duvalier returned to Haiti 
on January 16, 2011. Haitian prosecutors began in-vestigating him for corruption and embezzlement. Numerous survivors also joined the prosecution as civil parties and filed human rights charges. How-ever, on January 27, 2012, the investigating judge dismissed the human rights charges and limited the prosecution to financial crimes. The civil parties appealed this ruling.
CJA authored and on February 21, 2013, filed an 
amicus brief with the Court of Appeals of Port-au-Prince, in which we argue that Haiti will violate its duties under international and domestic law if it does not move forward with the prosecution. Our brief was co-signed by 27 human rights organiza-tions and torture treatments centers from around the world and provided important international support to our in-country partners.
12
U.S. HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY AND LEGAL REFORM
Our goal is to increase U.S. enforcement of  
human rights law, to incorporate human rights  
norms of command responsibility into U.S. law  
and practice, and to oppose immunity for torture  
and other abuses.
We focus particular attention on supporting policy 
initiatives that advance the U.S. government’s commitment to criminally prosecute human rights abusers. In recognition of our unique expertise in human rights enforcement, we have been invited to submit multiple rounds of testimony to Congress on strengthening the U.S. statutory framework for human rights crimes and adapting U.S. law enforce-ment to the global effort to deter mass atrocities through individual accountability for perpetrators.
This year, CJA responded to Kiobel by pushing to 
expand the TVPA. We drafted an amendment that would codify ATS case law and give survivors an explicit right to sue individual perpetrators for genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes committed overseas. Unanimously adopted by the Senate Judiciary Committee, CJA’s TVPA amend-ment is now a core component of the Senate and House versions of the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Bill.
In addition, we assisted the U.S. government on 
removal and extradition cases against human rights abusers from El Salvador, Guatemala, Somalia and Sri Lanka. We also worked with authorities from Argentina, Canada, Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru and Spain on extraditions, removals and hu-man rights prosecutions. 
For example, CJA worked directly with prosecutors 
in Boston on the criminal immigration fraud case against former Salvadoran Colonel and Vice  Minister of Public Safety,  Inocente Montano. Montano is a defendant in CJA’s Jesuit Massacre Case which is pending in Spain. Montano partici-pated in meetings in which the order to kill Father Ellacuría was authorized. CJA brought Montano, who had been living in the Boston area for ten years, to the attention of the U.S. government. In 2012, Montano was formally indicted on  criminal immigration fraud and perjury charges for making false statements regarding his  involvement in human rights abuses and the  Jesuits Massacre when he came to the U.S.  On September 11, 2012, Montano pled guilty to  six counts of federal criminal immigration fraud and perjury regarding his role in the Jesuits Massacre. As a result, he will likely be serving a sentence in U.S. federal prison while he awaits extradition to Spain on the murder charges.
13
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION
CjA’s outreach and education program mobilizes 
torture survivors to speak publicly, personalizing how international human rights are explained to  the general public. Through our outreach efforts, we seek to impact the international debate on the use of torture and empower other survivors to seek justice.
CJA staff participated in dozens of outreach  
events in the U.S., Cambodia, Colombia, Ecuador,  Somaliland, and Spain and focused on new  initiatives designed to give members of the  public a deeper understanding of the issues  at play in human rights litigation. We held  forums with members of the Cambodian and  Liberian diaspora in California, Massachusetts,  
CJA delegation at the Fundación de Antropología Forense de Guatemala (FAFG).  L-R Erin Callahan,  
Pamela Merchant (CJA Executive Director), Scott Greathead, Kathy Roberts (CJA Legal Director), Patricia  Viseur Sellers, Rev. Paul Roberts, Fredy Peccerelli (Director of FAFG), Philip Althouse, Almudena Bernabeu  (CJA International Attorney), Sandra Coliver, Kenneth Wales and Genevieve Jenkins.
Pennsylvania and Virginia to explain various  
accountability mechanisms available to them. 
Guatemala Delegation
We also organized a delegation that traveled to Guatemala City on April 15, 2013 to support the Ríos Montt prosecution. CJA’s delegation observed three days of witness testimony and met with key players including representatives from the U.S. Embassy and international prosecutors and judges. We had a private dinner with Guatemalan Attorney General Claudia Paz y Paz and Helen Mack, Presi-dent of the Myrna Mack Foundation. The delegation also visited the National Police Archives and the laboratories run by forensic anthropologist and expert witness Fredy Peccerelli.  14
AwARDS AND CELEbRATIONS
Each year since 2007, CJA has honored an individual or organization for their outstanding  
contribution to the movement for global justice with the judith Lee Stronach Human Rights Award. Presented at CJA’s Annual Dinner in San Francisco, the award is inspired by Judith Lee Stronach  (1943-2002), a committed human rights activist who was instrumental in the founding of CJA through a generous donation. CJA’s work continues to benefit from her vision and spirit, as well as the ongoing support and friendship of her husband, Raymond Lifchez. 
Over 350 CJA supporters, partners and clients joined us to celebrate our successes in holding  
high-ranking perpetrators accountable and providing redress to survivors of human rights abuses.  The Hon. willie L. brown, jr. emceed the program.
Guatemala Attorney General Dr. Claudia Paz y Paz accepted The Judith Lee Stronach Human Rights Award  for her heroic efforts to promote justice in Guatemala. Dr. Paz y Paz was Guatemala’s first  
woman Attorney General and has made unprecedented strides in the prosecution of organized crime, political corruption and human rights including the landmark prosecution of General Ríos Montt. 
We were especially inspired by the stories from our courageous clients – Aziz Deria of Somalia  
and k elvin So from Cambodia. 
Robert “b oby” Duval received the Champion of Justice Award for his long struggle for freedom  
and human rights in Haiti. Mr. Duval, a former Amnesty International Prisoner of Conscience and  soccer star, is a lead witness in the trial against Jean-Claude “Baby Doc” Duvalier. 
Champion of Justice Awardee Ahmed Salah was honored for his heroic commitment to promoting  
human rights in Egypt. He is Co-Founder of the 6th of April Youth Movement in Egypt and was one  of the leaders behind the demonstrations in Cairo that touched off Egypt’s revolution.
katya Cronin and Christina Hioureas accepted the Partner in Justice Award on behalf of pro bono  
law firm partner Latham & Watkins. We are inspired by Latham & Watkins’ long standing commitment 
to human rights and its work on CJA’s historic case involving abuses in Somalia, Ahmed v Magan. THE JUDITH LEE STRONACH HUMAN RIGHTS A WARD  
AND CJA’S ANNUAL DINNER
MAY 14, 201315
Photos clockwise from top left: 
-   Mina Titi Liu (CJA Board Member), Scott Gilmore (CJA Staff  
Attorney), Joey Neugart (CJA Board Member), James Mintz  
(CJA Board Member) and Lokelani Devone (CJA Board Member).
-  Ivor Samson, Dentons, LLP .
-   Almudena Bernabeu (CJA International Attorney), Carlos Mauricio 
(CJA Client), and Mariel Eden Caraballo.
-   Beth Van Schaack, Pamela Merchant (CJA Executive Director), Gerald Gray and Sandra Coliver.
-  Associate Justice Goodwin Liu, California Supreme Court.
-    Aziz Deria (CJA Client), Ahmed Salah (CJA Champion of Justice 
Awardee), and Robert Duval (CJA Champion of Justice Awardee).
-    Joey Neugart (CJA Board Member), Dr. Claudia Paz y Paz  (CJA Judith Lee Stronach Awardee), Jose Arturo Aguilar and  Jorge Zoder.16
ORGANIz ATIONAL SUPPORT
PRO-bONO LA w FIRMS,  
INVESTIGATIVE FIRMS AND ATTORNEYS 
Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer, & Feld LLP
Joseph Decker
Kevin EideJason GoldsmithMaka HutsonPatricia A. Millett Joanna NewdeckSteven H. Schulman Pratik ShahJames E. Tysse 
Chadbourne & Parke LLP
Daniel Aisaka 
Marc J. ArmasPooja AsnaniMary T. BarbettaDeanne BarrowsMark BeckettSerine ConsolinoNicholas FerreChristina HioureasCansu KahyaCarlos MartinezDelphine NicholsonStephanie PalmerNathaniel PutnamKaren RautenbergThomas RinaldiRachel RosenfeldEric RuizGuillermo Sandoval CoustasseMarc SuskinChristian Urrutia
Cyrus R. Vance Center for International justice
Marie-Claude Jean-Baptiste 
DLA Piper
Philip Angeli
Joseph DavisTara LeePaul Schmitt
james Mintz Group
Staci Dresher
Jill HaberkernMatt Toma
kegler brown Hill & Ritter
Kenneth R. Cookson
Kelly MarulloLatham & watkins LLP
Uchenna E. AnikweAmy E. ChambersKatya S. CroninTyler U. NimsEric S. Volkman
Linklaters
Justus Hoefnagel 
Jaap Kuster 
Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris, Glovsky  
and Popeo, P .C.
Anthony Arias
Eric R. BlytheMichael S. GardenerElizabeth GreenbergHelen M. GuytonElla ShenhavMcKenzie Webster
Morgan, Lewis & brockius LLP
Lincoln O. Bisbee
Howard Radzely
Ollé & Sesé LLP
Luis Acebal
Nuria GarciaEva GimbernatManuel Ollé Maite Parejo
walleyn & blanmailland SPRL 
Luc Walleynwilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman & Dicker LLP
Lenore Kelly
Donald P . Sullivan
wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati 
Leo Cunningham
Lee Anne MulhollandCharlene Koski
Volunteer Attorneys
Beth Stephens
Emily HirstMichael BlommestijnGregory GordonEmily RosendahlAdela Carrasco17LAw SCHOOL PARTNERS
International Human Rights Law Clinic,  
U.C. b erkeley, School of Law
Laurel E. Fletcher, Director
Roxanna M. Altholz, Associate Director
The Refugee and Human Rights Clinic,  
U.C. Hastings, College of the Law
Karen Musalo, Director
Naomi Roht-Arriaza, Faculty Advisor
University of Oregon, School of Law
Michelle McKinley, Associate Professor
Stanford Law School Human Rights  
Student Pro b ono Group
Anqi Li Jennifer Williams Sarah HoffmanRachel EasterJoe CaseyElena SudnekoKatherine ScherschelMary Van Houten Zachary Morris Gabe Schlabach
Supreme Court Clinic,  
Stanford Law School
Pamela S. Karlan, Co-Director
Jeffrey L. Fisher, Co-Director
LEGAL INTERNS
Igor Voloshin
U.C. Hastings, College of Law
Ariel Nelson
Harvard University, School of Law
Lilie Schoenack
University of North Dakota, School of Law
Sam Birnbaum
Harvard University, School of Law
Megan Murray
U.C. Hastings, College of Law
Lea Rosen
Rutgers University, School of Law
Kara Slack
U.C. Hastings, College of Law
William Johnson
University of Oregon, School of LawVOLUNTEERS
Jennifer Buchholz
Sr. Patricia Bruno, O.P .Felix ChenLauren DeMartiniHunter DreidameTristan ElkindJaclyn EpterDinali Fernando Molly FriendShirin HedayatiEmily HiggsMike HiltonAlexander JingMarion KriegerMichael LangleySamantha LeeCecilia LippGeorge LippLauren Locke-PaddonSamuel Pastor Ana MacielSarah Mohamed Rebecca MontagTerrance PattersonErin PressmanSamer Rabadi Christine Marie Romero Lucia RoncalliDora RoseShai RosenfieldRebecca StraussJudy TomsicIsaac Van AelstynAnneka Wickramanayake
ORGANIz ATIONAL SUPPORT
Aditi Bahri, Graphic Designer
Kathryn Kennedy WineryMerchant’s Exchange ProductionsThe San Francisco Chronicle
CJA Volunteers L-R: Rebecca Strauss, Sarah Mohamed, Christine Marie Romero.18
PARTNERS AND SUPPORTERS
Académie de droit International Humanitaire  
et de Droits Humains à Genève
adh-geneve.ch 
Advocates for Human Rights
theadvocatesforhumanrights.org
Advocates for Survivors of Torture and Trauma
astt.org
American Bar Association Center for Human Rights
americanbar.org/groups/human_rights
American Civil Liberties Union
aclu.org
American University Washington College of Law
wcl.american.edu
Amnesty International USA
amnestyusa.org
Amnesty International UK
amnesty.org.uk
Anti-Defamation League
http://www.adl.org/
Applied Social Research Institute of Cambodia
asricjustice.com
Asian Americans for Community Involvement  Center for Survivors of Torture
aaci.org
Asociación Bufete Jurídico Popular
mujerachi.interconnection.org/bufete.htm
Asociación Pro-Búsqueda de Niñas y Niños  Desaparecidos
probusqueda.org.sv
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos
aprodeh.org.pe
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos de España
apdhe.org
Association for Justice and Reconciliation
rightsaction.org/action-tags/association-justice- and-reconciliation
Boston Center for Refugee Health and Human Rights
bcrhhr.org
Bureau des Avocats Internationaux
ijdh.org
California Consortium of Torture Treatment Centers
notorture.org/ccttc
Canadian Center for International Justice
ccij.ca
Canada Haiti Action Network
canadahaitiaction.ca
Cardozo Law School
cardozo.yu.eduCenter for Constitutional Rights
ccrjustice.org
Center for Justice and International Law 
cejil.org
Center for Latin American Studies, UC Berkeley
clas.berkeley.edu
Center for Survivors of Torture and War Trauma
stlcenterforsurvivors.org
Center for Victims of Torture
cvt.org
Central American Resource Center
carecen-la.org
Centre for Accountability and Rule of Law
carl-sl.org/home
Centro para Acción Legal en Derechos Humanos
caldh.org
Centro International de Toledo para la Paz
toledopax.org
Centro Romero
centroromero.org
Civitas Maxima
civitas-maxima.org
Coalition for Justice in Liberia   
Comisión Colombiana de Juristas
coljuristas.org
Comisión de Verdad de Honduras
comisiondeverdadhonduras.org
Comité de Apoyo al Tíbet Comité de Familiares  de Detenidos Desaparecidos en Honduras
cofadeh.org
Community Refugee and Immigration Services
cris-ohio.com
Conflict Awareness Project
conflictawareness.org
Corporación de Promoción y Defensa de los Derechos
codepu.cl
Colectivo de Abogados José Alvear Restrepo
colectivodeabogados.org
Colegio de Abogados de Madrid
www.icam.es
Dejusticia
dejusticia.org
Dolly Filártiga
Dominican Sisters of San Rafael, CA
sanrafaelop.org
EarthRights International
earthrights.org
East Bay Sanctuary Covenant
eastbaysanctuary.org19East Timor Action Network
etan.org
El Rescate
elrescate.org
Electronic Frontiers Foundation
eff.org
Enough Project
enoughproject.org/
Equipo de Estudios Comunitarios y  
Acción Psicosocial
ecapguatemala.org
Equipo Peruano de Antropología Forense
epafperu.org
Ensaaf
ensaaf.org
Escola de Cultura de Pau
escolapau.uab.cat
European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights
ecchr.de
Fédération Internationale des Ligues des  Droits de l’Homme
fidh.org
Florida Center for Survivors of Torture
gulfcoastjewishfamilyandcommunityservices.org
FondasyonKoleZepol
fonkoze.org
Fundación para el Debido Proceso Legal
dplf.org
FreedomHouse
freedomhouse.org
Fundación de Antropología Forense de Guatemala
fafg.org
Fundación Democracia sin Fronteras
fdsf.hn
Fundación Internacional Baltasar Garzón
fibgar.org
Fundación Nueva Esperanza
fne.cosmosmaya.info
Fundación Rigoberta Menchú Tum
frmt.org
George Madison University/Pontificia  Universidad Católica del Perú
pucp.edu.pe
Global Justice Clinic at the New York University School of Law
chrgj.org/clinics/global-justice-clinic
Global Lawyers and Physicians
globallawyersandphysicians.orgHaiti Action Committee
haitisolidarity.net
Horn of Africa Human Rights Watch Committee
hornwatch4rights.blogspot.com
Human Rights and Genocide Clinic,  Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law 
The Human Rights Center at Berkeley Law
law.berkeley.edu/hrc.htm
Human Rights First
humanrightsfirst.org
Human Rights Institute of ChileHuman Rights Law Foundation
hrlf.net
Human Rights Litigation and International  
Advocacy Clinic at the University of Minnesota  Law School
Human Rights Watch
hrw.org
HUMANAS
humanas.org.co
Impunity Watch
httimpunitywatch.com
Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti
ijdh.org
Institute for Policy Studies
ips-dc.org
Institute for Redress and Recovery
law.scu.edu/redress
Institute for Study of Psychosocial TraumaInstitute on Religion and Public Policy
religionandpolicy.org
Instituto de Defensa Legal
idl.org.pe
Instituto de Derechos Humanos de la  
Universidad Centroamericana
uca.edu.sv/publica/idhuca
International Center for Transitional Justice
ictj.org
International Corporate Accountability Roundtable
http://accountabilityroundtable.org/
International Forum for Truth and Justice in Africa  of the Great Lakes Region
veritasrwandaforum.org
International Trauma Studies Program
itspnyc.org
Fundación Myrna Mack
myrnamack.org.gt
Jewish Family Services of Columbus, Ohio
jfscolumbus.org20
PARTNERS AND SUPPORTERS
Jueces para la Democracia, Spain
juecesdemocracia.es
La Peña Cultural Center
lapena.org
Latin American Studies Association
lasa.international.pitt.edu/
Legal Aid of Cambodia
lac.org.kh
Lowell Community Health Center
lchealth.org
Marjorie Kovler Center for the Treatment of  
Survivors of Torture
heartlandalliance.org/kovler
Media Defence
mediadefence.org
Memoria y Justicia
memoriayjusticia.cl
Moakley Foundation
moakleyfoundation.com
Movimiento Nacional de Víctimas de Crímenes de Estado
movimientodevictimas.org
Muslim Public Affairs Council
mpac.org
National Consortium of Torture Treatment Providers
ncttp.org
National Security Archive
gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
New York Civil Liberties Union
nyclu.org
Other Worlds
otherworldsarepossible.org
Partners in Health
pih.org
Physicians for Human Rights
physiciansforhumanrights.org
Plataforma de Derechos Humanos
pidhdd.org
Program for Survivors of Torture and Trauma:  Northern Virginia Family Service
nvfs.org/pstt
Program for Torture Victims
ptvla.org
Quaker Initiative to End Torture
quit-torture-now.org
Quixote Center 
quixote.orgREDRESS
redress.org
Reporters Without Borders/Reporters  
Sans Frontières
rsf.org
Rights International Spain 
Ris.hrahead.org
Santa Clara University 
scu.edu
San Francisco Bar Association
Sfbar.org
Skylight Pictures
skylightpictures.com
Sierra Leone Institute for International Law
sliil.org
Spanish Embassy, El Salvador
Survivors International
survivorsintl.org
Survivors of Torture, International
notorture.org
The Shalom Center
theshalomcenter.org
Torture Abolition and Survivors  
Support Coalition International
tassc.org
Tutela Legal del Arzobispado de San Salvador
tutelalegal.org
TransAfrica Forum
transafrica.org
TRIAL (Swiss Association Against Impunity)
trial-ch.org
United to End Genocide
http://endgenocide.org/
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
ucm.es
Universidad Centroamericana, “Jose Simeón Cañas”
uca.edu.sv
Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
urjc.es
Universidad de Salamanca
usal.es
Washington Office on Latin America
wola.org
Women’s Link Worldwide
womenslinkworldwide.org
World Organization Against Torture
omct.org24
FINANCIALS, STAFF AND bOARD
OPERATING REVENUES
Foundation Grants $1,483,874
UN Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture 29,500
Individual and Corporate Contributions 463,324
In-Kind Contributions** 2,181,831
Investment Income 2,116
TOTAL OPERATING REVENUES:  $4,160,645
OPERATING EXPENSES
Program $2,974,434
Administration 200,445Fundraising 264,407
TOTAL OPERATING EXPENSES:  $3,439,2864
PROGRAM EXPENSES
Program  86%
Administration 6%
Fundraising 8% 
Fundraising
AdministrationProgram
*     Audited figures for July 1, 2012 - June 30, 2013.  
An audited financial statement is available  upon request.
**    CJA partners with outside law firms and investigation firms to investigate and litigate cases on behalf of its clients. Nine firms and individual attorneys pro-vided over 4,000 hours of pro bono services valued at $1,927,387.  In addition, nine firms made contributions of $55,195 to cover out of pocket expenses. The total donated pro bono legal services was $1,982,582.L-R Back Row: Scott Gilmore (Staff Attorney), Nushin Sarkarati (Staff Attorney), Dana Serleth (Operations  & Finance Director), Kathy Roberts ( Legal Director);  Front Row L-R: Almudena Bernabeu (International  Attorney), Yonina Alexander (Legal Fellow), Danielle  Knutson (Development Officer), Pamela Merchant  (Executive Director), Cassandra Kildow (Operations & Finance Assistant).
CJA STAFF
CJA BOARD OF DIRECTORSOPERATING REVENUE & EXPENSES*
jUL Y 1, 2012 – jUNE 30, 2013
L-R Back Row: Mina Titi Liu, Joey Neugart, Jane Rocamora, 
Lokelani Devone; Front Row L-R: Farah Brelvi, William Aceves, Wilma Wallace, Pamela Merchant, James Mintz.BOARD OF DIRECTORS
William Aceves, Vice Chair
California Western School of Law
Farah Brelvi, Secretary
 Attorney
Lokelani Devone
Attorney
Mina Titi Liu
Stanford Law School
Pamela Merchant, President
James Mintz
 James Mintz Group
Joey Neugart
Singularity University
Jane Rocamora
Harvard Immigration & Refugee Clinic at GBLS
Wilma Wallace, Chair
Gap, Inc.
ADVISORY COUNCIL 
Chester AtkinsADS Ventures, Inc., former Member of Congress
Carlos Castresana Fernandez
Spanish Supreme Court Prosecutor
Sandra Coliver
Open Society Justice Initiative
Benjamin Cuellar
University of Central America, El Salvador
James Eisenbrandt
Berkowitz Oliver Williams Shaw & Eisenbrandt LLP
Gerald Gray
CJA Founder, Institute for Redress & Recovery
Jennifer Green
University of Minnesota Law School
Paul Hoffman
Schonbrun DeSimone Seplow Harris & Hoffman LLP
Naomi Roht-Arriaza
U.C. Hastings College of the Law
Steven Schneebaum
Greenberg Traurig LLP 
Michael S. Sorgen
Law Offices of Michael S. Sorgen
Ralph G. Steinhardt
CJA Founding Board Member,  George Washington UniversityCJA STAFF
Yonina AlexanderCJA Legal Fellow
Almudena Bernabeu
International Attorney/Transitional  Justice Program Director
Scott Gilmore
Staff Attorney
Cassandra Kildow
Operations & Finance Assistant
Danielle Knutson
Development Officer
Pamela Merchant
Executive Director
Kathy Roberts
Legal Director
Nushin Sarkarati
Staff Attorney
Dana Serleth
Operations & Finance Director 
CJA CONSULTANTS
Carolyn Patty BlumCJA Senior Legal Advisor
Erin Callahan
Special Projects 
Lisa Cohen
Media Relations
Martin Tannenbaum
Governance 
PHOTO CREDITS
Cover: © Elena Hermosa; Page 1: © Erik Törner  flickr.com/eriktorner; Page 2 L-R: © Erik Törner, Erik Mohn, Unitarian Universalist Service Committee; Page 3 L-R:  RURO photography, © Erik Törner; Page 4 L-R: © G. Slatin,  
UNICEF Ethiopia (CC); Page 5: © Rita willaert flickr.com/ 
rietje; Page 7: © Elena Hermosa (both photos);  Page 8: CjA; Page 9 top: CjA, bottom: Lyon Photography; Page 10: Earthrights International/brendan Hoffman;  
Page 11 L-R: © j oseph wenkoff (www.josephwenkoff.com),  
© Rodrigo Suarez; Page 12: © Oscar Villanueva; Page 13 top: CjA, bottom: © Elena Hermosa; Page 15: CjA; Page 17: CjA; Page 23: © Rita willaert, UNICEF Ethiopia (CC), © Rita willaert; 
Page 24: CjA (both)
* All photos marked (CC) are licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs  
  2.0 Generic (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0).The Center for Justice and Accountability
870 Market Street, Suite 680, San Francisco, CA 94102
(415) 544-0444  www.cja.org
Graphic design by JPD Communications, LLC