 
ANNUAL REPORT  |  2009-2010
1
OUR MISSION
The Center for Justice and Accountability  
is an international human rights organization dedicated to deterring torture and other  severe human rights abuses around the  
world and advancing the rights of survivors  
to seek truth, justice, and redress.
CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators 
individually accountable for human  rights abuses, develop human rights law,  and advance the rule of law in countries  transitioning from periods of abuse.
2MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIR AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
It is with great pleasure that we present you with this report of  
our July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2010 activities. 
CJA continues to grow in its breadth and scope while pursuing our mission to deter torture 
and promote human rights.  During the 2009-2010 fiscal year, we worked with a total of  
176 clients, including 144 torture survivors and 32 relatives of people who were tortured or 
disappeared from 20 countries.  We increased our docket of high profile human rights cases and investigations, while continuing to successfully litigate existing cases. Our transitional 
justice work has expanded to Argentina, Cambodia, Ecuador, Guatemala and Peru.  
 
This year marked a watershed for CJA; we won our first U.S. Supreme Court case  
(Samantar v. Yousuf) in a unanimous decision issued June 1, 2010.  The Court held for the first time that former government officials who seek safe haven in the U.S. are not immune 
from civil human rights claims under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act.  This victory  
was the result of the courage and tenacity of our clients and staff, and the tremendous  
outpouring of support from the human rights community, the legal community, former  
diplomats and military professionals, and academics.  We were particularly fortunate to  
partner with pro bono co-counsel from Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP , Cooley LLP  and the Stanford Supreme Court Clinic.  Patricia Millett who leads the Supreme Court practice at Akin Gump argued the case and was joined by CJA board member Beth Stephens.
 
CJA filed two new cases to address human rights abuses committed in Colombia  (Cabrera v. Jimenez Naranjo ) and Somalia (Ahmed v. Magan).  In addition, CJA began 
representation of 43 survivors of the brutal Khmer Rouge regime in Case No. 002 in the  Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia.  
3
Our work in Spain also remains very active.  In a game changing development in the Guatemala 
Genocide Case, CJA introduced into evidence an original military document known as “Plan 
Sofia” to the Spanish court.  Created in 1982, Plan Sofia implicates the army and the Guatemalan 
High Command in the killing of tens of thousands of civilians.  And, in the Jesuits Massacre Case, we presented the testimony of the only surviving non-military eyewitnesses to the crime.  
 
CJA continued to grow our transitional justice program.  For example, in our role as internation -
al advisor for the Truth Commission of Ecuador, CJA reviewed over seventy potential human rights 
cases and drafted important parts of the report regarding international civil and criminal law.  
 
We also continued our advocacy work for stronger accountability policies.  We submitted testimony 
to the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Human Rights and the Law for the hearing titled, “No Safe 
Haven: Accountability for Human Rights Violators in the United States, Part II” and participated 
in the U.N.’s Uniform Periodic Review of U.S. compliance with the Convention Against Torture.    
 
On the outreach and education front, we sent our first delegation to El Salvador to 
commemorate the 20th anniversary of the Jesuits Massacre and to meet with senior 
government officials to support efforts to repeal the amnesty law and to prosecute those  
responsible for the widespread abuses committed during El Salvador’s 12 year civil war.  In the fall of 2009, CJA hosted our first client conference  where we brought clients together with 
consulting psychologists from U.S. torture treatment programs to share their experience of the legal process and to discuss the challenges they still encounter in their lives.  The conference was  
so well received that we made a commitment to hold similar conferences biannually going forward.
 
This was the fourth year of our annual dinner, which featured an inspiring keynote by the former General Counsel for the U.S. Navy, Alberto J. Mora, who resigned his post in the Bush 
Administration over the harsh interrogation techniques used after 9-11.  Guatemalan human 
rights activist Helen Mack Chang received the Judith Lee Stronach Human Rights Award and the law firm Cooley LLP received the 
Partner in Justice Award.  
 
As CJA continues to grow and take on new challenges, we remain committed to the principle on which we were founded—that individual accountability for human rights crimes is  
crucial to deterring future abuses, upholding the rule of law and providing healing and redress 
for survivor communities. Our successes are the direct result of having a strong community 
of supporters—such as yourself  —dedic ated to supporting international justice and human 
rights.  With your continued support, we look forward to serving new communities around  
the world that have been denied access to justice.
 
Sincerely,
Pamela Merchant    E ileen O’Connor
Executive Director    B oard Chair    
4
INTRODUCTION
“Universal Jurisdiction” is the doctrine of international 
law that holds that certain crimes are so egregious that  
the perpetrators may be held accountable wherever  
they are found.  These crimes include genocide,  
crimes against humanity, war crimes, and torture.  
The doctrine provided the legal foundation for the  
Nuremberg trials against Nazi war criminals.  More  
recent events – including the arrest of Chilean General  
Augusto Pinochet in London, the establishment of the  International Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia  
and Rwanda, the prosecution of Liberian dictator Charles  
Taylor in Sierra Leone and the establishment of the International  Criminal Court – all reflect the growing determination of the international  
community to carry forward the Nuremberg legacy of bringing individuals to justice for 
violations of international law that shock the conscience of humanity.  CJA plays a leading role in this emerging area of international justice by pursuing universal jurisdiction cases.  
In the U.S., we hold perpetrators of international human rights abuses accountable 
through civil litigation.  In Spain, we pursue criminal human rights cases before the  
Spanish National Court.  CJA has pioneered a survivor-centered approach to the quest  
for justice that combines legal representation with medical and psycho-social services  
to both empower and heal torture survivors and their communities. 
“Transitional Justice” refers to a range of judicial and non-judicial strategies that are 
used to deal with a legacy of human rights abuses and armed conflict in a given country.  
These strategies have a variety of goals: to hold those who had “command responsibility” for systematic abuses legally accountable; to help repair social divisions caused by conflict; 
to provide survivors with a full accounting and acknowledgement of the abuses that  
occurred; to offer material and moral reparations to survivors; and to reform key state 
institutions, including the military, police and judiciary, to ensure that the pattern of human 
rights violations is not repeated.
From joining as co-counsel in the historic prosecution of Peruvian former President  
Alberto Fujimori for crimes against humanity, to managing the distribution of over 
$400,000 in damages awards to massacre survivors in one of Haiti’s poorest communities, 
CJA is advancing transitional justice goals in countries where abuses have occurred.    5
TIMELINE
1789   Congress enacts the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) to provide federal courts with 
jurisdiction over torts committed against aliens  “in violation of the law of nations.”
1945    The United Nations (UN), the Nuremberg International Military Tribunal, and the  
Tribunal for the Far East are established.  Crimes against humanity are defined.
1948   The U.N. General Assembly adopts the Genocide Convention and the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights.
1980      In Filártiga v. Peña-Irala, a U.S. appellate court breaks ground by holding a 
Paraguayan police officer liable under the ATS for torture committed in Paraguay.
1992    President Bush signs the Torture Victim Protection Act (TVPA), which endorses the 
ATS and permits U.S. citizens to sue for torture and extrajudicial killing.
1993   The U.N. establishes the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
1994   The U.N. establishes the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.  The U.S. ratifies the U.N. Convention Against Torture and adopts a law making torture, wherever  
committed, a crime prosecutable in U.S. courts.
1998   CJA is incorporated.  Chilean General Pinochet is arrested in London for torture and other crimes.  CJA files its first case, against Bosnian war criminal Nikola Vuckovic.
2002 
  The International Criminal Court is established.  CJA wins a trial against two Salvadoran ex-Ministers of Defense, confirming the doctrine of command responsibility in U.S. law.
2003
  CJA wins the first jury verdict in U.S. history for crimes against humanity in a contested case brought against Chilean death squad operative Armando Fernández Larios. 
2004
  The U.S. Supreme Court affirms in Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain that non-U.S. citizens may use the ATS to sue human rights violators for abuses committed overseas.  
2006   The U.S. indicts Liberian warlord “Chuckie” Taylor in the first criminal prosecution under the 1994 torture law. CJA joins the Guatemala Genocide Case in Spain.
2008
  CJA clients recover $580,000 from Haitian ex-Colonel Carl Dorélien.  CJA and partners 
file criminal charges with the Spanish National Court against Salvadoran officials  
responsible for the 1989 “Jesuits Massacre.” 
2009   Former Peruvian president Alberto Fujimori is sentenced to 25 years in prison for 
crimes against humanity. CJA was part of the prosecution team.
2010   A unanimous U.S. Supreme Court denies foreign sovereign immunity to Somali 
General Mohamed Ali Samantar, sued for human rights abuses in Yousuf v. Samantar.6
CJA’S CASES AT A GLANCE
Bosnia and Herzegovina
War Crimes and Ethnic Cleansing 
(Mehinovic v. Vuckovic)
2002: Bosnian Serb war criminal Nikola Vuckovic  
is found liable for torturing Bosnian Muslims.El Salvador
Command Responsibility  
for Atrocities  
(Romagoza Arce v. Garcia)
2006: The 11th Circuit Court of Appeals  
upholds a $54.6 million jury verdict against  
Generals García and Vides Casanova for  
the torture of three CJA clients. 
Assassination of  
Archbishop Romero  
(Doe v. Saravia)  
2004: CJA wins a $10 million judgment  
against Alvaro Saravia, one of the architects  
of the assassination. 
The Civil War’s Most Notorious War Criminal  
(Chavez v. Carranza)  
2009: The 6th Circuit Court of Appeals upholds a  
$6 million jury verdict against Colonel Nicolás Carranza  
for crimes against humanity.
Justice for the 1989 Jesuit Killings (The Jesuits Massacre Case)
2008: CJA files criminal charges in Spain against senior Salvadoran  
officials for the massacre of six Jesuit priests and two women in 1989. 
 
Guatemala
Justice for the Mayan Genocide  
(The Guatemala Genocide Case) 
2006: CJA becomes lead counsel in a case 
in Spain against senior Guatemalan mili-
tary officials. Haiti
The High Command and the  “Raboteau Massacre” (Jean v. Dorelien)  
2007: A jury finds Florida lottery winner 
Col. Carl Dorélien liable for human rights 
abuses in Haiti and awards $4.3 million  
in damages.   
Death Squads and Gender-Based  
Violence (Doe v. Constant) 
2006: Death squad leader Emmanuel 
“Toto” Constant ordered to pay $19 million 
for torture and gender-based violence.Honduras
Forced Disappearances  
(Reyes v. Lopez Grijalba)  
2006: Colonel Juan López Grijalba is ordered 
to pay $47 million to survivors and relatives 
of the disappeared. 7
CJA’S CASES AT A GLANCE
Chile
Pinochet’s “Caravan of Death”  
(Cabello v. Fernandez Larios) 
2003: Infamous Pinochet operative 
Armando Fernández Larios is held 
liable for torture, extrajudicial killing, 
and crimes against humanity.China
Torture and Religious Persecution (Doe v. Liu Qi)
2004: Liu Qi, ex-Mayor of Beijing, is found responsible for  
the torture of Falun Gong members. 
Colombia
Paramilitary Violence Against Human Rights Defenders  
(Cabrero v. Jimenez Naranjo)
2010: Colombians bring suit 
against “Macaco,” a paramilitary 
leader and narco-trafficker for 
torture, extrajudicial killing, and crimes against humanity. Indonesia
Atrocities During the East Timor  Independence Referendum (Doe v. Lumintang)
2001: General Lumintang is found responsible  
for human rights abuses.  The judgment is later 
reversed on a technicality.
Peru
The Accomarca Massacre I (Ochoa Lizarbe v. Hurtado)
2008: CJA obtains a $37 million judgment against  
Major Telmo Hurtado for the massacre of  
Peruvian civilians.
The Accomarca Massacre II  
(Ochoa Lizarbe v. Rivera Rondon)
2007: After bringing suit against Captain Juan Rivera 
Rondón for his role at Accomarca, CJA works with  
authorities in Peru to have him removed from the  
U.S.  to face charges in Peru. Somalia
Civil War and Widespread Repression 
(Yousuf v. Samantar)  
2010: In CJA’s suit for human rights abuses, a  
unanimous U.S. Supreme Court holds that former  
Defense Minister Samantar has no immunity under  
the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act. 
Grabela Massacre  (Doe v. Ali)  
2004: Somali survivors bring suit against Colonel  
Yusuf Abdi Ali for war crimes.
Torture of Somali Legal Scholar  (Ahmed v. Magan)
2010: CJA files a torture suit against an ex-division  
chief of the Somali National Security Service on behalf  
of professor Abukar Hassan Ahmed.8
SELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2009-2010
SOMALIA
Immunity Denied: Victory at the U.S. Supreme Court in  
Samantar v. Yousuf
When Bashe Abdi Yousuf began volunteering in schools and hospitals in Somalia in the  
early 1980s, he never imagined that this act of community service would lead to his brutal 
torture by government forces serving under General Mohamed Ali Samantar.  Nor could Bashe 
imagine that years later, after he had immigrated to the U.S., he would find the same General Samantar living out a comfortable retirement in the suburbs of northern Virginia. 
Bashe Yousuf, Aziz Mohamed Deria, and our other courageous clients decided to confront 
General Samantar in a court of law.  Last year, their pursuit of justice led to the highest court 
in the land.  The case began in 2004, when CJA and pro bono counsel Cooley LLP brought suit on behalf of five survivors and their families who were tortured under the Siad Barre regime: 
Bashe Yousuf, a young business man tortured and kept in solitary confinement for over six 
years; Aziz Deria, whose father and brother were abducted by officials and never seen again; John Doe I, whose two brothers were summarily executed by soldiers; Jane Doe, a university 
student detained by officials, raped 15 times, and put in solitary confinement for over three 
years; and John Doe II, who was imprisoned for his clan affiliation and was shot by a firing squad, but survived by hiding under a pile of dead bodies.
 
The suit accuses General Samantar—who served as Minister of Defense and Prime Minister 
under the Siad Barre regime in Somalia during the 1980s—of command responsibility for  
extrajudicial killing, arbitrary detention, torture, crimes against humanity, and war crimes.   
Rather than answer the charges, Samantar claimed that as a former foreign official he was  
immune from the jurisdiction of U.S. courts.  
It was that claim of immunity—granted by a lower court but reversed on appeal—that went 
before the U.S. Supreme Court.  And on June 1, 2010, a unanimous Court ruled that General 
Samantar did not have immunity under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA).  Faced with a choice between accountability and impunity, the Supreme Court squarely came down 
in favor of accountability.  The decision means that our clients and their families will now be 
able to hold General Samantar—the man responsible for these horrific acts—accountable.   
For Aziz Deria and Bashe Yousuf, who both attended oral argument, the decision brought  
vindication:  “We are delighted and grateful that the U.S. will not shield Samantar from our  
attempt to hold him accountable for the horrific things that he did to the people of Somalia.” 
In a deeper sense, the Court’s decision affirms our nation’s commitment to accountability.  
On the day of the decision, Senator Patrick J. Leahy (D-VT) commented, “The United States 
should not provide safe haven to those who use their position of authority to commit torture.”  
Senator Leahy and Senator Arlen Specter (D-PA) co-sponsored the Torture Victim Protection 9
SELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2009-2010
Act (TVPA), which Congress enacted to give survivors of human rights abuse the right to seek 
redress from their aggressors who come to the U.S. 
Samantar represents a critical turning point:  in the past few years, a series of lower court  
rulings granting immunity to foreign officials posed a threat to the domestic enforcement of 
human rights.  The entire field would have been in jeopardy if CJA had not prevailed.  With so 
much at stake, literally hundreds of attorneys and human rights activists mobilized to support 
our clients.  
We would like to thank our Supreme Court co-counsel, Patricia Millett of Akin Gump Strauss 
Hauer & Feld LLP , Pamela Karlan of Stanford Law School, Robert Vieth and Maureen Alger of 
Cooley LLP , and Board member Beth Stephens, professor at Rutgers University Law School.   
We would also like to thank our clients and members of the Somali community who continue 
to work valiantly for justice and redress for the abuses committed by the Siad Barre regime.
In addition, we are grateful to the authors and signers of ten amicus briefs supporting our  
position: the U.S. government, on whose behalf Deputy Solicitor General Edwin S. Kneedle 
argued against granting immunity; members of Congress (Senators Arlen Specter, Russell  
Feingold, and Representative Sheila Jackson Lee); Retired Military Professionals, Former  
United States Diplomats, Torture Survivors and their Family Members; Holocaust Survivors  
and Organizations Against Genocide; the Foreign Minister for the Republic of Somaliland; 
professors of International Litigation and Foreign Relations Law; Academic Experts in Somali 
History and Current Affairs; and Professors of Public International Law and Comparative Law. 
A complete listing of those who helped with the Supreme Court case is found on pages 20-21.
On the steps of the U.S.  
Supreme Court (l to r):   
CJA Client Aziz Deria,  
Sabah Dahir Yousuf,  
CJA Client Bashe Yousuf,  
CJA Executive Director  
Pamela Merchant, CJA Board Member Beth Stephens, CJA Legal Director Andrea Evans.10
SELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2009-2010
SOMALIA
Former Somali Secret Police Chief Sued for Law Professor’s Torture:    
Ahmed v. Magan
This year also brought the filing of a new case based on abuses in Somalia.  On April 21, 2010, 
CJA and pro bono counsel Akin Gump Hauer Strauss & Feld LLP filed suit on behalf of Abukar  
Hassan Ahmed, a constitutional law professor who was tortured in Somalia under the brutal 
Siad Barre regime.  The lawsuit was filed against Abdi Aden Magan, a former head of the  Somali National Security Service (NSS) Department of Investigations, who now resides in  
Columbus, Ohio.  Our complaint accuses Magan of directly ordering the gruesome torture  
of Mr. Ahmed, who still bears the scars of his ordeal. 
Background
Mr. Ahmed was a lawyer and an esteemed constitutional and international law professor at 
Somali National University.  After the Barre regime suspended the Constitution and launched 
a violent crack down on opposition, Mr. Ahmed continued to teach and speak out for human rights.  In November 1988, he was imprisoned for  
carrying an Amnesty International report.  While in 
prison, Magan ordered his subordinates to extract  a confession through torture.  An innocent man, 
Mr. Ahmed never confessed.
The United States campaigned for Mr. Ahmed’s release  
and Amnesty International declared Mr. Ahmed a  
“Prisoner of Conscience.”  In March 1989, Mr. Ahmed  
was released after paying a fine for possession of  
subversive literature.  Yet the NSS continued to stalk  
Mr. Ahmed until he ultimately fled Somalia.  A human 
rights advocate at heart, Mr. Ahmed believes that justice 
knows no borders and is determined to hold Magan  accountable for his crimes.  
11
SELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2009-2010
COLOMBIA 
Persecuted Democracy Activists  
Sue a Paramilitary Leader and Drug Trafficker:  
Cabrera v. Jiménez Naranjo
In June 2010, CJA and pro-bono co-counsel Wilson 
Sonsini Goodrich and Rosati filed suit against Colombian 
paramilitary leader and drug-trafficker Carlos Mario  
Jiménez Naranjo (known as “Macaco”) for torture,  
extrajudicial killing, war crimes, and crimes against  
humanity.  Macaco headed the Bloque Central Bolivar 
(BCB), a paramilitary group associated with the United  
Forces of Colombia (AUC).  The BCB funded its armed  
operations through the drug trade.  To maintain its 
monopoly on coca production, the BCB systematically 
tortured and “disappeared” activists from the Program 
for Peace and Development in the Middle Magdalena (PDP), an NGO that works to create sustainable  
communities by providing farmers alternatives to  
the drug trade.
We filed the case on behalf of surviving family members 
of two PDP activists, Eduardo Estrada Gutierrez and Alma 
Rosa Jaramillo Lafourie, who were brutally murdered in 
2001 by BCB troops under Macaco’s command.  Eduardo was murdered in front of his wife on their way home 
from a local dance.  Alma Rose was kidnapped from a 
public bus by BCB soldiers.  Her body was later found in the river, brutally tortured and mutilated.  Only her torso 
was recovered.  
Colombian efforts to bring Macaco to justice were thwarted when he and thirteen other  
paramilitary leaders were extradited to the U.S. to face drug trafficking charges in May 2008.
All of the defendants are well-known human rights abusers whose participation in the truth 
and justice process in Colombia was cut short by the extradition.  CJA was approached by the 
Colombian Commission of Jurists to pursue ATS/TVPA cases in an effort to seek some measure of accountability.  
Macaco is currently in U.S. custody in Miami, Florida.  Although he has admitted responsibility  
for torture and other atrocities in Colombia, the U.S. government has declined to charge him 
with any human rights crimes.  Thus, CJA’s civil case is the only opportunity for Macaco’s victims 
to exercise their rights to seek justice and have their voices heard.  
12
SELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2009-2010
EL SALVADOR
The Jesuits Massacre Case:  
Presenting Eyewitness Testimony  
Before the Spanish National Court  
CJA continues to present groundbreaking evidence in the Jesuits Massacre Case, which  
is in the investigative stage of proceedings in the Spanish National Court (SNC) before 
Judge Eloy Velasco.  In early 2010, the SNC took evidence from the only surviving non-military 
eyewitnesses to the massacre, Lucia and Jorge Cerna. Lucia was a housekeeper for the for the Universidad Centroamericana José Simeon Cañas and on November 15, 1989, they sought 
refuge at the University from El Salvador’s raging civil war.  That same night the Salvadoran 
military would launch an attack at the UCA.  The Cernas both testified about witnessing the 
raid by the Salvadoran military and the murder of the six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper  
and her daughter.
In June 2010, CJA presented witness testimony in Spain from a protected witness who served 
as a major in the Salvadoran military; Benjamin Cuellar, Director of the Human Rights Institute of UCA; and Col. Jose Luis Garcia, a retired colonel from the Argentine military and expert in 
military structure and chain of command.
In November 2009, CJA lead a delegation to El Salvador to commemorate the twentieth  
anniversary of the massacre and to meet with government officials on the importance  
of repealing the amnesty law and bringing those responsible for the massacre to justice.   
The image on the next page is from one of the marches held on November 16, 2009.   
Please see page 16 for more on the delegation.
Chavez v. Carranza:  
Final Judgment as the U.S. Supreme Court Denies Review
This year also brought welcome closure in another of CJA’s El Salvador cases.  In October  
2009, the U.S. Supreme Court denied the petition for certiorari of defendant Nicolas Carranza,  
ex-Vice-Minister of Defense of El Salvador.   With that ruling, the 2005 jury verdict holding  
Carranza liable for crimes against humanity, torture, and extrajudicial killing is final.  This  victory marked the first time that a U.S. jury in a contested case found a commander liable  
for crimes against humanity.13Marchers commemorate the  
20th Anniversary of the Jesuits Massacre,  
San Salvador, El Salvador, November 16, 2009.
In the early morning of November 16, 1989, six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper, 
and her daughter were woken from their sleep by Salvadoran special forces.   
The soldiers led them outside and shot them on the lawn of the Central American 
University José Simeón Cañas (UCA) in San Salvador. 
 
 E l pueblo siempre recuerda y jamás podrá olvidar,
 el cr imen que cometieron los que no quieren la paz.
 L os seis jesuitas murieron por orden de un criminal.
 
 T he people always remember and will never be able to forget
 T he crime committed by those who do not want peace.
 T he six Jesuits died because of the orders of a criminal.
 
–  S ong of the marchers honoring the 20th anniversary of the Jesuits Massacre   
at the UCA in San Salvador, as recorded by Prof. Richard Amesbury.14
AMICUS BRIEFS
AMICUS BRIEFS
CJA authors or signs onto “friend of the court” briefs in cases before U.S. courts  
and tribunals around the world with jurisdiction over human rights abuses.   
Below is an example:
Algodonero v.  Mexico
On July 7, 2009, CJA signed onto an amicus brief filed before the Inter-American Court of  
Human Rights on behalf of survivors of gender based violence in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico.   
The brief, signed by over fifty women’s and human rights organizations, law school clinical programs, and law and social science professors, urged the Inter-American Court to determine 
that the longstanding failure to investigate, prosecute or prevent the disappearances, rapes 
and murders of young women and girls in Ciudad Juárez over the last fifteen years violates Mexico’s obligations under the American Convention on Human Rights and other internation-
al treaties.  The brief also urges the Court to provide the full range of remedies for the  
violations including restitution, rehabilitation, public recognition of wrongdoing, legislation 
and policy reform, and training.  
On December 10, 2009, the court found Mexico in violation of the American Convention and 
the Convention of Belém do Pará.  The court held that the State has an affirmative obligation 
to respond to violence against women conducted by private actors.  It ordered Mexico to  
comply with a number of remedial measures, from building a national memorial for the  
victims to renewing investigations and making reparations of over $200,000 to the families  
in the suit.
Survivors of the brutal  
Khmer Rouge regime  
observe the trial of Kaing  
Guek Eav, a.k.a. Duch,  
at the Extraordinary Chambers 
in the Courts of Cambodia.
Please see page 15 for a  
description of CJA’s work  
in Cambodia.15
 TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE SUPPORT
TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE SUPPORT
CJA works with NGOs and governments around the world on a range of transitional  
justice initiatives.  As part of a comprehensive strategy to end impunity, we work  
alongside in-country prosecutors to hold human rights abusers criminally accountable in national courts—especially where defendants in CJA’s U.S. cases have been deported or extradited to stand trial in the home country.  CJA attorneys offer expert advice in  
witness preparation, presentation of evidence, and charging human rights crimes.
Argentina
Truth Trials for the Disappeared of La Plata
In May 2009, CJA was retained by a survivor of the U9 prison in La Plata, where, during the 1970s, the military junta detained young professionals accused of “subversion.”  Our client, 
Horacio Martinez Baca, now a U.S. attorney living in San Francisco, testified at La Plata Criminal 
Court on August 13, 2009 about his brutal torture at the U9 prison.  CJA will continue to help 
clients testify in the Argentine “Truth Trials.” 
Cambodia 
Khmer Rouge Trial (Case 002)
In June 2010, CJA began to represent 41 Cambodian-American civil party applicants in the second case before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) against  
four surviving senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge for charges of genocide, crimes against 
humanity, and war crimes. The ECCC was created in 2007 with the assistance of the U.N. to try former senior officials of the Khmer Rouge who are responsible for the human rights abuses 
committed in Cambodia from 1975 through 1979.  The ECCC is the only U.N. “hybrid” tribunal to 
permit victims to participate in a case as civil parties and seek accountability directly through 
the Court.  Civil parties in a trial may seek reparations and can testify or provide evidence in 
support of the prosecution.
Ecuador
Truth Commission Final ReportCJA was honored to assist Ecuador’s Truth Commission in preparing a five-volume report on 
human rights abuses perpetrated against 456 victims between 1984 and 2008.  CJA joined the 
Truth Commission in July 2009 to analyze evidence, advise on international law, and identify cases for prosecution.  As a result of CJA’s participation, the Truth Commission report is the first 
of its kind in Latin America to recommend  ATS and TVPA litigation as an alternative remedy for 
Ecuadorian victims when perpetrators are found in the United States.  The Ministry of Justice 
has requested that CJA develop a human rights litigation training program for prosecutors.16
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION 
CJA’s outreach and education program mobilizes torture survivors to speak publicly  
to personalize how international human rights are explained to the general public,  
impact the international debate on the use of torture, and empower other survivors  
to seek justice.  Our attorneys, clients, and expert partners conduct extensive public  
education on human rights issues in the U.S. and around the world.  CJA’s expanding  
role in the movement for global justice was recognized by the International Federation 
for Human Rights (FIDH).  On April 8, 2010, CJA was elected as one of only two Affiliate Members of FIDH for the United States.  
Other highlights from 2009-2010 include:
2009 Client Conference 
We held our first client conference in October 2009, where we brought together a dozen clients 
to discuss their experiences as survivors and participants in international justice efforts.  Ten  clients from around the U.S. and El Salvador participated: Carlos Mauricio, Neris Gonzalez and 
Dr. Juan Romagoza Arce (Arce v. Garcia, El Salvador); Cecilia Moran, Irma Calderon and Oscar 
Chavez  (Chavez v. Carranza, El Salvador); Oscar Reyes, Gloria Reyes and Zenaida Velasquez 
(Reyes v. Lopez Grijalba, Honduras); and Lexiuste Cajuste ( Jean v. Dorelien, Haiti). This event 
allowed clients to meet with each other in a safe environment with psychological support 
available, share their experiences of the legal process and discuss the challenges they still 
encounter in their lives. The workshops were lead by torture treatment therapists Mary Fabri 
from Heartland Alliance and Ana Deutsch from the Program for Torture Victims.  In connection with the conference, and at the clients’ initiative, we held a public event attended by over 100 
people where four clients participated in a panel discussion entitled,  “A Survivor’s Perspective 
on International Justice.”  
Jesuits Massacre 20th Anniversary Delegation November 13-17, 2009 
In November 2009, CJA led a delegation to El Salvador comprised of leaders from the human rights, legal, and Jesuit communities, to show the new Salvadoran government that many in 
the U.S. continue to stand in solidarity with the thousands of survivors from the civil war.  We 
met with many members of the new government including the Attorney General, the Chief 
of the Supreme Court and the Vice President.  Delegation members included Rev. Donald J. 
Monan, Chancellor of Boston College University, who traveled to El Salvador in 1989 immedi-
ately after the massacre and was an international observer at the 1991 trial which ended in a surprise acquittal despite overwhelming evidence; Javier Torrontegui, the Director General of 
the Basque Country Public Radio; Mike Greco past president of the American Bar Association; Sandra Coliver of the Open Society Justice Initiative; Sara Darehshori of Human Rights Watch; 
Farah Brelvi, Kirby Sack, Nico Van Aelstyn and three of our Salvadoran clients – Neris Gonzalez,  
Carlos Mauricio and Dr. Juan Romagoza.  At an outreach event at the University of Central America, CJA International Attorney Almudena Bernabeu and Benjamin Cuellar spoke to a 
crowd of several hundred about the Jesuits Massacre litigation in Spain. 17
U.S. HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY AND LEGAL REFORM
U.S. HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY AND LEGAL REFORM
CJA works on a variety of human rights legislative and policy efforts.  We focus particular  
attention on supporting policy initiatives that advance the U.S. government’s commitment  
to criminally prosecute human rights abusers.  CJA continues to work with U.S. authorities  
on the prosecution, deportation, extradition, and denaturalization of human rights abusers found in the United States.
Selected Highlights 
In October 2009, CJA submitted testimony to the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Human 
Rights and the Law for the hearing titled, No Safe Haven: Accountability for Human Rights 
Violators in the United States, Part II.  CJA’s testimony urged Congress to press for the indictment on human rights charges of 17 Colombian paramilitary leaders currently indicted for drug 
trafficking, and suggested new legislation to codify crimes against humanity and extrajudicial 
killing as crimes under U.S. law. 
Attorneys from CJA and  
CONAVIGUA, a Guatemalan 
NGO that supports survivors  
of the internal armed conflict, meet with witnesses in the  
Guatemala Genocide Case. 
Seated (l to r): Paloma Soria, 
Maria Castro, Jacinta  
Guarcas, Mari Toj.  Standing (l to r) Patricia Avila, Renata Avila, Almudena  
Bernabeu, Feliciana Macario.18
ANNUAL DINNER
The Judith Lee Stronach 
Human Rights Award and CJA’s Annual DinnerApril 28, 2010
Each year since 2007, CJA has honored an individual or  
organization for their outstanding contribution to the movement  
for global justice with the Judith Lee Stronach Human Rights Award.
Presented at CJA’s Annual Dinner in San Francisco, the award is inspired by  
Judith Lee Stronach (1943-2002), a committed human rights activist who was 
instrumental in the founding of CJA,  through a generous gift from the Judith Stronach  
Fund for Non-Violent Social Change.  CJA’s work continues to benefit from her vision and spirit, 
as well as the ongoing support and friendship of her husband, Raymond Lifchez.
We presented the 2010 Stronach Award to Helen Mack Chang,  a Guatemalan
businesswoman and activist, who became an outspoken advocate for human rights after her sister, anthropologist Myrna Mack Chang, was assassinated  
by the Guatemalan military on September 11, 1990.  In 1993, Helen Mack founded The Myrna Mack Foundation, which engages in an array of activities to promote human rights and end impunity in Guatemala.  
(l to r)  Amina Jireh, Aaron Loeb, 
Omar Yousuf, Kathy Roberts (CJA Staff 
Attorney), Wilma Wallace (CJA Board member), Richard Meyers.(l to r) Eileen O’Connor (CJA Board 
Chair) Alberto J. Mora (keynote speaker), Abukar Hassan Ahmed (CJA client), and Pamela Merchant.
19CJA’s Annual Dinner Special Guests
From victory before the U.S. Supreme Court, to the government of El Salvador’s apology for  
its role in the assassination of Archbishop Romero and the Jesuits Massacre, this has been a 
watershed year.  We were pleased to celebrate at our Annual Dinner, with Helen Mack Chang 
and our other speakers and honorees:
Abukar Hassan Ahmed, a client of CJA and a former Amnesty International Prisoner of 
Conscience, spoke on the importance of breaking the silence and standing up for justice.   
For more on Mr. Ahmed’s case, see  Ahmed v. Magan, page 10  above.
Alberto J. Mora, former General Counsel for the U.S. Department of the Navy gave the keynote address on the how the abusive interrogations of detainees at Guantánamo Bay  
and other locations has undermined the rule of law and weakened national security.  From 2002 to 2006, Mr. Mora waged a tireless campaign inside the Bush administration to oppose 
the use of cruel “enhanced interrogation techniques” on detainees in the “war on terror.”
Robert Vieth, partner at Cooley Godward Kronish LLP accepted the 2010 Partner in Justice 
Award which honors a firm’s commitment to pro bono service and human rights.  Since 2003, 
Cooley LLP and Mr. Vieth have worked as pro bono co-counsel on two of CJA’s cases against 
former senior military commanders from Somalia including Yousuf v. Samantar which was 
victorious at the Supreme Court.
(l to r) Beatriz Manz (U.C. Berkeley), 
Cárdenas Cuauhtémoc (former Mexican 
Governor and Senator), Richard Leigh 
(CJA Board member), Cristina Cabello, and Aldo Cabello (CJA client).
(l to r) Sandra Coliver (Open Society 
Institute), Naomi Roht-Arriaza  (U.C. Hastings College of Law),  Helen Mack Chang (Myrna Mack  
Foundation), Robert Stark, and  
Paloma Soria (CJA Visiting  
Attorney from Women’s Link).20
SAMANTAR V. YOUSUF SUPPORT
ACADEMIC EXPERTS IN
SOMALI HISTORY & CURRENT AFFAIRS
Lee Cassanelli, University of Pennsylvania*
J. Peter  Pham, James Madison University*
Steven M. Schneebaum, Greenberg Traurig LLP*
Ioan Lewis, London School of EconomicsGerard Prunier, Centre National  
de la Recherche Scientifique Siège  
Hussein Bulhan,  
University of Hargeisa in Somaliland
FORMER DIPLOMATS BRIEF
Douglass Cassel, Center for Civil and  
Human Rights, Notre Dame Law School*
Sean O’Brien, Center for Civil and Human  
Rights, Notre Dame Law School*
Amy Griffin, Center for Civil and Human  
Rights, Notre Dame Law School*
Morton I. AbramowitzJ. Brian AtwoodHarriet C. Babbitt
Harry G. Barnes, Jr.
J.D. BindenagelJames Bishop
James L. Bullock
A. Peter BurleighHodding Carter IIIGoodwin Cooke 
Patricia Derian
Robert S. GelbardWilliam C. Harrop
Samuel F. Hart
John L. HirschAllen HolmesPrinceton N. Lyman
Marilyn McAfee
James C. O’BrienThomas R. Pickering
Laurence E.  Pope
David J. Scheffer John Shattuck
Paul K. Stahnke
Alexander F. WatsonRobert White
HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS & 
ANTI-GENOCIDE GROUPS
Gregory S. Gordon, University of  
North Dakota, School of Law*Sonya D. Winner, Covington & Burling LLP*
Steven D. Sassaman, Covington & Burling LLP*
Martin Weiss
Gerald Rosenstein  Progressive Jewish Alliance
Association of Humanistic Rabbis
Jews Against GenocideStop Genocide Now
Save Darfur Coalition
Darfur and BeyondTexans Against Genocide and  
Defend Darfur, Dallas
San Francisco Bay Area Darfur CoalitionMassachusetts Coalition to Save Darfur
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
U.S. Senator Arlen Specter*U.S. Senator Russell D. Feingold
U.S. Representative Sheila Jackson Lee
PROFESSORS OF INTERNATIONAL 
LITIGATION AND FOREIGN RELATIONS LAW
William S. Dodge, University of California,  
Hastings College of the Law*
Michael D.  Ramsey, University of San Diego School of Law*
Richard M.  Zuckerman, Sonnenschein Nath  
& Rosenthal LLP*
Abigail D.  Lauer, Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP*
Stephen B. Burbank, University of Pennsylvania Law School
Richard M.  Buxbaum, University of California,  
Berkeley School of Law
David D.  Caron, University of California,  
Berkeley School of Law
Kevin M. Clermont, Cornell Law School
Thomas H. Lee, Fordham University School of Law
Edward T. Swaine, George Washington University  
Law School
PROFESSORS OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL
LAW AND COMPARATIVE LAW
Chimene I. Keitner, University of California,  
Hastings College of the Law*
Robert E. Freitas, Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP*
Nitin Gambhir, Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP*Christopher Yeh, Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP*David J. Bederman, Emory University School of Law 
Frederic L. Kirgis, Washington and Lee University  
School of Law
Ved P . Nanda, University of Denver Sturm College of LawCJA extends its deepest gratitude to all who partnered with us  
in our historic journey to the Supreme Court.  
CJA would like to acknowledge our sincere appreciation for the hard work and  
dedication of our Supreme Court pro bono co-counsel in Samantar v. Yousuf:
Patricia A. Millett, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP   
Mark J. MacDougall, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLPThomas C. Goldstein, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLPSteven Schulman, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLPLauren Kerwin, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLPRobert R. Vieth, Cooley LLPLori R. Ploeger, Cooley LLPMaureen Alger, Cooley LLPKyle C. Wong, Cooley LLPPamela S. Karlan, Stanford Law School Supreme Court ClinicJeffrey L. Fisher, Stanford Law School Supreme Court ClinicBeth Stephens, CJA Board, Rutgers School of Law
CJA would also like to acknowledge the individuals who drafted or supported amicus briefs:21Mary Ellen O’Connell, University of Notre Dame  
School of Law
Mathias Reiman, University of Michigan School of Law
Steven R. Ratner, University of Michigan School of LawLeila N. Sadat, Washington University School of Law
RETIRED MILITARY PROFESSIONALS
Virginia A. Seitz, Sidley Austin LLP*Laurie R. Blank, International Humanitarian Law Clinic,  
Emory Law School*
Lieutenant General Robert G. Gard Jr., U.S. ArmyLieutenant General Claudia J. Kennedy, U.S. ArmyLieutenant General Charles Otstott, U.S. Army
Major General Fred E. Haynes, USMC
Rear Admiral John D. Hutson, JAGC, U.S. NavyMajor General Melvyn S. Montano, ANG
Brigadier General David M. Brahms, USMC
Brigadier General James P . Cullen, U.S. ArmyBrigadier General David R. Irvine U.S. Army
Brigadier General Richard O’Meara, U.S. Army
Brigadier General Murray G. Sagsveen, U.S. ArmyBrigadier General Anthony Verrengia, USAFBrigadier General Stephen N. Xenakis, U.S. Army
Sergeant Leslie H. Jackson, American Ex-Prisoners of War
Geoffrey S. Corn, South Texas College of LawSean Watts, Creighton Law School
Eric Jensen, Fordham University School of Law
Victor Hansen, New England Law SchoolRoger Handburg, University of Central Florida
SOMALILAND GOVERNMENT
Richard L. Grossman, Townsend & Townsend & Crew LLP*Nancy L. Tompkins, Townsend & Townsend & Crew LLP*
Foreign Minister Abdillahi Mohamed Duale
TORTURE SURVIVORS & 
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
Tyler R. Giannini, International Human Rights Clinic,  
Harvard Law School*
Susan H. Farbstein, International Human Rights Clinic,  
Harvard Law School*
Nathan P . Ela, International Human Rights Clinic,  
Harvard Law School*
Dolly Filártiga
Amaryllis Hilao-EnríquezHilda B. Narciso
Sister Dianna Ortiz
Allard K. Lowenstein International Human Rights Clinic,  
Yale Law School
Amnesty InternationalEarthRights InternationalHuman Rights First
Human Rights Watch
International Human Rights Clinic
International Rights AdvocatesThe World Organization for Human Rights USABoston Center for Refugee Health and Human Rights
Stanford Law School Supreme Court Clinic
Survivors of Torture, InternationalTorture Abolition and Survivors Support Coalition,  
International
Consistent LifeThe Maryknoll Global Concerns OfficeThe Muslim Public Affairs Council
Pax Christi USA 
The Shalom Center
 
* Counsel for brief22
PARTNERS AND SUPPORTERS
PRO BONO LAW FIRMS  
AND ATTORNEYS
Akin Gump Straus Hauer & Feld, LLP
Amir Ali
Vivek Arora
Tibisay Boggio-TurnerBrian Burnor
Iain Burns
Elizabeth ConteColleen CoyleNatalya Dobrowolsky
Marwan Elrakabawy
Joseph FicocelloTeresa Ghali
Thomas C. Goldstein
Elise HabermanAlex HarisiadisAdria Hicks
Rebekah Jones
Ashley KeapprothLauren Kerwin
Melanie Langford
Harry LaxtonSean Lay
Mark MacDougall
Thomas McLishPatricia MillettDavid Nelson
Billy Nolan
Allissa PollardHolli Pryor-Baze
Jonathan Robell
Reed RussellSteven SchulmanKristine Sendek-Smith
Jerry Sierecki
Stephen SimpsonTiffany Smith
Jane Stack
Chad StegemanNada Taha
Randy Teslik
James ThompsonElizabeth TobioJoshua Waxman
Joseph Whitehead
Bass, Berry & Sims PLC
David Esquivel
Cooley Goodward Kronish LLP
Maureen P . Alger
William E. Grauer
Lori R. Mason 
Robert R. ViethKyle Christopher WongJoshua M. Feasel
Peter M. Colosi
Kathleen Elizabeth CassidyEmily F. Burns
Erik A. Kruger
Ethan A. StavskyCovington & Burling LLP
Richard A. Jones
Nan Lou
Theodore P . Metzler
Reid P . MullenSteven D. Sassaman
Sonya D. Winner
Hogan Lovells
Audrey Haroz Reed
Natalie Savarese Brinkman
Kilpatrick Townsend & Stockton LLP
Richard Grossman
Nancy Tompkins
McDermott Will & Emory
Eileen M. O’Connor
Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris  
  Glovsky & Popeo PC
Jessica Bumpous
Ben Clark
Erin CornellSusan Finegan
Mary Harrison
Ned Notis-McConarty
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius LLP
Joyce M. Baker
Greta BurkholderMarisa FortunatiKelli E. Hall
John H. Hemann
Shannon NakabayashiAmrutha Nanjappa
Laura W. Reilly
Amanda D. SmithWade Wilson
Mark Bravin
Ollé & Sesé LLP
Luis Acebal
Nuria GarciaEva Gimbernat
Manuel Ollé
Maite ParejoJon Ruiz Gabiña
Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe, LLP
Robert E. Freitas
Nitin GambhirEileen M. O’Connor
Christopher B. Yeh
Sidley Austin, LLP
Randall Luce
John Meehan
Virginia SeitzRonie SchmelzSarah Adamczyk
SNR Denton US LLP
Abigail d. Lauer
Ivor Samson
Richard M. ZuckermanWilson, Sonsini, Goodrich    & Rosati, PC
Leo Cunningham
Nema Milaninia
Lee Anne Mulholland
Volunteer Attorneys
Victoria Hartanto
Elizabeth MacGregor
UC Davis School of Law
PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS
The Mintz Group
Staci Dresher
Nina Loscialo
James Mintz
CLIENT SUPPORT
Ana Deutsch
Program for Torture Victims
Mary Fabri
Heartland Alliance
PRO BONO PROFESSIONALS
DjovidaJane Drury
Pamela Jue
LAW SCHOOL PARTNERS
International Human Rights Clinic,  
UC Berkeley School of Law
Laurel E. Fletcher, Director
Roxanna Altholz, Associate Director
International Human Rights Clinic,  
Human Rights Program,  
Harvard Law School
James Cavallaro, Executive Director
Tyler Giannini, Clinical Director
Susan Farbstein, Clinical Instructor
Refugee & Human Rights Clinic,  
UC Hastings College of the Law
Karen Musalo, Director
Naomi Roht-Arriaza, Faculty Advisor
Supreme Court Clinic,  
Stanford Law School
Pamela S. Karlan, Co-Director
Jeffrey L. Fisher, Co-Director
International Human Rights  
Law Clinic,  
University of Virginia School of Law
Deena Hurwitz, Director
Allard K. Lowenstein International 
Human Rights Law Clinic,  
Yale Law School
James Silk, Director23International Law Students  
Association, University of  
San Francisco School of Law
Daniel Castillas
Katherine Chu
Ted DanyoBen DockeryRyan Jang
Elizabeth Léone
Emily MuscatellErin Sedloff
LEGAL INTERNS
Lauren DeMartini
New York University School of Law
Vincent Fisher
John F. Kennedy University  School of Law
Amaha Kassa
UC Berkeley School of Law
Kristen Rau
University of Minnesota Law School
Anna Sanders
UC Berkeley School of Law
Amanda Sherwood
UC Davis School of Law
Efrain Staino
Santa Clara University School of Law
Ruly Tafzil
UC Hastings College of the Law
Claret Vargas
Harvard Law School
Wendy Yang
UC Hastings College of the Law
Charline Yim
Harvard Law School
Sara Zampierin
Harvard Law School
OTHER INTERNS
Anjali Alburquerque Erin Mariel Callahan
Bronwyn Dansey
Andre EpsteinAlessandra GalloJulissa Gomez
Andrea Jones
Walesa KanarekEddie Nadel
Aviva Prager
Justin ShiladAnnemarie Stephens
Kelli Youngson
ORGANIZATIONAL SUPPORT
Erin Callahan
Lisa Cohen
Brett Critchlow, Juice Design
Suse NakataRyan SharonMartin Tannenbaum
Ted Young, Radical DesignsPARTNERS AND SUPPORTERS
Académie de droit International  
Humanitaire et de Droits  
Humains à Genève
adh-geneve.ch
Advocates for Human Rights
theadvocatesforhumanrights.org
Amnesty International USA
amnestyusa.org
Amnesty International UK
amnesty.org.uk
Applied Social Research Institute  
of Cambodia
asricjustice.org
Asociación Bufete Jurídico Popular
mujerachi.interconnection.org/bufete.htm
Asociación ProBúsqueda de Niñas  y Niños Desaparecidos
probusqueda.org.sv
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos
aprodeh.org.pe
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos de España
apdhe.org
Association for Justice  
and Reconciliation
Boston Center for Refugee Health  
and Human Rights
bcrhhr.org
Bureau des Avocats Internationaux
ijdh.org
California Consortium of Torture 
Treatment Centers
Center for Constitutional Rights
ccrjustice.org
Centro para Acción Legal  
en Derechos Humanos
caldh.org
Centro International de Toledo  
para la Paz 
toledopax.org
Centro Romero
centroromero.org
Comisión Colombiana de Juristas 
coljuristas.org
Comisión de la Verdad de Ecuador
coverdad.org.ec
Comisión de Verdad de Honduras
comisiondeverdadhonduras.org
Comité de Apoyo al Tibet 
Comité de Familiares de Detenidos 
Desaparecidos en Honduras
cofadeh.org
Corporación de Promoción  
y Defensa de los Derechos 
codepu.clColectivo de Abogados  José Alvear Restrepo 
www.colectivodeabogados.org
Colegio de Abogados de Madrid
www.icam.es
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
www.ucm.es
Dejusticia 
dejusticia.org
Dolly Filártiga
EarthRights International
earthrights.org
East Bay Sanctuary Covenant
eastbaysanctuary.org
East Timor Action Network 
etan.org
El Rescate
elrescate.org
Equipo de Estudios Comunitarios  
y Acción Psicosocial
ecapguatemala.org
EquipoPeruanode Anthropología 
Forense
epafperu.org
Escola de Cultura de Pau 
escolapau.uab.cat
Fédération Internationale des  Ligues des Droits de l’Homme 
fidh.org
Florida Center for Survivors of Torture
FondasyonKoleZepol
fonkoze.org
Fundación para el Debido Proceso 
Legal
dplf.org
FreedomHouse
freedomhouse.org
Fundación de Antropología Forense de Guatemala
fafg.org  
Fundación Democracia sin Fronteras
fdsf.hn
Fundación Nueva Esperanza
fne.cosmosmaya.info
Fundación para el Debido  
Proceso Legal
dplf.org
Fundación Rigoberta Menchú Tum
frmt.org
Global Lawyers and Physicians
globallawyersandphysicians.org
Haiti Action Committee 
haitiaction.net
Horn of Africa Human Rights  Watch Committee
Human Rights First
humanrightsfirst.org24
PARTNERS AND SUPPORTERS
Human Rights Watch
hrw.org
HUMANAS 
humanas.org.co
Impunity Watch
impunitywatch.net
Institute for Redress and Recovery
law.scu.edu/redress
Institute for Justice and  
Democracy in Haiti
ijdh.org
Instituto de Defensa Legal 
idl.org.pe
Instituto de Derechos Humanos  de la Universidad Centroamericana   
uca.edu.sv/publica/idhuca
Interights 
interights.org
International Center for  
Transitional Justice
ictj.org
International Forum for Truth  
and Justice in Africa of the  
Great Lakes Region
veritasrwandaforum.org
International Rights Advocates
iradvocates.org
Fundación Myrna Mack
myrnamack.org.gt
La Peña Cultural Center 
lapena.org
Leo Valladares, Former  
Honduran National  Commissioner for Human Rights
Maryknoll Office for  
Global Concerns
maryknollogc.org
Memoria y Justicia 
memoriayjusticia.cl
MoakleyFoundation
moakleyfoundation.com
Movimiento Nacional  
de Víctimas de Crímenes  
de Estado 
movimientodevictimas.org
Muslim Public Affairs Council
mpac.org
National Consortium of  
Torture Treatment Providers
ncttp.org
National Security Archive
gwu.edu/~nsarchivPartners in Health 
pih.org
Physicians for Human Rights
physiciansforhumanrights.org
Pinochet Watch:  
Institute for Policy Studies 
tni.org//archives/pin-watch_watch
Plataforma de Derechos Humanos 
cofadeh.org
Program for Survivors of Torture  and Trauma: Northern Virginia  
Family Service
nvfs.org
Program for Torture Victims
ptvla.org
Redress 
redress.org
SafetyNet Project for  
Trafficked and Enslaved Persons,  Cambridge Health Alliance
Sister Dianna Ortiz
Spanish Embassy, El Salvador
Survivors International
survivorsintl.org
Survivors of Torture,  
International
notorture.org
The Central American Resource Center 
carecen-la.org
The Marjorie Kovler Center 
for the Treatment of Survivors  
of Torture
heartlandalliance.org/kovler
The Shalom Center
theshalomcenter.org
Torture Abolition and Survivors  Support Coalition International
tassc.org
Tutela Legal del Arzobispado  de San Salvador
tutelalegal.org
Unión de Fiscales Progresistas  de Cataluña 
Universidade de Salamanca
usal.es
Washington Office  
on Latin America 
wola.org
Women’s Link Worldwide
womenslinkworldwide.org
27
FINANCIALS
OPERATING REVENUE AND EXPENSES*
JULY 1, 2009 – JUNE 30, 2010
OPERATING REVENUES:
 F oundation Grants  $  1,349,800
 UN Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture  65,000
 Individual and C orporate Contributions  181,201
 In-K ind Legal Contributions**  2,219,745
 In vestment Income               4,048
 T OTAL OPERATING REVENUES:  $  3,819,794
OPERATING EXPENSES: 
 P ro Bono Fees and Expenses**  $  2,219,745
 P rogram  936,573
 A dministration  158,053  
 F undraising  204,480
 T OTAL OPERATING EXPENSES  $  3,518,851
               *Audited figures for July 1, 2009 - June 30, 2010.  An audited financial statement is available upon request.
            **  CJA par tners with outside law firms and investigation firms to investigate and litigate cases on behalf  
of its clients. Nineteen firms provided over 5,817 hours of pro bono services valued at $2,136,134.   
In addition, eleven firms made contributions of $81,451 to cover out of pocket expenses. The total  
donated pro bono services was $2,219,745. 
PROGRAM EXPENSES:
Program   90%
Administration   4%
Fundraising    6%FundraisingAdministration
Program28BOARD, ADVISORY,  & LEGAL COUNCILS AND STAFF
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
William Aceves, Secretary
California Western School of Law
Chester Atkins
ADS Ventures, Inc., Former Member of U.S. Congress
William Belding, Treasurer
American University
Maryam Elahi
Open Society Institute
Gerald Gray, Founder
Institute for Redress & Recovery
Richard Leigh
Retired Credit Union CEO
Mark MacDougall
Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP
Eileen M. O’Connor, Chair
McDermott Will & Emery
Jane Rocamora
Harvard Immigration & Refugee Clinic at GBLS
Ralph Steinhardt
George Washington University Law School
Beth Stephens
Rutgers School of Law – Camden
Wilma Wallace
Gap Inc.
LEGAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
Carolyn Patty Blum
Senior Legal Advisor, UC Berkeley School of Law
Carlos Castresana Fernández
Spanish Supreme Court Prosecutor
Sandra Coliver
Open Society Justice Initiative
Benjamin Cuellar
University of Central America
James Eisenbrandt
Berkowitz Oliver Williams Shaw & Eisenbrandt LLP
Jennifer Green
University of Minnesota Law School
Paul Hoffman
Schonbrun DeSimone Seplow Harris & Hoffman LLP
Naomi Roht-Arriaza
U.C. Hastings College of the Law
Amanda Smith
Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP
Beth van Schaack
University of Santa Clara School of LawBAY AREA LEADERSHIP COUNCIL
Lena Ayoub-VanLeeuwen
Law Offices of Lena Ayoub-VanLeeuwen
Jeffrey Bleich
Munger Tolles & Olson LLP
Russell Cohen
Orrick, Herrington, Sutcliffe LLP
David Lowe
Rudy, Exelrod & Zieff LLP
Paul Renne
Cooley Godward Kronish LLP
Frank Russo
California Progress Report
Amitai Schwartz
Law Offices of Amitai Schwartz
Michael Traynor
The American Law Institute
Hon. Rebecca Westerfield (Ret.)
JAMS
CJA STAFF
Seth Beale
Operations & Finance Assistant
Almudena Bernabeu
International Attorney/ 
Transitional Justice Program Director
Lindsay Bourne
Legal Fellow
Maria DeGaetano
Development & Outreach Associate
Andrea Evans
Legal Director
Natasha Fain
Staff Attorney
Scott Gilmore
Writer/Researcher
Pamela Merchant
Executive Director
Kathy Roberts
Staff Attorney
Nushin Sarkarati
Staff Attorney
Paloma Soria
Visiting Attorney, Women’s Link WorldwidePHOTO CREDITS
cover:  F abian Fehse
page 1:  CJA
page 2:  CJA
page 9:  CJA
page 10:  F rank Keillor
page 11:  J esus Abad Colorado
page 13:  A aron Ganz
page 14:  Ex traordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
page 17:  CJA
page 18/19:  all phot os CJA
page 21:  t op two photos: CJA;  bottom photo: Jean Quingwen Loo
page 24:  t op: Joe McKay;  middle: Ahron de Leeuw;  bottom: Fabian Fehse
page 26:  F rank Keillor
back page:  CJA
Back Row: (l-r) William Aceves, Martin Tannenbaum, Richard Leigh, 
Lindsay Bourne, Lisa Cohen, Nushin Sarkarati, Maria DeGaetano
Middle Row:  Scott Gilmore, Erin Callahan, Kathy Roberts, Lokelani Devone, 
Andrea Evans, Beth Stephens, Farah Brelvi, Almudena Bernabeu, Jane Rocamora
First Row: Jeff Leininger, Pamela Merchant, Wilma Wallace, Eileen O’Connor
CJA BOARD / STAFF 2010:The Center for Justice and Accountability
870 Market Street,  Suite 680
San Francisco, CA 94102(415) 544-0444www.cja.org
Graphic design by JPD Communications, LLC
