 
1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York State  Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance  
and 
Division of Criminal Justice Services  
 
NEW YORK STATE INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE ON HUMAN TRAFFICKING  
PUBLIC HEARING  
 
December 11 , 200 7 
 
Testimony of Juhu Thukral, Esq.  
 
Director  
Sex Wo rkers Project  
Urban Justice Center  
 
Steering Committee Member  
NY Anti -Trafficking Network  
 
123 William Street , 16th Floor  
New York, New York  100 38 
T: 646/602.5690  
jthukral@urbanjustice.org   
 
The Sex Worker s Project1 at the Urban Justice Center and the NY Anti -Trafficking Network, of 
which we are a member, thank you for this opportunity to present our recommendations for 
implementation of the New York State anti -trafficking law that became effective November  1, 
2007 .2  
 
The Network  is a coalition of diverse service providers and advocates in New York dedicated to 
ending human trafficking and coordinating resources for trafficked persons.  The NY Anti -
Trafficking Network has provided direct services to over 500 survivors of trafficking and advocated 
on issues of trafficking in persons since 2002. As the first coalition in New York to engage in 
advocacy on issues relating to trafficked persons in New York, the Network aims to bring together 
the voices of those wh o have first -hand experience of the injustices of human trafficking, who work 
                  
1 The Sex Workers Project (SWP) is the first program in New York City and  in the country to focus on the provision of 
legal services, legal training, documentation, and policy advocacy for sex workers. The SWP’s program on trafficking in 
persons advises and represents trafficking victims in legal cases; informs and educates imm igrant communities about the 
issue of trafficking and possible legal options; and trains attorneys on this issue. The SWP also coordinates with various 
law enforcement agencies to better identify victims of trafficking, and to ensure that trafficked person s who cooperate 
with law enforcement are protected through the legal process. Finally, we collaborate with other non -governmental 
organizations to advocate for trafficking -related policies that focus on the human rights of trafficked persons and respect 
their dignity. The SWP is a member of the national Freedom Network and the NYC Anti -Trafficking Network (Co -
Chair, Policy & Advocacy Committee; Member, Steering and Legal Committees).  
2 S.B. 5902, 228th Leg., Reg. Sess. (N.Y. 2007), chaptered on June 6, 2007 . 
Urban Justice Center  
123 William Street, 16th floor, New York, NY 10038  
Tel:  (646) 602 -5600 • Fax:  (212) 533 -4598   
2 consistently to meet the needs of trafficked persons, and who advocate for a more humane and 
responsive policy towards trafficked persons. Our membership currently includes over 90 
organizations and individuals advocating on behalf of survivors of trafficking and other forms of 
violence.  
 
We applaud the efforts of New York State , and work  of your agencies in particular , to address the 
problem of human trafficking at the state and local level . Given that New York State is a hub for 
this severe  violation of human rights, i t is critical that all trafficked persons here receive imm ediate 
and comprehensive services as soon as they are id entified , regardless of the sector in which 
they w orked and whether  or not law enforcement  has agreed to view them  as victim s of human 
trafficking . This victim -centered approach will allow trafficked persons to achieve dignity and 
stability in their lives, and simultaneously  support the State’s law enforc ement efforts.  
 
I. Identification and Confirmation Process of Trafficked Persons  
 
The new anti -trafficking law provides that the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance 
(OTDA) will coordinate with and assist law enforcement agencies and district att orneys’ offices to 
access appropriate services for trafficked persons, and that OTDA may enter into contracts with 
non-governmental organizations for providing pre-certified victims of human trafficking services.3 
Decisions regarding eligibility and confir mation for services rest with OTDA and the Division of 
Criminal Justice Services (DCJS).4 While we are pl eased that the State is taking steps  to ensure that 
trafficked persons receive the services they so desperately need, we have strong concerns about 
these efforts.  
 
1. The goal of the services provision and the confirmation process of the new law is to fill the “gap” 
between the time that a victim of human trafficking is identified, and the time it takes for that victim 
to be certified as a victim under t he federal law, at which point the victim is eligible to  receive 
federal benefits and services.5 However, there appear to be no mechanisms in place for social 
service providers or advocates to contact OTDA  and/or DCJS directly when we discover 
and identify  a victim of trafficking.  
 
The reality of this confirmation process is that law enforcement agents  and district attorneys’ offices  
will not contact OTDA  or DCJS  on behalf of a victim until  they have a reasonable belief that the 
person in question is a vic tim of trafficking in persons. This means that law enforcement will be  
conduct ing their own investigation s, which can take week s or more realistically, months. The results 
of this process are clear —a person who has been identified as trafficked will need t o be in a n 
ongoing  cooperative relationship with law enforcement or a district attorney’s office in order to 
access  services. Our experiences in working with well -meaning and dedicated law enforcement and 
prosecutorial offices have taught us that relying s olely on government agencies to initiate the process 
of accessing services delays necessary services and benefits for months. This is counter to the very 
intent of the service -related sections of the new law, since at this point, the trafficked person can 
apply for the T visa and be well on his or her way to receiving federal benefits.  
 
                  
3 NY Soc. Ser. Law §483 -bb (emphasis added).  
4 NY Soc. Ser. Law §483 -cc; Proposed 9 NYCRR 6174.3 (proposed emergency rule available at XXIX NY Reg. 2 (Nov. 
14, 2007)).   
5 XXIX  NY Reg. 1 (Nov. 14, 2007) (proposing an emergency rule adding a new Part 6174  to Title 9 NYCRR); see also 
Meeting Minutes from NY Anti -Trafficking Network Meeting  (Presentation by OTDA and DCJS) , Oct. 12, 2007, on file 
with the Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center.   
3 We strongly urge you to adopt measures that will work in a way that provides assistance to trafficked 
persons as soon as they are identified by service providers as well as  law enforcement agencies and 
district attorneys’ offices.  
 
2. In addition, there appear to be no mechanisms in place to protect confidentiality of 
victims’ information.  Given the sensitive nature of most trafficking  situations, often relating to 
immigrati on status and/or experiences of abuse that no one would want to be public, t his is a gap 
that must be addressed.  
 
II. Outreach and Training on T rafficking Into Labor Sectors   
 
We oppose human trafficking in all forms. Trafficking into various labor sectors  is as harmful as 
trafficking into prostitution. However, it is clear that thus far, New York State is focusing its 
resources largely on trafficking into prostitution.6 The prevalence and criminality of labor 
trafficking situations must be taken seriously by New York State , and its importance must be 
made clear  and acknowledged  in: 
 
 Outreach efforts  to increase public awareness of human trafficking ;  
 Training of law enforcement , prosecutors, and state agencies;  
 Identification of appropriate service provide rs;  
 Collecting data on the nature and extent of human trafficking in New York State ; and  
 Prevention efforts aimed at protecting vulnerable workers before they become victims of  this 
brutal crime.  
 
Labor trafficking has already been treated as a less serio us violation of human rights by being 
designated two felony levels lower than trafficking into prostitution.7 In the NY Anti -Trafficking 
Network, we see many cases of trafficking into sectors other than prostitution, including domestic 
work, retail work, a nd dancing or stripping. These cases will be ignored if substantial resources are 
not focused on outreach and training ; identification ; data collection ; and prevention efforts for labor 
trafficking . Ultimately, this  will result in New York State ignoring t he needs of a large sector of 
trafficked persons.  
 
Thank you for offering advocates such as the Sex Workers Project and other members of the NY 
Anti-Trafficking Network an opportunity to share our experti se and our concerns with you  as you 
consider mechani sms around implementation of the new law . We look forward to working with you 
in an effort to bring immediate  and comprehensive assistance to trafficked persons  in New 
York State . 
 
 
 
                  
6 Meeting Minutes from NY Anti -Trafficking Network Meeti ng (Presentation by OTDA and DCJS) , Oct. 12, 2007, on 
file with the Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center.  
7 See NY Penal Law §§135.35, 230.34.  