123	  William	  Street,	  16th	  Floor,	  New	  York,	  New	  York	  10038,	  T:	  646-­‐459-­‐3024,	  mbroudo@urbanjustice.org	  	  
TESTIMONY	  IN	  SUPPORT	  OF	  SB	  327 HUMAN	  TRAFFICKING	  VICTIM	  PROTECTION	  ACT PRESENTED	  TO	  THE	  HOUSE	  JUDICIARY	  COMMITTEE	  FEBRUARY	  15,	  2011	  	  Melissa	  Broudo,	  Esq.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  Staff	  Attorney	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  123	  Williams	  Street,	  16th	  Floor	  Sex	  Workers	  Project,	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  	  	  	  Tel:	  (646)	  602-­‐5626	  •	  Fax:	  (212)	  533-­‐4598	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  I	  am	  submitting	  this	  testimony	  on	  behalf	  of	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  at	  the	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  (SWP),	  a	  legal	  and	  social	  services	  organization	  in	  New	  York	  City.	  	  SWP	  represents	  individuals	  who	  are	  involved	  in	  the	  sex	  industry	  through	  force,	  circumstances,	  or	  coercion.	  Approximately	  half	  of	  our	  clients	  are	  survivors	  of	  trafficking	  in	  prostitution	  and	  we	  represent	  these	  clients	  on	  a	  variety	  of	  legal	  cases,	  including	  immigration,	  family	  reunification,	  criminal	  defense,	  and	  collateral	  consequences	  of	  convictions.	  We	  also	  have	  a	  social	  service	  component	  comprised	  of	  dedicated	  social	  workers	  who	  provide	  direct	  therapy	  to	  survivors.	  SWP	  has	  been	  recognized	  as	  a	  leader	  in	  the	  anti-­‐trafficking	  movement	  in	  the	  ten	  years	  since	  its	  founding.	  	  	  	  SWP	  has	  significant	  expertise	  on	  the	  issue	  of	  vacatur	  of	  convictions	  of	  prostitution	  for	  survivors	  of	  trafficking.	  Specifically,	  SWP	  co-­‐authored	  and	  helped	  to	  pass	  New	  York	  State’s	  “Vacating	  Convictions	  for	  Trafficked	  Persons”	  legislation,	  which	  was	  signed	  into	  law	  in	  August	  2010	  by	  Governor	  Patterson.	  New	  York	  State	  Senate	  Bill	  4429;	  New	  York	  State	  Assembly	  Bill	  7670;	  now	  New	  York	  Criminal	  Procedure	  Law	  440.10(1)(i).	  	  We	  filed	  the	  first	  motions	  under	  this	  new	  law	  for	  survivors	  of	  both	  domestic	  and	  international	  commercial	  sex	  trafficking.	  As	  attorneys	  for	  trafficking	  survivors,	  we	  know	  how	  important	  such	  provisions	  are,	  but	  would	  also	  like	  to	  share	  our	  insights	  into	  how	  to	  craft	  a	  comprehensive	  law	  to	  ensure	  that	  this	  critical	  remedy	  is	  available	  to	  the	  greatest	  number	  of	  survivors.	  	  	  	  There	  are	  critical	  distinctions	  between	  New	  York’s	  and	  Maryland’s	  laws	  with	  regards	  to	  criminal	  procedure	  and	  remedies	  available	  post	  conviction.	  New	  York’s	  post-­‐conviction	  remedies	  including	  vacatur,	  certificates	  of	  relief,	  and	  appeal.	  Vacatur	  is	  a	  remedy	  by	  which	  the	  Court	  decrees	  that	  there	  was	  a	  serious	  enough	  error	  warranting	  the	  convictions	  to	  be	  undone	  or	  removed	  from	  the	  history	  of	  the	  defendant’s	  case.	  Vacatur	  operates	  to	  “turn	  back	  the	  clock”	  to	  before	  the	  conviction	  to	  ensure	  the	  legal	  effect	  of	  the	  defendant	  never	  having	  been	  convicted	  of	  the	  crime.	  	  Expungement,	  which	  is	  not	  available	  in	  New	  York,	  generally	  applies	  as	  an	  administrative	  remedy	  that	  merely	  erases	  evidence	  of	  a	  conviction	  from	  a	  record,	  but	  does	  not	  entail	  a	  judgment	  as	  to	  an	  underlying	  error	  in	  the	  case.	  	  Vacatur	  is	  a	  more	  thorough	  remedy,	  which	  has	  implications	  especially	  for	  victims	  of	  international	  trafficking.	  Currently,	  migrants	  who	  seek	  admission	  to	  the	  United	  States	  can	  be	  excluded	  if	  found	  to	  be	  convicted	  of	  2	  or	  more	  prostitution	  offenses,	  even	  if	  those	  convictions	  are	  subsequently	  expunged.	  However,	  convictions	  that	  are	  vacated	  because	  of	  an	  error	  in	  the	  underlying	  case	  cannot	  count	  against	  a	  petitioner	  for	  immigration	  status.	  Eliminating	  this	  immigration	  bar	  was	  one	  of	  the	  goals	  of	  the	  NY	  bill	  and	  we	  recommend	  you	  make	  clear	  that	  it	  is	  a	  goal	  of	  yours	  as	  well.	  	  	  123	  William	  Street,	  16th	  Floor,	  New	  York,	  New	  York	  10038,	  T:	  646-­‐459-­‐3024,	  mbroudo@urbanjustice.org	  	  Another	  difference	  between	  the	  New	  York	  bill	  and	  SB	  327	  pertains	  to	  evidence	  of	  human	  trafficking.	  Under	  NYCPL	  440.10(1)(i)),	  documentation	  from	  federal,	  state,	  or	  local	  governmental	  agencies	  showing	  that	  the	  defendant	  is	  a	  victim	  of	  trafficking	  create	  a	  presumption	  that	  the	  defendant’s	  participation	  in	  the	  offense	  was	  a	  result	  of	  trafficking,	  but	  such	  official	  documentation	  is	  not	  required	  for	  these	  motions.	  We	  strongly	  urge	  Maryland	  to	  consider	  adopting	  language	  that	  makes	  absolutely	  clear	  that	  official	  documentation	  is	  not	  required,	  as	  few	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  will	  have	  “official”	  documentation	  recognizing	  them	  as	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  	  	  In	  addition,	  under	  440.10(1)(i),	  the	  court	  “must	  vacate	  the	  judgment	  and	  dismiss	  the	  accusatory	  instrument,	  and	  may	  take	  such	  additional	  action	  as	  is	  appropriate	  in	  the	  circumstances”	  whereas	  SB	  327	  bill	  permits	  the	  Court	  broader	  discretion	  “to	  vacate,	  modify	  the	  sentence,	  or	  grant	  a	  new	  trial.”	  We	  are	  concerned	  that	  in	  cases	  where	  a	  defendant	  definitively	  proves	  that	  she	  sustained	  a	  prostitution	  conviction	  while	  being	  trafficked	  that	  the	  court	  could	  still	  use	  its	  discretion	  to	  simply	  change	  her	  sentence.	  We	  believe	  this	  kind	  of	  discretion	  invites	  inconsistent	  or	  discriminatory	  application	  of	  the	  law,	  and	  will	  not	  ensure	  the	  rights	  of	  trafficked	  persons.	  We	  strongly	  urge	  Maryland	  to	  adopt	  such	  similar	  language	  to	  ensure	  that	  all	  survivors	  receive	  the	  same	  full	  remedy,	  namely	  vacatur.	  	  Finally,	  the	  NY	  law	  permits	  survivors	  of	  trafficking	  to	  vacate	  prior	  convictions	  that	  resulted	  from	  an	  arrest	  for	  Prostitution	  (Penal	  Law	  230.00)	  or	  Loitering	  for	  the	  Purpose	  of	  Engaging	  in	  a	  Prostitution	  Offense	  (Penal	  Law	  240.20)	  if	  the	  defendant’s	  participation	  in	  the	  offense	  was	  a	  result	  of	  having	  been	  trafficked.	  	  This	  limitation	  has	  proven	  to	  be,	  in	  practice,	  not	  comprehensive	  enough.	  Many	  survivors	  of	  trafficking	  were	  forced	  by	  their	  traffickers	  to	  engage	  in	  activities	  beyond	  prostitution,	  which	  sometimes	  resulted	  in	  criminal	  convictions.	  Activities	  we	  have	  seen	  include	  purchasing	  of	  drugs	  for	  traffickers/abusers,	  violating	  street	  vendor	  laws,	  trespassing,	  and	  others.	  Further,	  individuals	  can	  sustain	  convictions	  of	  lesser	  offenses	  in	  plea	  arrangements	  even	  when	  the	  underlying	  act	  was	  prostitution.	  It	  is	  advisable	  to	  build	  some	  discretion	  into	  the	  law	  to	  take	  into	  account	  these	  situations.	  	  	  	  We	  commend	  the	  Maryland	  legislature	  for	  addressing	  this	  important	  issue	  and	  invite	  any	  questions	  or	  dialogue	  towards	  the	  goal	  of	  protecting	  the	  rights	  and	  ensuring	  the	  futures	  of	  survivors	  of	  trafficking.	  	  	  Urban	  Justice	  strongly	  supports	  the	  goals	  of	  this	  section	  of	  SB	  327	  and	  urges	  the	  adoption	  of	  these	  recommendations	  to	  create	  a	  more	  comprehensive	  remedy	  for	  survivors	  of	  trafficking.	  