 
Phumzile Mlambo Ngucka  
Executive Director, UN Women  
 
July 5, 2016  
 
Dear Phumzile Mlambo Ngucka:  
 
It has come to our attention that UN Women is intending to make sex work a priority 
area, and is interested in consulting with stakeholders that work with sex workers towards 
this effort. While still in a preliminary stage, the Urban Justice Center’s Sex Workers 
Project would like to contribute our expertise to this process.  
 
For fifteen years, the Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center has provided  
client -centered legal and social services to individuals who engage in sex work, 
regardless of whether they do so by choice, circumstance, or coercion. One of the first 
programs in the nation to assist survivors of human trafficking, the Sex Workers Proje ct 
has pioneered an approach to service grounded in human rights, harm reduction and in 
the real life experiences of our clients. We offer legal representation to sex workers and 
victims of human trafficking on criminal, civil, and immigration matters. The  Sex 
Workers Project also provides therapeutic counseling and case management to our 
clients. Our clients hail from all over the world, from Latin America, Asia, Africa, 
Europe and from the United States. We are recognized experts on the profound human 
rights abuses victims of trafficking and sex workers face, and perform research and 
documentation on these abuses, with a focus on New York City.  
 
It is important to affirm, as many UN Agencies have in recent years, that sex workers 
deserve the same human rig hts as others, and as documented by the Global Commission 
on HIV and the Law,  that criminalization of sex work is harmful, and that the conflation 
of consensual sex work and human trafficking causes inappropriate and damaging 
responses.  
 
We have produced multiple reports about the lives of sex workers and trafficked persons 
in New York City . These include reports about people who sell sex on the street 
(Revolving Door , 2003 , http://sexworkersproject.org/publications/reports/revolving -
door/ ) and people who did sex work indoors ( Behind Closed Doors , 2005 , 
http://sexworkersproject.org/publicati ons/reports/behind -closed -doors/ ) and the 
experiences of people arrested during anti -trafficking raids and experiences of services 
providers around the country ( The Use of Raids to Fight Human Trafficking , 2009 , 
http://sexworkersproject.org/publications/reports/raids -and-trafficking/ ) and a report 
specifically about people brought to the US from Mexico ( The Road North: The role of 
gender, poverty and violence in traffic king from Mexico to the US , 2012 http://sexworkersproject.org/publications/reports/the -road-north/)  undertaken at the 
request of Mexican NGOs. Additionally, our report Publi c Health Crisis : The use of 
condoms as evidence of prostitution in New York City  
(http://sexworkersproject.org/publications/reports/public -health -crisis/)  demonstrates  that 
criminalization encourages police to work counter to important public health initiatives to 
prevent HIV and sexually transmitted infections both of which present serious 
reproductive health problems.   
 
Our research demonstrates that c riminalization o f sex work  is a failed policy. 
Criminalization  does not provide living wage alternatives to those who sell sex, but only 
adds harm to their lives: from the trauma of arrest and incarceration, to having  a criminal 
record  making it  harder to get a job , to increased risk of trafficking and exploitation, to 
prevention of effective health outreach. Criminalization is also linked to violence, 
because perpetrators know they are likely to go unpunished when they target criminalized 
people . 
 
However, criminaliz ation of sex work is a very entrenched policy in the U.S. While there 
are signs of a changing perspective, there are policy goals we can reach for while we 
build towards a more thorough recognition of the rights of sex workers. We thought it 
would be usefu l to share the policy changes and goals we have as an organization 
fighting for the rights of sex workers and survivors of human trafficking in the U.S.  
 
1. Repeal of laws that charge HIV positive sex workers with felony level crimes, 
charge sex workers with criminal records with felonies, or place HIV positive sex 
workers on sex offender registries ; 
2. Repeal of laws that criminalize minors for engaging in sex work;  
3. Expansion of laws that vacate past convictions for survivors of trafficking ; 
4. Implementation of laws that vacate, expunge or seal past convictions of 
prostitution ; 
5. Change in law enforcement practices that use anti -trafficking funding streams to 
raid and arrest sex workers ; 
6. Passage of laws that exclude condoms from being confiscated from sex workers 
in the course of arrest ; 
7. Challenging the linkag e of social services with criminalization in “prostitution 
diversion courts ;”  
8. Repeal of the mandate to “cooperate with law enforcement” in order to receive 
benefits and remedies as a victim of trafficking ; 
9. Repeal of funding restrictions on organizations that fight for decriminalization of 
sex work, domestically and abroad ; 
10. Fully funding harm reduction based shelter, social services, and healthcare for sex 
workers;  
11. Deprioritizing the arrest of sex workers and th eir clients;  
12. Repeal of laws that mandate the deportation of persons with prostitution 
convictions.  
 
My colleagues are available to meet with you and to introduce you to other service providers and organizations of sex workers in New York City. We look for ward to 
engaging with you as UN Women develops its policy on sex work.  
 
Yours truly,  
 
 
Crystal DeBoise , LMSW  
Managing Director  
Sex Workers Project  
Urban Justice Center  
cdeboise@urbanjustice.org  
(646) 602-5692  
 
 
Cc:  
Purna Sen  
Lopa Banerjee  
Jade Cochran  
Kalliopi Mingerlrou  
Vivek Rai  
 
