Attorney General Rob McKenna , President  
National Association of Attorneys General  
2030 M Street NW, 8th Floor  
Washington, DC 20036   
 
May 30, 2012  
 
Dear Attorney General Rob McKenna , 
It has come to our attention that the National Association of Attorneys General has commenced 
the Pillars of Hope campaign directed at ending human trafficking.  As organizations and service 
providers that work directly with survivors of trafficking and ot hers engaged in the sex trade, we 
support efforts to raise awareness of human trafficking.  However, we want to sound a note of 
caution in diverting precious time and resources towards “End Demand ” strategies to end 
prostitution in the hope that those stra tegies will also end trafficking into prostitution and child 
prostitution.  End Demand strategies have not been shown to be effective, and they have often 
had harmful effects on sex workers and trafficking victims,  including minors.   
The NAAG emphasizes several po licies in the Pillars of Hope Campaign that concern us.  For 
example, Pillars of Hope outlines a campaign to encourage the public view that purchasing sex is 
socially unacceptable.   We fear that this campaign will only increase harmful stigmatization of 
sex workers while failing to do anything to end trafficking into prostitution or child sexual 
exploitation .  The NAAG  also mentions a campaign to promote these messages in conjunction 
with the Super Bowl, even though there has never been any evidence of a link betw een sporting 
events and trafficking.  Finally, the NAAG expresses an interest in continuing the campaign 
against online classified services such as Backpage.com, obviously in the hope that this will stop 
prostitution.  However, shutting down any online ser vice is not a solution as internet -based 
prostitution would simply move to another site if Backpage.com were shut down.  
We urge NAAG to pursue policies and use precious resources to take action that will help 
victims of trafficking and child sexual exploi tation  without further stigmatizing or harming adult 
sex workers.   
FURTHER CRIMINALIZING CLIENT S AND STIGMATIZING S EX WORKERS WILL 
NOT STOP HUMAN TRAFF ICKING OR CHILD SEXUAL EXPLOITATION  
In attempting to educate the public about human trafficking, the NAAG should  be careful to 
promote messages about trafficking and child sexual exploitation that are evidence -based.  The 
Attorneys General are in a unique position to influence state legislatures and government 
agencies regarding the best policies to aid victims of t rafficking and child sexual exploitation and 
to prosecute traffickers and child abusers.  States obviously have limited resources with which to 
pursue criminals, and therefore, the NAAG should support policies that have been shown to 
work, such as supporti ng cooperation with organizations that work with trafficking victims and 
adult sex workers, training law enforcement on trafficking and prostitution, and providing 
accurate information about trafficking.  Although  End Demand style policies  have a simplistic 
appeal, a more nuanced investigation into the complexities of human trafficking and child sexual exploitation reveals that trafficking is not demand -driven.  Instead, traffickin g is driven by the 
greed of traffickers and facilitated by r estrictive immigration policies, lack of labor rights and 
economic, social and other factors.  Therefore, in order to reduce human trafficking and child 
sexual exploitation , the Attorneys General should focus on prosecuting traffickers and abusers 
and supp orting programs to reduce the conditions that make trafficking and child sexual 
exploitation possible. They will completely miss the mark if they waste energy and resources to 
arrest more clients of adult sex workers who are not trafficked.1   
There is no evidence demonstrating that trafficking into prostitution is caused by client 
demand for trafficking victims  
 
The  Pillars  of  Hope  campaign  expresses  “ending  demand  for  trafficking”  as  a  goal.    While  we  
also seek to end trafficking, there is little evidenc e that trafficking into prostitution is driven by 
the  ‘demand’  or  desires  of  clients.    Anderson  and  O’Connell  Davidson   completed a 
comprehensive study on the question of whether trafficking for commercial sex and domestic 
labor are demand -driven and pointe d  out  significant  evidentiary  defects  in  the  “demand”  theory.    
They found that “demand  for  both  commercial  sexual  services  and  the  labor  of  domestic  
workers, like demand in all markets, is very much a socially, culturally and historically 
determined matter .  It is also intimately related to questions concerning supply or availability; 
indeed,  we  could  almost  say  that  supply  generates  demand  rather  than  the  other  way  round.”2  
They  cautioned  against  tactics  that  focus  only  on  the  sex  sector  as  “it  is  not  cle ar that calls for 
punitive  policies  against  [purchasers  of  commercial  sex]  would  lead  to  the  desired  outcome”  of  
reducing trafficking into prostitution.3 
 
There is no evidence that increased arrests of clients reduces prostitution or trafficking  
 
No study has yet demonstrated that increasing the investigation and prosecution of persons who 
purchase commercial sex acts causes any decrease in trafficking or prostitution in the United 
States.4  For example, educational diversion programs for those arrested for  purchasing 
commercial  sex,  colloquially  known  as  “John  Schools,”  are  already  in  effect  in  fifty  jurisdictions  
in the United States.  None of these programs have been shown to have an effect on the 
prevalence of prostitution or human trafficking.5  In fact , studies show that they may not even                                                  1  See Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women, Moving  Beyond  ‘Supply  and  Demand’  Catchphrases:   Assessing 
the Uses and Limitations of Demand -Based Approaches in A nti-trafficking  28-35 (2011), available at  
http://www.gaatw.org/publications/MovingBeyond_SupplyandDemand_GAATW2011.pdf  (providing examples of 
the ineffectiveness of End Demand policies in ending trafficking) .   2Bridget Anderson  and Julia O ’Connell Davidson, International Orga nization for Migration,  Is Trafficking in 
Human Beings Demand -Driven? A Multi -Country Pilot Study (2003), available at  
http://www.childtrafficking.com/Docs/anderson___o_connell_davids1.pdf . 3Id. 4See Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women, supra  note 1, at 36.  5 One study claims that the San Francisco john school reduced recidivism, but that study was seriously flawed and 
did not, in fact, prove any link between the john school and the reduced recidivism.  Compare  Michael Shively, et 
al., Abt Associates, Inc. , Final Report on the Evaluation of the First Offender Prostitu tion Program, (2008),  
available at  http://www.abtassociates.com/reports/FOPP_Evaluation_FULL_REPORT.pdf , with Rachel Lovell and 
Ann Jordan, Do John Schools Really Decrease Recidivism?: A methodological critique of the evaluation of the first 
offender prostitution program in San Francisco, working paper on file with authors.  reduce recidivism among participants.6  Educating our community members may be a laudatory 
goal, but these initiatives show that the current models are not best practices that should be 
replicated.   
 
It is also instru ctive to look at other nations that have implemented laws to criminalize clients to 
see if they have been able to document any effect on human trafficking (or prostitution). Sweden 
criminalized the purchase (but not the sale) of commercial sex in 1998  with the belief that this 
would lead to an end to prostitution and trafficking into prostitution.  The government does not 
have any evidence that the law reduced trafficking into prostitution.  Although it proclaims that 
the law has reduced street prostitution  by 50%,7 their own data does not provide any evidence to 
support the claim.8  In fact, these tactics have not even reduced prostitution in Sweden.9 
 
More troubling, increased prosecutions of clients may decrease reliable reporting of human 
trafficking, child sexual exploit ation  and abuses against adult sex workers  
 
Human trafficking organizations and law enforcement have learned from working intently on 
this issue, that many trafficking victims are directly helped by one of their customers who help 
them escape or report their situation to law enforcement.  Purchasers of commercial sex who feel 
increasingly targeted by law enforcement and so are in greater fear of being arrested are less 
likely to rep ort trafficking -like situations or act as witnesses.  
TRAFFICKING INTO PRO STITUTION AND LARGE SPORTING EVENTS  
As part of its Pillars of Hope campaign  the NAAG employed  an End Demand  approach with 
respect to the 2012 Super Bowl. This plan was based on assump tions that large sporting events 
like the Olympics, the World Cup, and the Super Bowl increase the number of persons,                                                  6See. e.g., Martin A. Monto  and Steve Garc ia,  “Recidivism Among the Customers of Female Street Prostitutes: Do 
Intervention Programs Help? ,”  3  Western Criminology Review (2011), available at  
http://wcr.sonoma.edu/v3n2/monto.html . 7Sweden’s  Chan cellor of Justice Anna S karhed Report, Förbud mot köpavsexuelltjänst En utvärdering 1999 –2008  
34-36 (2010), r eport summary in English available at  
http://www.sweden.gov.se/content/ 1/c6/14/92/31/96b1e019.pdf . 8Susanne Dodillet and Petra Ostergram, The Swedish Sex Purchase Act: Claimed Success and Documented Effect s 
(2011), available at  http://www.petraostergren.com/upl/files/54259.pdf ; Annika Eriksson  and Anna Gavanas , 
National Board of Health and Welfare, Individual and Family Unit, Prostitution in Sweden 2007 , 47-48 (2008), 
available at  www.socialstyrelsen.se . 9Elizabeth Bernstein,  Temporarily Yours: Intimacy, Authenticity, and the Commerce of Sex  (2007); Don Kulick, 
Sex in the New Europe: The Criminalization of Clients and Swedish Fear of Penetration , 3 Anthropological Theory 
199 (2007)  (Studies  show that although the Swedish law and similar efforts to crack down on street -level 
prostitution in the U.S. may have decreased the visibility  of prostitution, it has not decreased its frequency, but rather 
moved  indoors  or  “underground.”);;   Sweden’s  Chancellor  of  Justice  Anna  S karhed Report, Förbud mot 
köpavsexuelltjänst En utvärdering 1999 –2008 (2010),r eport summary in English available at  
http://www.sweden.gov.se/co ntent/1/c6/14/92/31/96b1e019.pdf  (stating that  although there was an initial decrease in 
prostitution, now the government could only conclude that prostitution had simply not increased in Sweden since the 
law); Working Group of the Legal Regulation of Sexu al Services, Purchasing sexual services in Sweden and the 
Netherlands: Legal Regulation and Experiences (2004), available at  
www.nswp.org/sites/nswp.org/files/PURCHASINGSEX.pdf  (A 1999–2003 study  showed stable levels of street -
based prostitution .). particularly minors, who are trafficked for sex.  These allegations are simply unfounded. The 
idea that trafficking is inextricably linked  to sporting events is a prime example of an unfounded 
rumor  resulting  in a gross misuse of resources. The claims that large numbers of persons would 
be trafficked for sex to both Sydney in 2000 and Athens in 2003 for the Olympic Games, or to 
Germany in 20 06 and South Africa in 2010 for the World Cup  have been investigated and found 
to be unsubstantiated.10  Furthermore, the claims that  thousands of underage domestic minors 
would be trafficked for sex at the U.S. Super Bowl in Dallas in 201 1 or Indianapolis in 2012  
have not been supported by any plausible evidence.11  Finally, o f the small number of arrests 
occurring in these locales,12 none but a handful was related to minors.  
In the case of the Super Bowl in Indianapolis this year, Indiana passed an emergency bill to 
update previous laws in an attempt to toughen up their human trafficking laws by extending the 
definition of sex trafficking and increasing penalties.13 The city also engaged in an extensive 
campaign to educate and train hotel workers and cab drivers to recognize the signs of human 
trafficking.14  While we support well targeted education campaigns to spread awareness about 
human trafficking, there was no evidence to bear out propositions by officials that many women 
and minors would be traff icked to the city for the event.15                                                   10See, e.g., Carpenter, Les , “Debunking  World  Cup’s  biggest  myth ,”  Yahoo News , June 10, 2010.;  Cronin, Brian , 
“Sports  Legend  Revealed:  40,000  prostitutes  enter  th e country hosting the World Cup ,”  Los Angeles Times , June 16, 
2010.; O’Neill,  Brendan ,  “Stop  this  il licit trade in bull____ stories ,”  Spiked , March 18, 2010 ;  IOM (2007), 
Trafficking in Human Beings and the 2006 World Cup in Germany,  Migration Research Series no. 29  available  at 
http://www.iom.ch/jahia/webdav/site/myjahiasite/shared/shared/mainsite/published _docs/serial _publications/mrs29.
pdf (stating that “the estimate of 40,000 women expected to be trafficked [in Germany surrounding the World Cup] 
was unfounded and unrealist ic”); SWEAT (2010), Press Release, Sex Workers Education and Advocacy Taskforce  
(SWEAT) and the UN  Population Fund (UNFPA), Oct. 21. 2010)  available at 
http://victimempowermentsa.wordpress.com/2010/10/25/sex -workers -during -2010 -soccer -world -cup-reality -
vspredictions/  (stating that during the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, there was only a small increase in the 
number of femal e sex workers who advertised online and that there was “no spike in supply and demand of paid sex 
through newspaper and online advertising ” during this time period); What ’s the Cost of a Rumour? A guide to 
sorting out the myths and the facts about sporting  events and trafficking, Report by the Global Alliance Against 
Traffic in Women, 2011, available at  http://www.s -i-o.dk/tekst/WhatstheCostofaRumour.pdf  (stating that there were 
no instance s of trafficking for prostitution linked to the 2004 Olympics).   11 Kotz, Pete , “The  Super  Bowl  Prostitute  Myth:  100,000  Hookers  Won’t  Be  Showing  Up  in  Dallas.”   Dallas 
Observer , January 27, 2011.  12 Sex trafficking related arrests in Germany for the entire year of 2006 were less than 1000; there were 133 arrests 
in Dallas during the North  Texas  Law  Enforcement,  Attorney  General’s  Office  Prevent  Human  Trafficking  Surge  at 
the 2011 Super Bowl.  Of the 133 mostly prostitution -related arrests, only 8 were related to human trafficking and of 
those only 4 involved minors.  See  Huseman,  Jessica  L.  2011.  “Top  FBI  agent  in  Dallas  praises  Super  Bowl  security  
effort, sees no evidence of expected spike in child s ex  trafficking.”   Dallas News , March 2, 2011.; Peterson, Matt. 
2011.  “Efforts  of  sex  trafficking  task  force  led  to  133  arrests  in  run -up  to  Super  Bowl.”   Dallas News , February 18, 
2011.  13 Elizabeth Prann, Indiana passes human trafficking law in time for Supe r Bowl, FoxNews.com , February 2, 2012 
available at http://www.foxnews.com/us/2012/02/02/human -trafficking -law-passes -before -super -bowl/ . 14 Siara  Sparkman and Evie Lichtenwalter, The Ball State Daily News , February 1, 2012, available at 
http://www.bsudailynews.com/gov -daniels -approves -anti-trafficking -bill-1.2693657#.T0saYYcgfd4 . 15 Rachel Loyd, Urban Legends and Hoaxes: How Hyperbole Hurts Trafficking Victims, Huffington Post , February 
3, 2012, available at http://www.huffingtonpost.com/rachel -lloyd/village -voice -escort -ads_b_1250617.html  (stating 
that while “there have definitely been some reported cases, the sta tistics just don ’t bear out this claim. ”). The misguided focus on trafficking and sporting events relies on gendered stereotypes, not on 
evidence. Not only men attend sporting events and not all  men who attend sporting events buy 
the services of victims of human t rafficking .  Rather than addressing the serious problem of 
human trafficking, this misdirection diverts important resources and tends to obscure the real 
source of the problem.    
BACKPAGE AND  INTERNET FORUMS FOR SEX WORK  
NAAG’s  Pillars  of  Hope  campaign  als o expresses an interest in continuing the NAAG campaign 
against online classified services such as Backpage.com.  Efforts to shut down adult services ads 
on websites like Backpage.com are misguided approaches to combat human trafficking.  In fact, 
we are v ery concerned that these actions will fuel the growth of human trafficking.  Without 
Backpage .com , other escorting sites, of which there are thousands,16 will quickly fill the gap.17  
We work with survivors of human trafficking, and can assure you that traffickers  will not be 
dissuaded by the absence of one website.  Human traffickers will scatter to these other sites, 
which are less structured and harder to monitor, or go offline altogether.18  Trafficking that 
occurs in hidden locations with no public profil e is much harder to find, investigate, and stop.  
Does  the NAAG have an effective strategy and adequate resources to counteract the 
redistribution of online human trafficking that will result from the removal of Backpage .com ’s  
adult services section?  Utilizing limited resources against one Internet  forum  will do nothing to 
reduce trafficking within the sex industry.19  
We have heard from local and federal law enforcement agencies that the existence of 
Backpage .com  actually makes it easier to investigate and combat human trafficking.  Traffickers                                                  16 See Mark Latonero, Ph.D., The Role of Social Networking Sites on Online Classifieds , Human Traff icking Online, 
Sept. 2011, at 14 , available at  
https://technologyandtrafficking.usc.edu/files/2011/09/HumanTrafficking_FINAL.pdf .  A report by A Shared Hope 
International found that there could be as many as 5,000 websites offering commercial sex, either directly or 
indire ctly. 17 Backpage replaces Craigslist as top site for prostitution ad -leader, AIM Group, Oct. 19, 2010, available at  
http://aimgroup.com/blog/2010/10/19/backpage -replaces -craigslist -as-prostitution -ad-leader/.  After Craigslist.org 
refused to accept further  escort ads, Backpage.com experienced a 15.8% surge of unique visitors in September 2010.  
Escort listings increased 17.5%.  A handful of other similar sites also experienced revenue growth that either 
matched or exceeded Backpage.com ; see Shoshana  Walter, Online Sex Trade Is Flourishing Despite Efforts to Curb 
It, N.Y. T IMES , Mar. 16, 2012, available at  http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/16/us/online -sex-trade -flourishing -
despite -efforts -to-curb-it.html . 18 Online prostitution advertising stunted by Cra igslist’s  departure , AIM Group, September 6, 2011, available at  
http://aimgroup.com/blog/2011/09/06/online -prostitution -advertising -stunted -by-craigslist’s -departure/.  In the year 
since Craigslist.org removed escort ads from their website, it is estimated  that the amount spent on online 
prostitution has fallen by more than 50%. While this could erroneously be hailed as a victory, it is illogical to 
assume that a decease in online ads equates to less sexual trafficking. Sadly it only implies that portions o f this 
illegal activity have moved to less visible areas.  Despite the decrease in revenue, ads are still plentiful.  
Backpage.com had an estimated 86,600 sexual advertisements in August 2010.  19 See Megan Woolhouse, Craigslist not the only online site for sex ads , Boston.com, Sept. 8, 2010, 
http://www.boston.com/business/technology/articles/2010/09/08/craigslist_not_the_only_online_site_for_sex_ads/.  
Efforts to  take down these sites are  compared  to  a  game  of  “Whac -a-Mole”  by  John  Palfry,  codirector  of  the  
Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School.  He urges that attacking intermediaries through 
censorship will not eliminate illegal online activities.  and  other  perpetrators  of  violence  leave  “virtual  footprints”  when  they  utilize  Internet  forums,  
and this information is available to law enforcement through subpoena.20  Law enforcement 
investigations around the count ry that have utilized online sex advertisements may have resulted 
in arrests and prosecutions that would not otherwise have been possible.21 Backpage.com 
currently provides evidence to law enforcement agencies to support trafficking cases.22  Many 
other sites do not offer this support.23   
We believe that law enforcement developing a working relationship with Backpage .com  will be 
more helpful than clinging to the hope that removal of online sex ads will alleviate the 
prevalence of sex traffick ing.   
ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES  
As a leader in the law enforcement community, the NAAG has an important role to play in the 
fight against trafficking.  We encourage NAAG to focus on  the following alternative policies and 
activities as part of your campai gn:  
 
Support law enforcement cooperation with service providers and advocacy organizations 
that are rooted in communities affected by human trafficking .  
Organizations that support sex workers, undocumented immigrants, low wage workers, and other 
marginal ized communities are best positioned to identify  possible victims of trafficking.  In the 
2011 Trafficking in Persons Report the U.S. State Department recommends partnerships between 
government offices and NGOs.  By partnering with advocacy and support gro ups that are 
knowledgeable, trusted resources, law enforcement can start to build the trust that is needed to 
address this crime. 24 
 
Support  organizations that assist survivors of human trafficking.   
Human trafficking into prostitution is a horrific human rights abuse, and there are a growing 
number  of qualified direct service providers with expertise on assisting its victims.  Supporting 
organizations that work to assist survivors of human trafficking is an essential part of any 
campaign to end trafficking . 
  
Support uniform training of law enforcement on human trafficking and prostitution issues.   
Law enforcement officers on the state level need universal and consistent training on how to 
identify victims of human trafficking and human trafficking situatio ns.  Unfortunately, lack of 
uniform training leads to a patchwork of better and worse responses to human trafficking around                                                  20 Latonero  Supra  note 15, at 13.  21 Id. at 19, 20. A Florida federal jury found Tyrone Town send guilty of sex trafficking in February 2011.  Twenty -
eight Internet sex ads were included among the evidence. See Katia Hetter, Fighting sex trafficking in hotels, one 
room at a time , CNN, Feb. 29, 2012, http://www.cnn.com/2012/02/29/travel/hotel -sex-trafficking/index.html.  22 Patricia Calhoun, Backpage.com  response  to  John  Suther’s  announcement  of  human -trafficking indictment , 
Denver Westword Blog (Jan. 31, 2012, 3:07 PM), 
http://blogs.westword.com/latestword/2012/01/backpage_response_john_suthers_huma n_trafficking.php . 23 Id. 24 See Trafficking in Persons Report, U.S. Department of State, June 2011, available  at 
http://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/2011/166777.htm .  the country.  Law enforcement should collaborate with knowledgeable organizations to develop 
training modules on how to deal with ad ult sex workers and minors in prostitution. This would 
include important topics such as how to identify and differentiate between trafficking victims, 
children in prostitution and voluntary adult sex workers and how to link each group to 
appropriate servic es and support.25  
 
Provide accurate information and support to trafficking victims.  
Attorney General Offices are often contacted by residents who do not know who else to call 
about a problem. While the Attorney General is not always the best placed enforcement agency 
to investigate a human trafficking case, they can provide an avenue for those who want to know 
about their rights and have access to services. Since trafficking victims are often hidden in the 
shadows, they need a way to access information and resources.  NAAG could be an important 
resource for trafficking victims looking for a local referral.  
We believe these alternative approaches will both help victims of trafficking and child 
prostitution and not harm voluntary sex workers.  
Sincerely,  
 
Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center  
New York, NY  
 
New York Anti -Trafficking Network  
New York, NY  
 
Break The Chain Campaign  
Washington, DC  
 
The Women's ReEntry Network -WREN  
Tucson, AZ  
 
Sex Workers  Outreach Project Chicago  
Chicago, IL  
 
International Institute of Buffalo  
Buffalo, NY  
 
Desiree Alliance  
National  
 
Best Practices Policy  Project  
Washington, DC                                                   25 See Robert Moossy, J.D., Sex Trafficking: Identifying Cases and Victims , NIJ Journal No. 262, March 9, 2009, 
available  at http://www.nij.gov/journals/262/sex -trafficking.htm .  
Walter Leitner International Human Rights Clinic  
New York, NY  
 
Mary Robertson, PhD Candidate, University of Colorado at Boulder, Department of Sociology  
Boulder, CO  
 
Kristin Heffernan, The  College at Brockport, State University of New York  
Brockport, NY  
 
 
*For questions or responses, please contact Sienna Baskin, Esq. at the Sex Workers Project at the 
Urban Justice Center: (646) 602 -5695 or sbaskin@urbanjustice.org .  
 
 
Attachment : 
Beyond  ‘Supply  and  Demand’  Catchphrases:  Assessing  the  Uses  and  Limitations  of  Demand -
Based Approaches in Anti -Trafficking, The Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women 
(GAATW).   
 
 
 
 
 