 
40 RECTOR STREET, 9TH FL. NEW YORK, NEW YORK 10006 WWW.URBANJUSTICE.ORG 	  
	  Police	  Chief	  James	  Tolbert	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  November	  10,	  2014	  City	  of	  Flint	  Police	  Department	  210	  E.	  Fifth	  Street	  Flint,	  MI	  48502	  Jtolbert@cityofflint.com	  	  	  Dear	  Police	  Chief	  Tolbert,	  	  I	  am	  writing	  to	  discuss	  the	  recent	  decision	  to	  post	  “the	  names	  and	  arrest	  photos	  of	  prostitution	  suspects”	  on	  the	  Flint	  Police	  Department’s	  Facebook	  wall	  as	  a	  deterrent	  for	  prostitution.	  My	  name	  is	  Sienna	  Baskin	  and	  I	  am	  Managing	  Director	  of	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  (SWP)	  at	  the	  Urban	  Justice	  Center.	  The	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  is	  an	  organization	  which	  provides	  free	  legal	  and	  social	  services	  to	  people	  who	  work	  in	  the	  sex	  industry	  and	  victims	  of	  human	  trafficking,	  a	  unique	  intersection	  which	  allows	  us	  to	  serve	  a	  marginalized	  community	  that	  few	  others	  reach.	  As	  one	  of	  the	  first	  programs	  in	  the	  nation	  to	  assist	  survivors	  of	  human	  trafficking,	  we	  are	  recognized	  experts	  on	  the	  profound	  human	  rights	  abuses	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  and	  sex	  workers	  face,	  and	  perform	  research	  and	  documentation	  on	  these	  abuses.	  I	  have	  over	  7	  years	  of	  experience	  working	  directly	  with	  sex	  workers	  and	  survivors,	  and	  testifying	  on	  their	  behalf	  in	  local,	  federal	  and	  international	  law	  settings.	  	  While	  we	  understand	  your	  urgency	  to	  address	  the	  issues	  facing	  Flint	  residents,	  there	  are	  a	  number	  of	  unintended	  consequences	  that	  we	  would	  like	  you	  to	  consider	  before	  instituting	  this	  practice.	  Stigma	  and	  discrimination	  of	  those	  accused	  of	  engaging	  in	  prostitution,	  including	  trafficked	  persons,	  makes	  it	  harder	  for	  those	  seeking	  to	  leave	  the	  sex	  trade.	  By	  posting	  photos	  and	  names	  of	  those	  arrested	  for	  the	  crime,	  it	  will	  only	  make	  it	  harder	  for	  those	  individuals	  who	  seek	  alternative	  employment	  to	  do	  so.	  While	  a	  new	  employer	  may	  not	  see	  a	  sealed	  arrest	  record,	  posting	  this	  information	  on	  such	  a	  widely	  and	  well-­‐trafficked	  site	  such	  as	  Facebook	  makes	  it	  readily	  available	  for	  public	  consumption.	  Making	  it	  more	  difficult	  for	  those	  involved	  in	  prostitution	  to	  find	  formal	  employment	  will	  only	  keep	  people	  returning	  to	  prostitution	  to	  meet	  their	  economic	  needs.	  Trafficked	  persons	  and	  those	  who	  have	  escaped	  violent	  situations	  will	  be	  put	  in	  jeopardy.	  It	  is	  common	  for	  those	  leaving	  trafficking	  or	  domestic	  violence	  situations	  to	  turn	  to	  prostitution	  for	  a	  short	  time	  after	  escaping	  those	  situations.	  For	  those	  leaving	  trafficking	  situations	  or	  domestic	  violence,	  having	  their	  pictures	  and	  information	  so	  easily	  publicly	  available	  can	  expose	  these	  individuals	  to	  traffickers	  and	  abusers,	  leaving	  them	  vulnerable	  to	  further	  victimization	  and	  violence.	  This	  will	  not	  deter	  individuals	  from	  engaging	  in	  prostitution.	  As	  a	  services	  organization,	  we	  hear	  on	  a	  daily	  basis	  the	  reasons	  for	  engaging	  in	  the	  sex	  trade,	  and	  they	  are	  overwhelmingly	  about	  meeting	  economic	  need.	  Publicly	  shaming	  those	  who	  have	  engaged	  in	  prostitution	  will	  not	  address	  the	  underlying	  reasons	  for	  their	  decisions,	  nor	  will	  it	  address	  those	  issues	  for	  others	  who	  are	  considering	  trading	  sex.	  To	  more	  effectively	  address	  the	  reasons	  why	  people	  engage	  in	  prostitution,	  we	  urge	  you	  to	  instead	  encourage	  and	  support	  the	  City	  of	  Flint	  to:	  • Create	  economic	  opportunities	  for	  those	  seeking	  living-­‐wage	  work	  including	  job	  training	  programs	  • Increase	  the	  availably	  of	  long-­‐term	  shelter	  services	  for	  both	  young	  and	  of-­‐age	  individuals,	  as	  many	  who	  engage	  in	  sexual	  exchange	  are	  facing	  homelessness	  and	  housing	  instability	  • Engage	  with	  social	  service	  organizations	  to	  provide	  information,	  instead	  of	  arrest,	  for	  those	  who	  may	  be	  involved	  in	  prostitution	  As	  a	  service	  organization	  that	  sees	  the	  reasons	  why	  people	  enter	  the	  sex	  trade	  on	  a	  daily	  basis,	  we	  urge	  you	  to	  reconsider	  this	  decision.	  Over	  the	  coming	  days,	  we	  will	  also	  be	  reaching	  out	  to	  organizations	  and	  advocates	  who	  may	  also	  be	  concerned	  with	  this	  news	  to	  contribute	  their	  perspectives	  as	  well.	  Many	  of	  the	  organizations	  which	  work	  with	  those	  in	  the	  sex	  trade	  have	  come	  up	  against	  the	  same	  challenges	  or	  employment,	  stigma	  and	  discrimination	  which	  this	  tactic	  will	  only	  exacerbate.	  We	  hope	  you	  will	  reconsider	  this	  plan,	  which	  will	  publicly	  shame	  those	  only	  accused	  of	  a	  crime	  that	  is	  so	  often	  motivated	  by	  economic	  need	  and	  circumstances	  which	  can	  be	  addressed	  in	  other	  ways.	  Thank	  you	  for	  your	  time,	  	  	  Sienna	  Baskin,	  Esq.	  Managing	  Director,	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  	  	  
Contact:	  Kate	  D’Adamo,	  National	  Policy	  Advocate	  646.602.5689,	  kdadamo@urbanjustice.org	  	  CC:	  Jason	  Lorenz,	  Public	  Information	  Officer	  810.237.2039	  jlorenz@cityofflint.com	  	  Scott	  Kincaid,	  City	  Council	  President	  810.766.7418	  ext.	  3158	  skincaid@cityofflint.com	  