 
 
 
 
 
July 2, 2013  
 
 
To: National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Law  
 
Re: Comments on the Uniform Act on Prevention of and Remedies for Human 
Trafficking  
 
Dear Commissioners:  
 
The Sex Workers Proje ct at the Urban Justice Center provides client -centered 
legal and social services to individuals who engage in commercial sex , regardless 
of whether they do so by choice, circumstance, or coercion. We write to submit 
comments before the final reading of the Uniform Act on Prevention of and 
Remedies for Human Trafficking.  We are recognized expert s on human 
trafficking and comm ercial sex in the United States .  
 
We submitted suggestions and feedback in September, and are glad to see 
many of our suggestions incorporated. We are especially gr atified to see that 
victims of trafficking into commercial sex will be eligible for restitution  from 
their traffickers, and also that there is a clear definition of human trafficking, to 
which remedies and penalties attach.  We support the robust protectio ns for 
victims’ rights and the emphasis on services for victims.  In general, we believe 
the proposed Uniform Act embraces an effective approach to human trafficking  
that will elevate and clarify state responses to this egregious crime . We 
respectfully off er a few additional suggestions and comments to strengthen the 
Act. 
 
 In Section 2, where forms of coercion are enumerated , we suggest adding 
“or threat of” to subsections B, C, D,  E, and F . In our experience, coercion is 
often experienced as the threat of some form of harm, not the harm itself.  
 
 In Section 1 7, to make  this remedy accessible and effective for victims of 
trafficking : 
1. Ensure  that if a survivor meets the requisites of the law, the j udge MUST 
vacate the prior conviction(s), dismiss the accusatory instrument, and 
seal the record.   
2. Ensure the  victim  confidentiality  provisions in Section 13 apply to these 
motions as well, by allowing for initials or “Jane Doe”  designations to be 
used in court filings . 
 
  To preserve this  Uniform Act ’s clear focus on  the crime of  human trafficking, we support restraint in 
targeting patrons of commercial sex who do not have knowledge that they are patronizing a victim 
of trafficking or a  minor. In Section 7(a)(2), w e support a t least a  reckless ness standard be applied as 
to the age of the minor .  
 
 The severity of penalties  under Section 6 and 7  seems  to be in reverse proportion to the culpability 
of the individual.  We would support an individual who knowing ly patronizes a minor victim of 
trafficking to have a higher penalty imposed than an individual who unknowingly patronizes a minor.  
 
We understand that some advocates would enlarge the focus on patrons to include heightened 
penalties for even patrons of a dult, non -trafficked sex workers . We note that p atronizing prostitution  is 
already a crime in every state where prostitution is illegal.  Human trafficking is most effectively reduced 
by prosecuting traffickers, supporting and empowering those vulnerable to  victimization, and reducing  
the social  conditions that pave the way for  trafficking and child sexual exploitation. There is no evidence 
that increasing penalties for persons who patronize  consensual adult sex workers causes any decrease in 
trafficking. We  are concerned that including such penalties  in this Uniform Act will encourage states to 
expend energy and resources better spent fighting human trafficking.  
 
For more information, please see : 
 Moving Beyond ‘Supply and Demand’ Catchphrases: Assessing the Uses and Limitations of 
Demand -Based Approaches in Anti -trafficking  (2011), by Global Alliance Against Traffic in 
Women, available at  
http://www.gaatw.org/publicat ions/MovingBeyond_SupplyandDemand_GAATW2011.pdf ; and  
 Is Trafficking in Human Beings Demand -Driven? A Multi -Country Pilot Study (2003),  by 
International Organization for Migration, available at  
http://www.childtrafficking.com/Docs/anderson___o_connell_davids1.pdf . 
 
We thank you for taking our comments into consideration. If you  have any questions, please do not 
hesitate to contact us for further information.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sienna Baskin, Esq.  
Co-Director  
Sex Workers Project  
Urban Justice Center  
(646) 602 -5695  
sbaskin@urbanjustice.org  
