When Tao arrived in the United
States, she hoped to leavebehind the violence she 
witnessed in her war-torn SoutheastAsian country. Yet after resettlement,she was isolated and lived in fearthat violence could erupt again.
Every year, 70,000 refugees
arrive in the United States. Theyflee homelands wracked by warand political violence. Like Tao,many are still traumatized by theirexperiences, even after settling in a more peaceful country. 
Fortunately, Tao’s doctor referred
her to a group run by CVT andmembers of her refugee community.Here, she met other women whoshared similar experiences andfound support and understanding.The psycho-education group helpedher understand how the war hadaffected her and reduced her fear of mental health services.
Too many refugees suffer from
ongoing and untreated traumasymptoms, sometimes years aftertheir resettlement. Clinics struggleto assess symptoms because of cultural barriers, stigma and thelack of culturally-adapted mental
health screening tools.
CVT’s Healing in Partnership
(HIP) initiative is changing that.HIP is a research, healing and training project developing a systemof identifying refugees who needmental health care and then connecting them with the bestresources. The project is a collabo-ration between CVT, the Universityof Minnesota, the MinnesotaDepartment of Health, and fourrefugee communities in Minneapolis/St. Paul—the Somali, Bhutanesefrom Nepal, Oromo from Ethiopia,and Karen from Burma.
Screening Refugees 
When refugees arrive in the
United States, they typically receivea health exam to identify physicalproblems. While about half of allstates provide mental health screening,most rely on informal conversation,making it less reliable. We knowmany refugees are torture or wartrauma survivors and experiencehigh levels of depression and posttraumatic stress disorder.Sept./Oct. 2011, Volume 21, Issue 5 A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture www.cvt.org
INSIDE
2Letter from the Chair
4T ed Bowman, Volunteer and Donor 
4Planning for Hope, Healing—and Y our FutureOur mission: T o heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.Healing in Partnership: Collaborating 
to Provide Mental Health Care to Refugees
Unfortunately, many of these new-
comers do not receive the mentalhealth services they need. 
In collaboration with CVT,
University of Minnesota facultymembers Patricia Shannon, Ph.D.,and Elizabeth Wieling, Ph.D., set outto improve the care for refugees,beginning with a screening tool toidentify refugees who should see amental health specialist. 
After gathering information
from the refugee communities, aquestionnaire was created that can
Ehtaw Dwe is working
as a research inter-preter and culturaladvisor with CVT, ahealth clinic andcommunity partnerKaren Organization of Minnesota. Alongwith a graduate stu-dent, he administersthe mental healthscreening tool to new Karen refugees.See page 3
PHOTO © CVTUnder Doug’s leadership, CVT has trained
more than 300 paraprofessional mental health coun-selors in Africa and the Middle East, placeswhere few mental health resources exist. CVTstaff in Moba in the Democratic Republic ofCongo participated in a teambuilding activity
2Letter from the Chair
As I write this, CVT’s search for a new executive director is well
underway. Of course, finding a suitable successor to Doug Johnson will be a significant challenge. But thanks to his vision and leadership, thistransition will occur while CVT has a strong foundation, talented staff and a solid financial position.
This past summer, the Board of Directors hired Schall Executive Search to assist in the
transition process. Schall guided the board through a series of conversations to determine theskills and qualities desired in a new executive director. Building on the many talents of Doug,Schall and the board developed a position description, which is posted on our Web site(www.cvt.org).
It was determined that CVT’s next executive director must be a strong advocate for
human rights, a global thinker, and possess strong people and communication skills with deep compassion, humility and humor. This individual must be a strategic thinker with a high level of intellectual capacity and be team oriented, participatory and demonstrate deeprespect for organizational values, creative leadership and excellent managerial skills. 
We are now engaged in a national search, reviewing candidates and beginning the 
interview process. We expect to conduct interviews this fall and announce the new executivedirector in December. Our hope is that the new director and Doug will work together inJanuary 2012 to ensure a smooth transition for CVT.
This type of leadership transition can be challenging for organizations and their 
stakeholders. I know for the board and staff, Doug’s departure will be a poignant moment. But we look forward to this new era in CVT’s growth, one that will continue advancing ourmission to heal survivors and work for a world without torture.
Sincerely,
Patti Andreini Arnold
Chair, CVT Board of DirectorsPatti Andreini Arnold
......................................................
PHOTO © CVTUnder Doug’s leadership, CVT has trained more than 
300 paraprofessional mental health counselors in Africaand the Middle East, places where few mental healthresources exist. In the Democratic Republic of Congo,these local counselors have helped nearly 4,000 men andwomen rebuild their lives. The CVT Moba staff picturedhere participated in a teambuilding activity this spring. be administered in a medical clinic.
Questions include inquiries aboutnightmares, feelings of sadness oranger, as well as torture or physicalthreats.
The screening questionnaire was
translated for each community. Thetranslation process is very thoroughto confirm questions will be under-stood by the refugees. Illustrationsare included to demonstrate certainconcepts. “The different culturalgroups have their own ethnicexpressions and experiences ofmental distress,” explained Patty.“Some cultures use expressionssuch as ‘air in the brain’ while others talk about a ‘tired or weakheart.’”
The screening tool is now being
offered at a few county clinics aspart of routine refugee medicalexams and will expand to otherclinics. If the tool reveals that aman or woman has mental healthconcerns, they can be referred forfurther assessment.
Healing Refugees
In addition to identifying indi-
viduals who need mental healthcare, the project is helping refugeescope with their experiences and learnabout U.S. health care. Researchshows that psycho-educationgroups are important because they counteract isolation by reinforcingrelationships and examples ofresiliency. The seven-week groupsaddress living in a new country;taking care of yourself and yourfamily; effects of war stress; and loss,grief and the healing process. Likethe screening tool, the curriculumfor the groups is adapted to reflectthe unique language and character-istics of each culture.
The groups are being led by
3From page 1 CVT Psychotherapist Abbey Weiss,
Psy.D, L.P., with a communityleader participating to assist withinterpretation and cultural trans-lation and a student intern wholearns group leadership skills. Thegroups also reduce the stigma ofmental health problems so thosewho need help will be more likelyto seek it. 
Training Leaders and 
Sharing Knowledge 
Refugee leaders are the linchpins
in communities of newcomers, providing guidance and support.To help these leaders strengthentheir communities, CVT socialworker and project manager EvelynLennon trains them on the physicaland mental health effects of warand torture. As they see individualssuffering and begin to understandthat assistance is available, theleaders help community membersfind the care they need. 
To make the education and 
support groups self-sustaining and toencourage community involvement,CVT is also training cultural leadersat the community organizations tolead the groups. Refugee leaderslearn how to facilitate dialogue topromote healing. Saw Morrison, an employment and social servicesprogram manager with the KarenHealing in PartnershipOrganization of Minnesota, helpedfacilitate the first group for Karenrefugees. “I have done a lot ofsocial service work, but this groupwas filled with emotion,” explainedSaw Morrison. “I see with theclients that I have to keep in mindtheir hearts and minds as I helpthem get their lives back on track.”
While the project is on-going,
our collaborators are beginning toshare their findings. ResearcherPatty Shannon and her team havepresented at conferences and arewriting for professional journals to share what they’ve learned. 
As the Executive Secretary to 
the Association of Refugee HealthCoordinators, Ann O’Fallon worksclosely with refugee programsnationwide. “I know how importantit is to screen for mental healthearly in the resettlement process,”said Ann. “This project is buildinga foundation that will make it easierto screen refugees and help themget the care they need quickly andefficiently. Receiving quality mentalhealth care can make a world ofdifference in how men, women andchildren adapt to their new lives.”
Healing in Partnership is funded by
the Huss Foundation, Asian PacificEndowment of the Saint Paul andMinneapolis Foundations, The SaintPaul Foundation, Blue Cross andBlue Shield of Minnesota Foundation,and the Medica Foundation.
The refugee mental health screening tool asks simple questions
to determine if further evaluation is needed. Questions are carefullyadapted for cultural and linguistic differences. 
American English version of a screening question:
"How many times in the last month did you feel worthless?”
Karen version of a screening question:
"How many times in the last month did you have a weak heart?"Once you move through the doors
at CVT, you get caught up inthe culture,” said Ted Bowman,
a volunteer for nearly five years anda table captain at the RestoringHope fundraising breakfast.
Ted is an educator, author and
consultant who specializes in grief,loss and disruptive events. Using hisprofessional knowledge, Ted teachesother CVT volunteers how multiplelosses affect torture survivors. 
He also teaches essential listening
skills to volunteers who work withsurvivors so they know how torespond when a survivor tells astory. “We contain many stories,”explained Ted. “Torture survivorsmay share some things with a volunteer, and if that volunteer
responds in a particular way, thenthe client may not be as open to atherapist.” Through Ted’s work,CVT volunteers learn how to besupportive to survivors on theirhealing journeys.
As a table captain last year, Ted
invited his friends and colleagues to the Restoring Hope breakfast.“It was done wonderfully in thespace of an hour,” said Ted, “andwas respectful of everyone’s time.”The testimonies clearly explainedCVT’s work of rebuilding the livesof survivors, he explained, so hisfriends “saw the link between theirvalues and the values of CVT.” Teddecided to host a table again thisyear because of 
his financial and volunteer commitment to CVT. “If thefinancial resourcesaren’t there, it’shard to maintainthe services.”
T ed Bowman: Volunteer and Donor
© 2011 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
11-NE5In today’s uncertain economy, we
understand donors are looking for creative ways to continue 
supporting CVT’s mission of hopeand healing—and at the same time,protect their own financial well-being. An increasing number of oursupporters are choosing to establishcharitable gift annuities. 
Charitable gift annuities date
back to the 19th century and allowdonors to make a donation and
receive a guaranteed lifetimeincome—sometimes as high as9.5%. Donations can include cash,stock or other assets. The incomeis based on the donor’s age and is especially favorable to older individuals. A fixed annuity can 
be very reassuring for individuals in their retirement years.
Funds from annuities support
CVT’s efforts to rebuild the lives of torture survivors in the UnitedStates, Africa and the Middle East.Because of your support, survivorsare finding the hope and couragethey so desperately need to overcomethe legacy of torture.
If you’d like to learn more about
charitable gift annuities or othergiving options to support CVT,please contact Rachel Hughes,Individual Giving Officer at 612-436-4859 or rhughes@cvt.org.Planning for Hope, Healing—
and Y our Future
The CENTER for 
VICTIMS of TORTURE
Restoring the Dignity of the Human Spirit
649 Dayton Avenue   St. Paul, MN  55104
www.cvt.org............................
PHOTO © TOM BOWMAN
Join us at the Restoring Hope
breakfast at 7:00 a.m. on October13. Visit www.cvt.org or contactRachel Hughes at 612-436-4859or rhughes@cvt.org for more information.
.................................................................................................Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.