Mary’s Story: A Life Interrupted 
The unfathomable pain of being 
separated from loved ones is 
widely felt among asylum 
seekers worldwide. Sometimes 
the separation occurs as soon as 
a survivor escapes, leaving every -
thing and everyone behind. Others 
are torn apart from family members 
by the very governments whose 
protection they seek. Because the 
majority of CVT’s U.S. clients are 
asylum seekers, separation and 
the trauma that results are all too 
familiar experiences. Flashbacks 
from fleeing home to survive are 
not uncommon. Neither is the 
constant confusion of navigating 
the U.S. immigration system. 
Every day, torture survivors 
like Mary* must confront the pain 
of their past and the challenges 
that accompany rebuilding their 
lives—lives that have been forever 
changed, simply for identifying 
with a particular political party, 
religion or culture, or for being in 
the wrong place at the wrong time. 
In Mary’s case, it was because she 
was unafraid to speak out. 
When she noticed election fraud 
in her home country in Africa, Mary didn’t ignore it. She denounced it. 
“This fraud happens a lot,” Mary 
said. “But I protested. When I 
spoke about it, I was arrested. I 
was held and tortured for more 
than four weeks. They threatened 
my life; I thought I would die. 
Even after they let me go, I knew 
they would come back to kill me.” 
Mary feared for her life. She 
needed to escape her home country. 
A young woman in her 40s with 
six children, she made the agonizing 
decision to leave her family. Such 
a predicament is not unique. 
Survivors of torture around the 
world are often forced to leave 
their families and homes behind, 
taking only the possessions they 
can carry. Some flee on foot, others 
find transportation. Sometimes 
survivors are at the mercy of 
strangers when they flee, and thus 
risk enduring additional abuses, 
like physical assault, human traf -
ficking and robbery. Women like 
Mary are more susceptible to 
sexual assault and rape. 
When survivors flee, it’s not 
unusual for their families to 
become targets. Perpetrators can identify loved ones through cell 
phone data, social media or mutual 
family and friends. They torture 
spouses and relatives for informa -
tion about the escapee, or to make 
them pay for the individual’s 
alleged crimes. Mary’s husband 
faced similar consequences. After 
she fled, he too became fearful and 
was also forced to flee. He hasn’t 
been heard from since. 
Mary found temporary safety 
(see page 4) 
INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Women of CVT Speak— Celebrating International Women’s Day 
4Many Ways to Support Healing The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 29, ISSUE 3 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
T H E sto rycloth 
A P R I L 20 19 
*Her name has been changed to protect 
her privacy.         © Dreamstime.com    2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friend, 
CVT’s clients, whether they are refugees or asylum seekers, have 
survived torture, persecution and/or war atrocities in locations around 
the world. They tell us what it was like to make the excruciating 
decision to flee from home—they leave their countries because they 
have no choice. 
The biggest difference between asylum seekers and refugees is that individuals coming to 
the United States as refugees had their cases processed abroad and obtained “refugee status” 
before arriving here. Asylum seekers, on the other hand, do not have such status when they get 
to the United States—they must prove they qualify for asylum once they are in the country.  
Most importantly, refugees and asylum seekers share the experience of having to escape, 
often without warning, and embark on a difficult and dangerous search for safe haven. Each 
step of the way, asylum seekers suffer devastating and compound trauma. 
When they reach the U.S. border, they are often handcuffed, detained in terrible and 
prison-like conditions, interrogated and expected to produce physical evidence of their claims 
of persecution. People fleeing persecution often escape at a moment’s notice. Even when they 
have time to plan, they rarely prepare for future asylum inquiries—many do not, or cannot, 
bring proof of their need to flee.  
Trauma is especially hard on children seeking asylum. Detention has particularly harmful 
effects on them, which are compounded when a child is separated from his or her parents. It can 
have extreme consequences for a child’s development and long-term mental health. 
And asylum seekers face hardship in a new country. Torture survivors are often thrust into 
an entirely new culture and language and must cope with these changes while enduring symptoms 
of trauma and loss of identity, even many years after the abuse. 
The asylum process in the U.S. can exacerbate survivors’ suffering and make healing more 
difficult. Legal representation is critical, but often hard to obtain. Asylum seekers must wait 
before they can work. And the legal process can take years. Torture and trauma survivors are 
forced to re-live their persecution, repeatedly. 
But thanks to your generous support, with CVT’s healing care survivors can rebuild their 
lives and prosper. Never doubt the tremendous impact you have in their lives, nor how grateful 
we are for your partnership. 
With my thanks, 
Curt Goering ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
International Women’s Day (March 8) 
is a global day celebrating the social, 
economic, cultural and political 
achievements of women. The day also 
marks a call to action for a more 
gender-balanced world, and the 2019 
campaign theme is #BalanceforBetter — 
better the balance, better the world. 
The women of CVT raise their voices 
in a powerful chorus of support for 
survivors of torture. Every day they 
help torture survivors on their healing 
journeys to restored dignity and hope. 
They and the survivors in their care 
have stories of strength, survival and 
a pursuit of a life free of the profound 
pain of torture. 
The women of CVT include Jepkemoi 
Kibet, a physiotherapist and trainer at 
CVT Nairobi who is working to help 
women reconnect to their bodies after 
torture. “At CVT, we help the brave 
women who seek to rebuild their lives,” 
Jepkemoi said. “It is exciting to see them 
improve and regain their ability to perform activities of daily living with ease. That 
is what is most awesome about CVT— 
people reconnecting with their bodies. 
I’ve heard others say we put the soul 
back into the body.” 
Another is Islam Al-Aqeel, a senior 
psychosocial counselor at CVT Jordan. 
In describing her work with survivors 
she said, “Torture rehabilitation takes 
a lot of patience and time. We help 
survivors look inside themselves, regain 
their identity. For many, their dignity 
has been lost to the conditions they face. 
We help them feel they have a safe space 
where they can develop trust and the 
ability to look inside and reflect. They 
rebuild their dignity and identity through 
this process.” One client told her it was 
like turning the lights back on. 
And as Amrita Chudasama, a psycho- 
social counselor at CVT Nairobi, sums 
it up, “I think of that saying that when 
people fall down, they can get back up 
and dust themselves off. But these people 
didn’t just fall; they fell deep into the 
murk. They were put there by another 
person, the torturer. We have a saying: 
The lotus blooms in the mud. And that’s 
what we see. The process of change is 
very beautiful, and it encourages us as 
counselors. As my counseling trainer 
said to me, ‘We’re instillers of hope.’” 
__________________________________ 
To read more about the women of CVT 
and their stories of healing and hope, 
visit rejecttorture.cvt.org/women-of-cvt/. 
3Women of CVT Speak 
Celebrating International Women’s Day 
For many, their dignity 
has been lost to the 
conditions they face. 
We help them feel they 
have a safe space where 
they can develop trust 
and the ability to look 
inside and reflect. 
Jepkemoi Kibet 
Islam Al-Aqeel 
Amrita Chudasama 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 19 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 19-NB5B The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Many Ways to Support Healing 
Charitable Contributions —CVT 
relies on the generosity of our sup -
porters to help survivors and advo -
cate for an end to torture world -
wide. Thank you for your gifts of 
hope and healing, and for consid -
ering some of the many ways you 
can further support CVT. 
Circle of Hope, CVT’s Monthly 
Giving Program —Both a hassle- 
free way to support CVT and help 
us work more efficiently, your 
monthly gift ensures a stable source 
of continuous funding. As a Circle 
of Hope member, you will help 
CVT decrease administrative costs 
so that more of your donation helps torture survivors directly, 
restoring human dignity and rebuild -
ing thousands of lives worldwide. 
To sign up to be a monthly donor, 
visit cvt.org/donate. 
Workplace Giving and 
Corporate Matching Gifts —
If your employer has a work place 
giving program or will match your 
charitable contributions, designating 
CVT as the recipient is a convenient 
and easy way to leverage your 
generosity. Some companies will 
allow you to make a simple payroll 
deduction, and others will match 
your donations, doubling or even 
tripling your impact. Planning Y our Legacy —You can 
extend your support for CVT and 
leave a legacy of hope for torture 
survivors with a bequest in your 
will or another planned gift. You 
don’t have to be wealthy to make a 
meaningful gift, and there are many 
ways you can personally benefit as 
well as spare your loved ones from 
complex probate procedures and 
costly taxes. For more information 
on making a planned gift to the 
Center for Victims of Torture, 
please contact Fawn Bernhardt- 
Norvell at (612) 436-4888 or 
giving@cvt.org. (from page 1) 
in the U.S. but wonders how she’s 
expected to feel safe when her 
children are in danger so far away 
and the whereabouts of her husband 
is unknown. The pain of separation 
intensifies her symptoms of post- 
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and 
depression. “I can’t concentrate. 
I am depressed and exhausted,” 
she said. “How can I stay in this 
situation? It’s hard to keep living 
a life interrupted like this. What 
is my life for, here without my 
kids?” Moreover, the U.S. has yet 
to determine if she’s eligible for 
permanent protection. 
Initially, Mary found relief in 
the healing care she received from CVT. Then a five-year delay for 
her first asylum interview severely 
impacted her recovery. She now 
views the slow, ongoing asylum 
process as a threat, and a trigger 
of past traumas. “I experience it 
like punishment,” she said, “I want 
to ask immigration if I deserve 
punishment, but I have no power. 
They do. I must be quiet and wait.” 
So Mary waits. And the longer 
she waits, the more helpless she 
feels. Few things bring her joy. 
She's been unable to pursue an 
education in the U.S . She learned 
English and began working, but 
the strain of the asylum delays 
weakened her motivation. She 
says she operates in survival mode on a daily basis, that it takes all 
her energy to get through the day. 
Though Mary struggles to stay 
hopeful, CVT remains determined. 
We will continue to fight for the 
rights of all asylum seekers, 
because we understand that clients 
like Mary can be indispensable to 
our community—culturally, socially 
and economically. And CVT clients, 
many of whose stories are not 
unlike Mary’s, recognize the positive 
impact our care has had on their 
lives. So together we persevere, 
until each and every one of our 
clients can find safety and the peace 
of mind to effectively transform 
themselves and their lives. Mary’s Story: A Life Interrupted 