The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 28, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
THE sto rycloth 
JUNE 2018 
Innovative New Aftercare Program 
Helps LGBTI Survivors in Nairobi
Many refugees in Nairobi who 
are members of the LGBTI
community fled their home
countries because of persecution 
and violence specifically targeting 
them. In some countries near
Kenya, it is illegal to be gay. The
consequences are devastating and 
often brutal. Once people escape
to Nairobi, they may find relative
safety, but they can still face
harassment, barriers and challenges
in addition to those they face as
refugees.
For this group of survivors,
CVT Nairobi has become known 
as a place where they will find 
help and care. And because 
survivors expressed a need for
support beyond their course of
rehabilitative counseling, CVT 
developed an Aftercare program 
to meet the ongoing needs of this
community. 
Psychotherapist and trainer
Elizabeth Mbatha Muli said, “The
objective was to provide more
social connections and focus on 
enhancing coping skills. We givethem a forum to talk about feelings
and learn from each other how 
they’re doing, to hear what others
are doing about their problems.” 
Another key component of the
Aftercare program is the work of
peer facilitators, former clients who 
are members of the LGBTI refugee
community. While developing the
new Aftercare curriculum,CVT’s
clinicians provided training and 
support to new peer facilitators,
working closely with them to get
ready for the first cycle of continuing 
support sessions.
“Once they’ve been through 
counseling, they say, now we are
done, what now? As LGBTI, we
still are facing discrimination,” said 
Francis*, a trained peer facilitator.
“We give them the opportunity to 
see things differently …we help 
them get back on their feet.” 
The community responded 
positively. Timothy*, another of the
peer facilitators, said, “Participants
ask to be in another session—they 
don’t want it to end. And now 
they refer their friends.” Timothy said he feels much more
hope about his work prospects
since he came to CVT. He said, “I
feel like even when I’m resettled,
that I’m supposed to continue this
work. This is the best work I’ve
done, the best place I’ve been. I
want to find a way to help others
in some way.” 
“I wish I’d found CVT earlier,” 
Timothy said.
*Names and some details have been 
changed for confidentiality and security. 
CVT's work in Nairobi is made possible by 
Steven Walker and supported by funding 
from the U.S. State Department’s Bureau of 
Population, Refugees and Migration; the United 
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture; 
the S.L. Gimbel Advised Fund at The Community 
Foundation –Inland Southern California. INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3CVT Opens in Kenya’s Kakuma Refugee Camps 
4A Survivor’s Story of Determination and Hope 
4Make a Difference in the Life of a Survivor From left: Joanne Jepkemoi Kibet, 
physiotherapist/trainer; Rosina Mruttu, 
psychotherapist/trainer; and Elizabeth 
Mbatha Muli, psychotherapist/trainer. 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends,
I recently visited CVT’s healing center in northern Uganda, where 
we have been caring for torture survivors in the city of Gulu for the 
past nine years. 
Thanks to your generosity, over the last year we have been able to expand 
our rehabilitative work with traumatized survivors and communities targeted 
by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) militia in the 1990s and 2000s. One of the LRA’s most 
brutal attacks took place not far from Gulu in 2004 in what has since been called the Lukodi
Massacre, when more than 60 people were mercilessly killed.
The LRA committed massive and uniquely horrifying human rights violations. It was known 
for its widespread abduction of children, both boys and girls, who were forced to become child 
soldiers, “wives” of fighters or porters carrying supplies. Abducted children were often forced 
to kill their own family members—and if they refused, they themselves would be killed. 
Virtually the entire population of northern Uganda—up to two million people—was displaced 
during this period. Since the fighting subsided after a ceasefire was agreed upon more than a 
decade ago, the population has gradually been returning to their villages. Entire communities
were deeply traumatized by the horrific events and many remain so today.
During my visit I had the opportunity to meet with survivors of the massacre in Lukodi, as well
as with abductees. Many specific details of their stories were terribly gruesome—the individual
and collective pain in the stories they related defies description. 
But I also heard about how CVT is enabling survivors to reconnect with their families and 
communities. They are picking up the pieces and rebuilding their lives under circumstances that
few of us can begin to comprehend. Community leaders and other members of the community in 
Lukodi recognized that CVT’s assistance allowed survivors to rebuild the social fabric the LRA 
had destroyed and urged individuals to seek CVT’s healing care.
Thank you for helping us give these survivors renewed hope for the future. The resilience of
the human spirit is amazing to see, and I am so grateful for your support of this life-changing 
work. Your generosity is doing more good than I have words to describe.
With my thanks, 
Curt Goering ......................................................
Curt Goering 
3CVT Opens in 
Kenya’s Kakuma Refugee Camps 
Survivors of torture at the
Kakuma refugee camps and 
in the local community are
now receiving CVT's lifesaving 
healing care. On-site care includes
counseling and physiotherapy.
“The need for rehabilitative
care here is enormous,” said 
Pablo Traspas, country director
for CVT Kenya. “The hard reality 
is that this region is now home to 
more than 180,000 refugees and 
asylum-seekers, thousands of
whom have survived torture and 
the horrors of war, and our 
dedicated staff is already joining 
clients on their healing journeys.
Our doors are also open to ourneighbors in the host community,
who are struggling with different
issues but who may benefit from 
holistic care, making our healing 
center unique among CVT’s other
initiatives. CVT has made it 
possible to cover the existing gap 
in mental health and physiotherapy 
services in the Kakuma refugee
camps.” 
Psychological first aid is deliv -
ered by CVT counselors stationed 
at various locations around the
camps. Counselors provide imme-
diate intervention for survivors
struggling with trauma and other
mental health crises upon arrival at
the camps. CVT expects to see as
many as 175 survivors of torture
and war atrocities through the 
rest of 2018, and more than 400 
in 2019.
“During my recent visit to our
Kakuma site and the adjacent
Kalobeyei settlement, I was once
again inspired by the passion of
our colleagues who have begun 
meeting with survivors while
building of the site continues
around them, a testament to the
dedication at the heart of humani-tarian work,” said Curt Goering,
CVT’s executive director. 
Even as healing work is under-
way, final infrastructure is being 
put into place. Modified shipping 
containers which can withstand 
the region’s windy conditions are
acting as temporary staff housing 
and office space while construction 
continues for more permanent
structures.
Hope and healing are rising 
with each new day in Kakuma,
thanks to the generosity of CVT’s
supporters who are making this
urgently needed rehabilitative care
possible.
.. .this region is now home to 
more than 180,000 refugees 
and asylum-seekers, 
thousands of whom have 
survived torture and the 
horrors of wa r... 
PHOTO BY SYDNEY STEAD PHOTO BY SYDNEY STEAD 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 18 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.18-NC5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Make a Difference in the Life of a Survivor 
Your generous support brings healing to torture survivors 
worldwide. CVT welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for ongoing planning and 
delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your legacy of support . 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors while offering tax 
benefits to donors.•In-Kind Donations of specific items improve the lives of 
survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a check to 2356 University 
Avenue W, Suite 430, St. Paul, MN 55114, or call 612.436.4808 
for other ways to give. Thank you for your ongoing commitment 
to healing the wounds of torture.Thomas*is a 36-year-old man 
from Africa. Soft-spoken and 
slight of build, he was tortured 
multiple times due to allegations
about his political beliefs. He was
diagnosed with several medical
conditions as a result of being 
beaten, dragged, whipped and 
subjected to other torture while 
he was detained.
He obtained a visa to come to 
the United States and is currently 
separated from his children.
Thomas applied for asylum, but
due to his immigration status he
does not qualify for any public
benefits and is not authorized to 
work. Unable to contribute to his
host family, he soon found himself
homeless.
Because of his circumstances
and chronic health issues, it’s 
challenging for Thomas to meet his
basic needs. CVT has connected 
him to medical care, nutritional
food, numerous community 
resources and volunteer lawyers 
to assist with his asylum case. 
But housing has been a persistent 
issue for Thomas and the biggestobstacle in his healing journey.
Despite setbacks, Thomas is a 
resilient and determined individual.
He is grateful for the medical care
that CVT made possible and the
new connections to his community 
through church and his English 
learning center. On the anniversary 
of his move to the United States,instead of focusing on the reason 
he fled, Thomas is thankful he
found CVT and accessed the care
that saved his life.A Survivor’s Story 
of Determination and Hope 
*Name and some details have 
been changed for safety and 
to protect confidentiality. 
ILLUSTRATION BY AMANDA SCHEID 