The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
The worst thing about the asylum
process is the waiting,” saidCVT social worker Evelyn
Lennon. Evelyn, along with CVT’sother client services staff, accompanytorture survivors as they seek long-term safety in the United States bysupporting and counseling themthrough the asylum process.  In our St. Paul Healing Center, nearlytwo-thirds of all clients are seekingasylum—some waiting up to fouryears for an answer. Until asylum isgranted, though, survivors face therisk of being forced to return to the
countries responsible for their torture.
For survivors of torture who fled
their homes seeking protection inthe United States, a grant of asylumstatus offers a lifeline toward thesafety and stabilization that is thefirst step in their holistic healingprocess. Due to major problems in the asylum system—includingdetention, extended delays, broadlydefined bars to asylum, and rigiddeadlines for filing—CVT’s clientsoften find the process itself to be 
Asylum: A Lifeline for Healing from T ortureVOLUME 23, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG
INSIDE
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 Donor Profile: Bill and Margaret Hunt, Supporting CVT  
4 Planning for Hope and Healing—and for Y our Future
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human SpiritINSIDE   
THEstory cloth
MAY 2013
re-traumatizing. Without the 
assurance of asylum, survivors’healing process is prolonged.
CVT psychotherapist Abbey
Weiss is working with one survivorwe’ll call “Jean Paul” whose asylumhearing is scheduled for 2016.Unfortunately, he is not alone in his long wait because of the back-log in the immigration courts. “Hefeels like he’s in a different type of
prison,” said Abbey of the young
man who fled a central Africancountry after being tortured for his involvement with a politicalopposition group. “He was a collegestudent when he was tortured andhe’d like to go back to school. But asan asylum-seeker, he doesn’t qualifyfor student loans or grants. He ismaking progress in his healing, butthe asylum process makes survivors’symptoms worse and makes the suffering last much longer.” 
Obtaining asylum is exceedingly
complex and can be filled withlegal twists and turns. “The processis intimidating and confusing,” saidEvelyn. “It can be dehumanizing”for survivors who have been 
See page 3For survivors of torture
who fled their homesseeking protection inthe United States, asylum offers a lifelineto healing. CVT clientsoften find the processto be re-traumatizing.
PHOTO © ROBERT AICHINGER
WWW.SXC.HU2Letter from the Executive Director
Our cover story this issue features one of the difficulties survivors
face to healing after torture: Challenges in the U.S. asylum system. 
The burdens to asylum place survivors in a terrifying limbo, 
uncertain if they will be returned to the country responsible for their torture.
Removing these barriers to healing is one reason why CVT has an established presence 
in our nation’s capital. Through our Washington, D.C. office, we advocate for the protectionand care of torture survivors and an end to torture.
In addition to asylum reform, we continue to call for the release of the Senate Intelligence
Committee report on how the CIA came to use torture and cruel treatment in counterterrorismefforts. The report is the best opportunity to date to secure accountability for past abuses and work to prevent a recurrence.
And through our Washington, D.C. office, we’re working to increase understanding 
about the importance of torture rehabilitation in any response to humanitarian crisis involvingtorture. The worsening conflict in Syria is one of the most immediate examples of this need. 
Without any outreach, the CVT Jordan team reports a waiting list of 400 Syrians 
brutalized by torture and war and a waiting list of Iraqis struggling with severe trauma.
While we’re actively seeking funds to expand our care, the scale of the crisis requires 
the significant resources of the international community (including the United Nations andwealthy nations) to fund skilled mental health care for torture survivors.
I hope you will join us by becoming an advocate for survivors purposefully silenced by
torture. You can do that by signing up for emails from CVT on our website at www.cvt.org. 
On a wistful note, CVT will say goodbye to the Minneapolis house in August. For the 
last two years, survivors have received care at our St. Paul Healing Center. This summer, we’ll consolidate non-clinical staff in one location to better serve our growing organization.
Thank you for the compassion, support and generosity 
you show to CVT and the survivors we serve.
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
This summer, CVT will move out of the
Minneapolis house, which once servedas a healing center for torture survivors.
PHOTO © CVT3Asylum: A Lifeline for
Healing from T orture
From page 1
detained in jails or prisons. 
Individuals who wish to receive
asylum must file the necessaryforms within one year of enteringthe country. Then, they tend to waitsix months—or perhaps longer—for an interview with an asylumofficer. If their case is before animmigration judge, the process cantake years. 
While waiting for their interview
or hearing, survivors must producea written testimony describing theirtorture. They are expected to pro-vide evidence that corroboratestheir story, such as a birth certificate,enrollment in a university or proof
of membership in a political party.For those who lived in rural areasor developing countries, there maynot be birth records or other legaldocuments to verify a survivor’sstory. Survivors often flee with veryfew belongings and are now thou-sands of miles away from requireddocumentation, trying to adapt to a new culture and struggling withdepression, flashbacks, nightmaresand overwhelming fear. While theyare working to heal, the burdens ofdocumenting their torture can beoverwhelming for many survivors. 
At the initial interview, the asylum
officer questions the survivor.Survivors must be prepared to tellthe most painful secrets of their torture to a complete stranger.Those who have a hearing beforean immigration judge may beforced to tell these secrets in opencourt. They may be aggressivelycross-examined by an attorneyfrom the government who is tryingto expose holes in the story. Oftenfor women survivors, this includesdescribing being raped or sexuallyassaulted. “To be questioned aboutyour story is disturbing,” saidEvelyn. “The story must be credibleand match the written testimonybecause any inconsistency can be a reason to deny or delay grantingasylum.” As a coping mechanism,survivors may tell their story withlittle emotion or omit an event thatcauses them pain or shame. Yet thismay lead to doubt about the validityof the story.
While survivors wait months or
years for progress in their cases, theybegin to rebuild their lives in smallways. “The survivors learn copingmechanisms for this waiting period,”said Evelyn. “They learn techniquesthat help them relax or sleep.”CVT social workers and volunteershelp survivors find hobbies, learnhow to use the library, visit com-munity centers or find a place ofworship. If they don’t already knowEnglish, they’ll start learning. Theymight begin volunteering or perhapsworking. “Most clients want to be
“The worst thing about the asylum
process is the waiting. ” Currently CVTclients are waiting about three yearsfor an asylum hearing.
PHOTO © CARIN ARAUJO / WWW.SXC.HU
Survivors must be prepared to tell the most painful
secrets of their torture to a complete stranger... [they]may be forced to tell these secrets in open court.busy so they don’t have to think,”
said Evelyn. “For many, their spiritual life helps sustain them during the waiting.” 
Currently, CVT clients are wait-
ing about three years for an asylumhearing. At that time, the survivormust again tell their story. Oftenthe judge will rule orally at the conclusion. “I’ve seen survivors fall to the floor in the hearing in joy and in despair,” said Evelyn. 
Once a survivor is awarded 
asylum, they must wait one yearbefore applying to be a permanentresident and reuniting with theirfamily. But they can begin planningfor a life without the fear of havingto return to their homeland andtorturers. Clients will spend thetime working and saving for planetickets for family members. Theyhave hope and can actively worktowards a positive future.
“The happiest times we share
are when clients bring their familiesback to meet us,” said Evelyn.“They can show their families theHealing Center and the people whohelped guide them through recovery.”take care of the 
people who are tortured,” said Bill. 
The IRA Charitable Rollover
allows individuals over age 70½ tomake distributions from their IRAsdirectly to nonprofit organizationswithout incurring the taxes thatwould apply to a normal withdrawalfrom their IRA accounts. If you’dlike to support CVT with an IRArollover, talk with your financialadvisor or contact Rachel Hughes atrhughes@cvt.org or 1-877-265-8775.
.....................................................................................................Bill Hunt is one of CVT’s veryfirst supporters. In the 1970s, he worked on the University of
Minnesota campus and knew thefounders of CVT. Nearly 30 yearsafter CVT’s founding, Bill and hiswife, Margaret, found a creativeand easy way to support CVT withan IRA rollover.
“I checked with my financial
advisors and made a list of charitiesI wanted to support,” said Bill.“My advisors sent me some papersto sign and that was it. It’s veryeasy to do. It’s not for everybody,but it made sense for us and our
taxes.”
Retired for 15 years, Bill and
Margaret lead very full lives. Hewrites and helps with local home-school students. Margaret is apainter and teaches painting. Theyboth are supportive of their friendsand family who are aging in thecommunity and need help withtransportation or other tasks. 
While Bill and Margaret support
many organizations, CVT is closeto their hearts. “I think CVT is verywell managed and it’s important to
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2013 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.13-NB5You have already made a big 
difference in helping theCenter for Victims of Torture
to heal the wounds of tortureworldwide—and we are deeplygrateful for your generosity andcommitment. 
CVT continues to hear from
supporters who are looking for creative ways to support our mission—including bringing hope and healing to Syrians who havesurvived torture and severe war-related atrocities, and who are now streaming into CVT’s healingcenter in Jordan in great numbers.An increasing number of donors are establishing Charitable GiftAnnuities (CGA) to support ourwork. A Charitable Gift Annuity is a
type of planned gift. In return for a transfer of cash, marketable securities or other assets, donorsreceive a guaranteed lifetimeincome. CGAs can be set up forimmediate income or for deferredpayments until a certain age; theincome is based on the donor’s age and is especially favorable toolder individuals. For example, the annual annuity rate for an individual age 70 is about 7%; forindividuals age 80 it’s about 10%.
If you’d like to learn more about
Charitable Gift Annuities or otherplanned giving options, pleasecontact Rachel Hughes at 
1-877-
265-8775 or rhughes@cvt.org.Planning for Hope and Healing—
and for Y our Future
PHOTO PROVIDED BY BILL HUNT
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Bill and Margaret Hunt: Supporting CVTwith an IRA Rollover
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
