INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Fierce Intolerance for Injustice 
4Ways You Can Help More Survivors Rediscover Hope 
4Important Tax Changes to Charitable Giving in 2020 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 31, ISSUE 1 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
OCTOBER 2020 
Life has been tough for me. But 
looking back, I see so many 
places where, because of the 
compassion of others, I was never 
really alone. 
When I escaped to South Africa 
after being tortured in the Congo 
twenty years ago, I was a scared 
and lonely young man. It was 
through the kindness of a stranger 
I met on the plane that I was able 
to find a place to stay and have 
food to eat. 
And when I made it to 
Minneapolis after being tortured 
again after speaking out for what 
is right, I was distraught, separated 
from my wife and children in 
South Africa. I even considered 
ending my own life. But through the kindness of another good 
Samaritan, I found my way to 
CVT and its community of caring 
supporters. 
So I know the helping power of 
strangers. I will never meet most 
CVT supporters, but your kindness 
and generosity has forged an 
unbreakable bond between us. It is 
how I found the therapy I needed. 
It is why I am alive today, making 
more of my dreams come true. 
On the day I graduated from 
CVT, I went for my final session. 
Sitting in the waiting room were 
four survivors of torture waiting 
for their appointments. One young 
man looked to be the same state I 
was in when I first came to CVT. 
His eyes were fixed on the floor, his shoulders hunched as though 
he was carrying the weight of the 
world on his back. I could feel his 
weariness. 
My mind went back to my own 
first day at CVT. I asked him why 
he came here. He started telling me 
his story in French. And do you 
know what? He was from the 
Congo too. I quietly cried as he 
told me in a low voice about how 
(see page 3) In His Own Words: 
Blaise’s Journey to Healing 
Photo by Dreamstime 
After peacefully protesting the authoritarian government’s shutdown 
of his university in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Blaise was 
detained and tortured before escaping to South Africa and, eventually, 
making his way to the United States. The courageous story he shares 
below is adapted from remarks he delivered during CVT’s Restoring 
Hope Breakfast this month. 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends, 
As I write this, we’re nearing the end of one of the most 
contentious elections in American history. 
I don’t know how these next few days will play out. I don’t know which candidate will win 
the White House, or which party will control Congress … or even how long it may be before we 
know the answers to those questions as the unprecedented number of mailed-in ballots are counted. 
But there’s one thing I do know. No matter what changes Election Day may usher in, the 
vision you and I share will never change: 
A world free of torture. A world where all survivors hurting in body 
and mind and spirit get the healing care they so desperately need. A 
world where families forced to flee violence and persecution are treated 
with compassion and assistance rather than cruelty and contempt. 
In some areas, of course, the outcome of the election will affect our tactics and immediate 
objectives, especially in our critical advocacy work to restore just and humane systems through which 
refugees and asylum seekers can seek protection in the United States. 
But no matter who wins the election, that advocacy work will face tough challenges in the 
coming year—either in the hard work of rebuilding our asylum and refugee systems after years 
of attack, or in protecting them against even greater dismantling. 
No matter who wins the election, we will continue to confront the immediate crisis of 
COVID-19, which is dramatically compounding many of our clients’ sense of isolation and fear, 
and creating severe obstacles in our ability to give them healing care, especially at our projects 
in refugee camps. 
And no matter who wins the election, CVT will still be overwhelmed by the number of 
torture survivors reaching out for our help, as the worst refugee crisis since the Second World 
War drags on. 
That’s why I am so deeply grateful for your caring support … and hopeful that even more 
torture survivors like Blaise, who shares his story with you in this newsletter, will be able to count 
on you in the weeks and months ahead. No matter who wins the election. 
With my deepest appreciation, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
Phyllis Owen remembers when 
she first heard about the Center 
for Victims of  Torture. 
It was June of 1989 and she was 
reading the newspaper comments 
made by Minnesota’s then-Governor 
Rudy Perpich about this new organi -
zation — an organization doing such 
wonderful work helping torture 
survivors in the state’s growing 
refugee population. Phyllis sat down 
immediately and wrote out a check 
for $10. 
That was the beginning of a long 
partnership that comes naturally to 
Phyllis, whose entire life has been 
defined by a fierce intolerance for 
injustice and a passion for helping 
others. That’s why she chose nursing 
as a profession. That’s why she and 
her husband, Greg, helped sponsor 
a Bosnian family forced to flee civil 
war in their home country. That’s why she was sick with outrage when 
our own government tortured people 
in the wake of 9/11. 
And that’s why she and her 
husband have not only supported 
the Center for Victims of Torture 
over the years but also decided to 
create a lasting legacy by including 
CVT in their estate plans. As she 
says, “What you put in your will is 
an expression of your values and 
heart.” 
She knows that CVT gives her a 
powerful way to put her values into 
action: “CVT is able to do what 
individuals can’t do on their own. 
You have to be part of a community, 
taking action together to make the 
work happen.” 
The legacy gift they’re making 
through their will ensures that Phyllis 
and Greg will be a part of that 
community for many years to come. 
3Fierce Intolerance for Injustice 
(from page 1) 
he had been beaten and felt fear 
through his entire body. 
It was a fear I knew all too well. 
And it’s why I told my social worker 
that day, “This is not the end for 
me and CVT. It is the beginning 
of something else. I will do what I 
can so that those men and women 
in the waiting room will not be 
forgotten.” 
The work done by CVT helps 
save lives. It helped save my life. I 
am a living witness to what happens 
when you choose to stand up for what is right and support CVT. 
When there is a waiting list it 
doesn’t mean that CVT doesn’t 
want to help, it means that they 
don’t have the resources to say yes 
to everyone. I went through awful 
things—things which you don’t 
want to know. But there is always 
another person behind me. And 
another behind that person. We 
cannot simply ignore these people. 
For me, I have big dreams to 
make a difference for others. I am 
graduating this fall with a degree in 
business and community develop -ment. I’ve started a new foundation, 
Bon Samaritain , located in the 
Congo, to help young people, 
like me, who were tortured for 
standing up for what is right. 
And I have some joyful news: 
my wife and I reunited after four 
years of being separated! We are so 
happy being back together, raising 
our children in Minnesota. 
Life is short, and I believe we 
have to make a difference so that 
when our time is up we can look 
and say to ourselves, “Okay I did 
something for someone.” In His Own Words: Blaise’s Journey to Healing “What you put in 
your will is an 
expression of your 
values and heart. ” 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 2020 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Ways You Can Help More Survivors Rediscover Hope 
Your caring generosity helps CVT give torture survivors 
the care they need to heal their wounds, rebuild their 
lives and rediscover joy and hope in the future. Here 
are some ways you can magnify your impact and help 
even more survivors. 
Employer-Matching. Many employers will match 
charitable giving from their employees, doubling or 
even tripling their contributions. Contact your employer’s 
human resources department to find out whether this 
is a way you can leverage your impact. 
Monthly Giving. Rather than donating once a year, or a 
few times throughout the year, many of our supporters 
choose instead to join the CVT Circle of Hope by having 
a smaller gift charged every month to a credit card or 
transferred electronically from a checking account. 
As a Circle of Hope member, you will help provide a 
stable source of reliable funding, reduce our administrative 
costs and ensure that even more of your donation 
supports life-changing rehabilitative care. You will 
receive an annual statement in January with all of your 
donations for the previous year. And, of course, you 
can change, suspend, or cancel your giving at any time. 
To join the Circle of Hope , contact Anna Zaros, at 
azaros@cvt.org or 651-436-4859. 
Legacy Giving. Many donors who do not have the 
resources to make substantial gifts during their lifetime s
find it possible to be extraordinarily generous through 
their estate planning. A gift of this kind will extend your legacy of hope to future torture survivors while also 
offering potential financial benefits to you and your 
loved ones, including sparing them complex probate 
procedures and costly taxes. 
• Bequest — Making a bequest to CVT through your 
will or living trust is one of the simplest ways to create 
a legacy gift to CVT. A bequest can be modified or 
canceled at any time, and it can be for a specified 
amount or percentage of your estate. 
• Life Insurance or Retirement Plan Beneficiary — 
Another simple way to leave a lasting impact to survivors 
of torture is by naming CVT a beneficiary of your life 
insurance,IRA, or other retirement account. 
• Qualified Charitable Distribution from an IRA — 
If you are 70½ years of age, you can make a qualified 
charitable distribution to CVT from your Individual 
Retirement Account (IRA). 
For more information on any of these options or other 
ways to make a legacy gift to the Center for Victims of 
Torture, please contact Anna Zaros at (612) 436-4859 
or azaros@cvt.org . Of course, you should always consult 
with your attorney, accountant, or financial planner to 
ensure that your gift fits your personal situation. 
To make an immediate gift, visit us online at 
www.cvt.org , send a check to 2356 University Avenue W, 
Suite 430, St. Paul, MN 55114, or call (612) 436-4808. 
Thank you for your ongoing commitment to healing the 
wounds of torture. 
21-NA5 1Required minimum distributions (RMDs) from 
certain retirement plans and accounts, including 
traditional IRAs, are suspended for 2020. If you 
are 70½ years of age, you can still make a qualified 
charitable distribution (QCD), which lowers the fair 
market value of your IRA and can have the benefit 
of lowering your RMD amount for future years. 
2For taxpayers who do not itemize, if you make a 
$300 charitable contribution you can add it as a deduction on top of the standard deduction. This is for 
cash gifts only. 
3The adjusted gross income limitation for charitable 
gifts is lifted for 2020. Typically you can deduct up 
to 60% of your adjusted gross income for cash gifts 
given to charity. This year, you can deduct up to 100% 
of your adjusted gross income for gifts to charity on 
your 2020 tax return. This only applies to cash gifts 
given directly to charities. Important Tax Changes to Charitable Giving in 2020 