Abrutal war raged in the
Democratic Republic of Congo(DRC) from 1998-2003. During
the conflict, nearly 4 million peopledied, 1.7 million were displacedand countless individuals were tortured. The conflict continues to simmer to this day.  
Men, women and children who
survived sexual violence, beatingsand other torture perpetrated by allsides of the conflict, are in need ofhealing. For three years CVT hasprovided desperately needed care totorture survivors in the southeasternprovince of Katanga. “Joseph,”(nothis real name for confidentialityreasons) is among the many indi-viduals CVT has helped.During the war Joseph lived on
the run for several years. Movingfrom village to village, he tried toavoid being forced into service bythe Armed Forces of the DemocraticRepublic of Congo (FARDC), thestate military. 
Eventually, though, he was 
captured and beaten repeatedly fordays, often to the point of uncon-sciousness. He was forced to watchkidnappings and rapes. “I was soscared because I was separatedfrom my wife, who was pregnant,and I imagined how she would gothrough the same agony as thewomen I saw being raped by theFARDC,” said Joseph.
“When they finally let me go, 
I started looking for my wife andfound her after a couple of weeks.But she died two months later whilegiving birth. We could not get neara hospital due to the fighting andshe died with the baby in her womb.I felt so incredibly helpless watchingher die.”
Like many torture survivors,
Joseph was traumatized for yearsby his experiences during the war.He could not sleep and experiencedintense periods of anger. He feltoverwhelming sadness, a sense of
uselessness and guilt. 
At a community event Joseph
learned about CVT and soon joineda counseling group. After ten weeksof therapy, Joseph is more optimisticabout life. “I am happy to reportthat I sleep much better. The terribleimages of the war bother me less andless and let me do my work in peace.And most of all, I understand that Iam not guilty for my wife’s death.” 
Fall 2009, Volume 19, Issue 4    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Letter from the Executive Director
4Volunteer Brings Healing Touch to Jordan
4Your Commitment to Hope and HealingJoseph’s Story: A Profile of Healing
Our mission: To heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.See page 3Congolese mental health counselors
Arlette and George lead counselinggroups for torture survivors in theDemocratic Republic of Congo.
PHOTO © EDIE LEWISON
“I don’t understand how 
CVT came to my village . . .but I understand that CVThelps us to get humanityback.” 
– Joseph, CVT Client in the DRC2Letter from the Executive Director
This has been a year of incredible change for the country and for 
CVT. When President Obama, on just his second full day in office, issued an executive order banning torture and cruelty, our nation turned a page. We took a step away from the brutal tactics that had marked our nation’scounterterrorism practices for the past eight years.
As the first human rights organization to call for this Presidential directive, we were thrilled.
There is plenty of credit to be shared for this extraordinary accomplishment, because so manyhuman rights groups came to support the concept of an executive order. But there are some who recognize CVT as having made the key contribution to this successful campaign. 
Across the world, in Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Jordan, our healing
centers continue to help torture survivors heal from their deep wounds, reclaim their lives andrebuild their communities. And there is more good news: soon CVT will extend care to Iraqi torturesurvivors not only in Jordan, but in Syria as well. We’ll also begin working in Uganda and Zimbabwe.
Reflecting back on this year, I’m encouraged by the healing capacity we’ve built by providing 
technical assistance and training to more than 50 torture survivor rehabilitation centers in the U.S.and abroad. And I’m inspired to note that CVT has now helped more than 18,000 survivors recoverfrom the devastating wounds of torture. Your support has made this fine work possible; pleaseaccept my deepest thanks.
But despite our success, CVT is feeling the same financial 
pressures as all nonprofit organiza tions. Earlier  this year we 
reduced our budget by $350,000. Sadly, we were forced to lay off several staff members.
This is the time of year when we ask you and our other 
donors to make special year-end gifts. The amount of financial support we receive before the end of the year will determine what we’re able to accomplish in the year ahead. I hope we can count on your support again.
Thank you for being our partner in healing. May you and
your family have a wonderful holiday season.
Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
In-Kind Donations of specific items
improve the lives of survivors.
Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send 
a check to 717 East River Parkway,Minneapolis, MN 55455, or call 1-877-265-8775 for other ways to give.Thank you for your ongoing commitmentto healing the wounds of torture.Joseph’s story is not unique. In
the DRC, large numbers of menhave been savagely beaten, some to the death. Tens of thousands ofwomen and girls have suffered barbaric sexual attacks—someendured irreparable mutilation during rape and will never be ableto have children. Looted homes,“disappearances,” theft of cropsand food, arbitrary detentions andextortion, and violent rampageswere widespread.  
Survivors of these attacks are
virtually paralyzed by their post-traumatic reactions which include flashbacks, panic attacks, intenseand incessant nightmares, and powerful feelings of hopelessnessand despair. They are frequentlyunable to function normally withinthe community or care for theirchildren and are in desperate needof mental health services. 
With funding from the State
Department’s Bureau of Population,Refugees and Migration, CVT beganproviding care to torture survivorsin the DRC in 2006. A grant fromthe European Union’s European
Instrument for Democracy andHuman Rights allowed CVT to hireand train additional counselors towork in the remote communities of Moba and Pweto during the pastyear. Expatriate psychotherapistsconduct individual therapy sessionsand Congolese paraprofessionalcounselors lead therapy groups likethe one that helped Joseph.
Alice Behrendt is CVT’s mental
health clinician and trainer in Moba.“Since mid-June about 8,000returnees have arrived. It is plannedthat 15,000 more will be repatriated
from the camps in Zambia by theend of December,” said Alice.“Moba and surrounding villageshave been highly affected by fightingbetween Rwandan forces, theFARDC and different rebel factions,”explained Alice. 
CVT’s on-going mental health
services will rebuild the lives ofmany of these traumatized refugees.They will begin to live meaningful,productive lives again, like Josephhas done. “I don’t understand howCVT came to [my village], how thisplace was picked, but I understandthat CVT helps us to get humanityback,” said Joseph. “I feel like ahuman being again.”
CVT’s work in the
DRC is funded by the EuropeanUnion’s EuropeanInstrument forDemocracy andHuman Rights(EIDHR) and the U.S. Department ofState’s Bureau of Population, Refugeesand Migration (BPRM).
3Joseph’s Story: A Profile of Healing
From page 1
Give Gifts of Hope this Holiday Season
The perfect holiday gift this 
year may be the one that rebuilds a life. 
Instead of shopping for material
presents this holiday season, considermaking a contribution to CVT andgiving holiday Gifts of Hope in 
celebration of your loved ones. 
When you make a Gift of Hope,
you’ll receive a card for the recipientthat will tell them how their holidaygift is healing torture survivorsaround the world. Please visitwww.cvt.org to make Gifts of Hope,
or call us toll-free at 877-265-8775.
Everyone on your holiday 
shopping list is sure to appreciatethe profound impact of giving hope.We don’t often get a chance to helprebuild
someone’s lifewith a simple
gesture, but at CVT, that is exactlywhat your gift will do. 
May these Gifts of Hope bring
you joy as they bring hope andhealing to torture survivors aroundthe world.
In Joseph’s therapy group
survivors drew aspects oftheir lives to depict theirgrief and loss. For Joseph,sketching his loved oneshelped him heal. “Drawing[my wife], the baby andother beloved people I lost during the war, [and]speaking about the goodtimes I shared with her,made me realize that it is time to move on.”
MaryAnn de Ruiter’s tools and
methods are often simple. Sheteaches CVT clients how to use
rice hot packs to relieve their aches.She helps them find more supportiveshoes to alleviate pain in their legsand feet. Yet the effects of de Ruiter’swork are extraordinary.
A professional physical therapist,
she volunteers to help clients in theMinneapolis Healing Center. Hergoal is to soothe the chronic physicalpain that afflicts torture survivors. 
For ten years, de Ruiter has helped
survivors manage the on-going physi-cal effects of torture. From explaininghow to tape a damaged knee causedby a beating to demonstrating self-massage to alleviate head or backaches, she teaches CVT clients howto manage pain and pressure. 
The results of de Ruiter’s work are
life-changing. “Clients tell me, ‘I wasable to sleep better’ and ‘I feel like I
can manage my own pain’ after theyhave received therapy,” said de Ruiter.Some clients need only a few sessionsof physical therapy while others mightrequire several months of care beforeseeing improvement.
In June, de Ruiter traveled to the
CVT treatment center in Amman,Jordan to share her skills. She spent aweek working with physical therapistEman Al-Zughbieh, demonstratingtechniques and approaches conduciveto working with torture survivors. 
Together de Ruiter and Al-Zughbieh
worked with seven women clients.“In Jordan our clients’ torture isquite recent, so we’re able to addresstheir physical pain much sooner andin a different way,” explained deRuiter. Al-Zughbieh is now using deRuiter’s lessons in Amman full-time.
Having witnessed how CVT clients
Volunteer Physical Therapist Brings Healing Touch to Jordan
Restoring the dignity of the human spirit
717 EAST RIVER PARKWAY    www .cvt.org     
MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55455 cvt@cvt.orgToll Free 1-877-265-8775    © 2009 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
9-ND5benefit from her healing touch, de
Ruiter wishes she could spend moretime working with them. “Survivorsare resilient, talented and inspirational.I often feel humbled by them.”
Each year, thousands of torture
survivors come to CVT in thehope of rebuilding their lives and
healing from the wounds of torture.Generous support from CVT donorslike you makes it possible for women,men and children to live withoutnightmares, fear and isolation.Because of your financial commit-ment, these brave individuals have a chance to reclaim healthy, peacefullives. 
Your generosity is especially
important at the end of the year. Thecontributions CVT receives beforeDecember 31 determine the extentof the healing and advocacy initia-tives we can carry out next year.  Making a tax-deductible 
contribution by check
orcredit card
before the end of the year is the easiest way to help CVT. You canuse the enclosed envelope to send in your gift, or go to our Web site at www.cvt.org
to make a secure 
gift online. If you would like tomake a gift of stock, we would behappy to assist you. Please call us at the number below. 
This year CVT is making a spe-
cial effort to encourage supportersto give Gifts of Hope as holiday
gifts. Everyone on your gift list willappreciate knowing that a life isbeing restored in their honor. CVTwill send you cards with messages ofhope that you can send to announce
your Gift of Hope.
However you choose to support
CVT at the end of this year, pleaseknow that CVT’s clients, Board ofDirectors and staff are deeply grate-ful for your commitment to healingtorture survivors and stopping torture worldwide. Your supporthas given over
18,000 torture
survivors achance torebuild their
lives. Thank you for your generosity
and your compassion.
If you would like to discuss your
options for year-end giving, includinggifts of stock, please call Ashley at877-265-8775 (toll-free) or e-mailabennett@cvt.org. Reaffirm Your Commitment to Hope and Healing with a Gift to CVTCVT volunteer physical therapist
MaryAnn de Ruiter traveled to Amman,Jordan to help train Eman Al-Zughbieh.
PHOTO © REEM KLOUB