The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
Over 140 torture rehabilitation
centers around the world makea unique contribution in the
fight to end torture and to heal themen and women who have survivedit. They reclaim leaders targeted for torture, document evidence oftorture and expose the secrecy usedto hide human rights abuses. 
But many centers operate in 
isolation. In countries with persistenthuman rights violations, they workin a culture of fear and apathy.
CVT recently launched a new
international initiative to supportthis developing network of torturerehabilitation centers. Partners inTrauma Healing (PATH) will offerprofessional, intellectual and emo-tional support for the difficult work of healing torture survivors. 
Edward Bokarie with CAPS,
Community Association for Psycho-social Services, is one of our partners.Edward worked with CVT SierraLeone as a paraprofessional mentalhealth counselor. He and othercounselors trained by CVT formedCAPS, which today continues tocare for torture and war trauma survivors. “By participating in the PATH
project we hope to gain and shareknowledge with the other torturetreatment centers around the world,”said Edward. “The knowledgegained from other torture treatmentcenters will be incorporated in ourcommunity approach to tortureissues and healing.”
Over the next four years, PATH
will provide intense training oncounseling skills and organizationaldevelopment to CAPS and nineother independent foreign torturerehabilitation centers. Periodic liveconferences and visits from CVTadvisors will be supplemented byphone and video calls. The partnercenters, which are scatteredthroughout Africa, Eastern Europeand Asia, will connect with andlearn from each other through Webconferences and online discussions. 
Strengthening Mental Health
Treatment
While the partner centers may
have trained counselors on staff, the counselors might not haveworked with torture and war traumasurvivors. With CVT, each centerwill determine the clinical skillsthey need to develop. 
The centers will also have an
experienced psychotherapistembedded with the organizationfor a year to train and mentor theclinical staff. This type of in-personcoaching reinforces what counselors
See page 3Partnering to Heal Survivors
Staff from the CAPS rehabilitation center
outside of a hut where the organizationworks with survivors.       
PHOTO © AMY JO VERSOLATOVOLUME 22, ISSUE 1 •WWW.CVT.ORG
INSIDE
2 Letter from the Deputy Director, Ruth Barrett-Rendler
4 Donor Profile, Katherine Schafer
4 Y our Membership Renewal Brings Hope and HealingINSIDE   
THEstory cloth
FEBRUARY 2012
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human Spirit2Letter from the Deputy Director
As we begin the New Year, there is still more to be done to end 
torture. We need your help.
2011 saw a disturbing turn toward torture and cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment. Cries for the return to torture and cruel treatment followed the capture and killing of Osama bin Laden. Former Vice President Cheney defended these techniques in his memoir. Some Republican presidential candidates suggested the return of waterboarding. 
In Congress, an amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) would
have opened the door again to the use of torture and cruelty in U.S. interrogations. While weare gratified this amendment did not become law, we do anticipate the sponsors will attemptto bring it up again in the future. 
Thanks to all of you who joined us in speaking out against this amendment.Unfortunately, the NDAA signed into law provides legal authorization for indefinite
detention. This is the first time the United States has authorized, by statute, cruel, inhuman anddegrading treatment of detainees. From our experience providing care to torture survivors, weknow indefinite detention causes severe, prolonged and harmful health and mental healthproblems for those detained. 
We worked hard to stop indefinite detention from becoming part of the NDAA and have
called upon Congress and President Obama to make repealing indefinite detention a top priority.
Your support and involvement in our advocacy work is as important as ever.Please take a moment to visit our Web site at www.cvt.org to learn more about what you
can do to be part of our advocacy work, including signing up for news and action alerts. Wewill let you know when your voice is urgently needed. 
You can also sign our online petition calling for an independent, nonpartisan commission
to investigate all aspects of U.S. policy relating to detainee treatment.
Follow us on Facebook for updates.Thank you for your support and participation. You can make a difference.
Sincerely,
Ruth Barrett-Rendler
Deputy Director......................................................
Ruth Barrett-Rendler
Stay on top of what CVT is doing
by signing up for our e-mail alertsat www.cvt.org or connecting withus on Facebook.3From page 1Partnering to Heal Survivors
may have read in books or learned
in workshops but have yet to inte-grate into practice. For example,after a counseling session, the psychotherapist can ask the partnercounselor, “What did you noticeabout Kisimba’s face when he saidthat he wasn’t able to save hismother?” 
“While we remain grateful to
CVT for sending several psycho-therapists in the past to conducttrainings for CAPS staff, the PATHproject has a unique opportunity initself,” said Edward. “The provisionof a base psychotherapist for at leasta year is beyond our imagination.”
To build an effective, sustainable
mental health program for torturesurvivors, rehabilitation centers mustmonitor and evaluate the healingprocess. This involves creating toolssuch as simple surveys for survivorsto report their symptoms of depres-sion and anxiety. Centers must alsoidentify what it means to be healthywithin their communities and thentranslate Western measures andtechniques appropriately. 
“We’ll help each center develop
accurate and thorough evaluationmethods, so they understand themost effective ways to help survivors
organizations, we’ll provide grants.Organizations can apply for fundingfor a specific purpose, such as purchasing accounting software orpaying for a clinical conference fora counselor. These small investmentsare the building blocks of a stableorganization that can provide healing to torture survivors. 
The PATH partners are eager to
learn from their experience. “Wehope to achieve the overall growthand strategy of our Centre,” saidDr. Mariam Jishkariani, presidentand medical director of RCT/EMPATHY, a torture rehabilitationcenter in Georgia. “We want todevelop an international level academic institution with developedmanagement, clinical, legal andforensic, research and trainingstructures, through increasing effec-tiveness and strong multi-facetedsustainable programmes.”
Partners 
in TraumaHealing is made possible through the financial support of USAID and the Americanpeoples’ support.
Greg Vinson, CVT senior research
and evaluation manager, and Kristi Rendahl, organizational development advisor, were greeted at Memoria, a torture rehabilitation center in Moldova, with a special “Chisinau” cloth and a bread ring, the traditional way of welcoming guests.
PHOTO © ANN WILHOITE
Transcultural Psychosocial Organization
Cambodia is a PATH partner.      PHOTO © CVTheal and rebuild their lives,” said
Pam Kriege Santoso, PATH projectmanager.
Developing Sustainable
Organizations
Even with the most skilled and
compassionate counselors, survivorsmay not get the care they need if thecenter is struggling administrativelyor financially. To strengthen admin-istrative functions, we will workwith partner staff to assess theirstrengths and set up a plan to developthe organization’s infrastructure. 
“We’ll work with executive
directors, staff members and boardsof directors to develop resourcemobilization strategies, strengthenmanagement and financial practices,and invest in organization-wideleadership to position the centersfor on-going stability and growth,”said Kristi Rendahl, the PATHorganizational development advisor.“As the centers implement theirplans, they will see their organiza-tions become more efficient andultimately more effective at caringfor survivors of torture.”
To assist the partners in
strengthening key areas of their$5 to $100 per year
work together to invest more than$420,000 in CVT’swork. These gifts play a vital role in funding ourWashington, D.C.,office and assessment trips to countries that may benefitfrom CVT’s initiatives. They represent the backbone of CVT’swork, and we c ould not continue 
to do our work without it.
“If torture is repugnant to you,
support this organization,” urgedKatherine. “An annual gift of anysize can bring hope and healing totorture survivors throughout theworld.”
................................................................Katherine Schafer was introducedto CVT nearly 25 years agowhen a friend invited her to help
with renovations to our first healingcenter, a restored home designed to feel welcoming to survivors.
She was drawn to CVT’s mission
and wanted to help but knew thatworking with survivors was not the best fit for her. Throughout herlong history with CVT, though,Katherine has supported our workin many ways: as a photographer,eBay book auctioneer, annual donorand most recently, as a planned 
giving donor who has added CVT to her will.
Katherine has made a gift to
CVT every year since 1989. Likehundreds of CVT donors, her giftsare not large. But as Katherine said,“I believe in grassroots support. Itdoesn’t matter how small the gift is,it all adds up to help CVT heal thewounds of torture survivors.”
Every gift made to CVT is gener-
ous. The faithful support of donorslike Katherine who give gifts of 
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2012 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.12-NA5At the beginning of each year we
ask all our supporters to renewtheir annual support for the
Center for Victims of Torture.Membership renewals are especiallyhelpful early in the year because ofthe impact they can provide to ourwork throughout the whole year. 
Thanks to your generosity, CVT
cared for 3,000 torture survivors in2011—giving them the hope theyneed to rebuild their lives. In thecoming year, we anticipate beingcalled upon to care for even moretorture survivors—here in theUnited States, in Africa and in theMiddle East. 
By renewing your membership,
you’ll help us extend care to survivors in Minnesota, theDemocratic Republic of Congo,Kenya and Jordan. You’ll supportour efforts to strengthen domesticand international colleagues through
technical assistance and training.You’ll support our work to sustainfederal funding that brings care totens of thousands worldwide. Andyou’ll support our efforts to endtorture and cruelty—no matter whois committing it.
So, when you receive your
renewal request, please respondgenerously. If you wish to renewyour annual support online via our secure server, please visitwww.cvt.org and click “DONATENOW.” Our Web site also makes it easy to become a member ofCVT’s monthly giving program, the Circle of Hope. Call us toll-freeat 1-877-265-8775 if you wish touse your credit card or if you haveany questions. Thank you for yourgenerous partnership in restoringthe dignity of the human spirit.
Y our Membership Renewal 
Brings Hope and Healing 
PHOTO © CVT
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Donor profile: Katherine Schafer urges gifts of any size
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
..................................