INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Self-directed Healing for Mothers and Aunties in Jordan 
4Many Ways to Support Healing The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 29, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
T H E sto rycloth 
F E B RUA RY 20 19 
Seeking Asylum After T orture 
What if, at a moment’s notice, 
you found yourself in life- 
threatening danger? What if 
you had no choice but to flee your 
home? As you scramble to perma -
nently leave your house, neighbor -
hood, city, country, what do you 
take? Whom do you bring with 
you? 
For the countless individuals 
fleeing war and violence in their 
home countries, these questions 
aren’t hypothetical. They’re a 
heartbreaking reality, one CVT clients know well. At CVT’s 
St. Paul Healing Center, two-thirds 
of our clients are asylum seekers. 
They are also doctors, lawyers, 
teachers and journalists. They are 
mothers and fathers, daughters 
and sons. 
Back home, these asylum seekers 
were often unafraid to speak out. 
They were targeted for their activism, 
their associations or their identity. 
Some were just in the wrong place 
at the wrong time. Forced to flee 
from imminent danger, many weren’t able to bring their loved 
ones with them to safety. They 
came to us alone, as Esme* did. 
Esme couldn’t talk during her 
therapy sessions; she could only 
cry. The pain of being separated 
from her children felt worse than 
memories of her torture. Because 
of her immigration status, Esme 
did not qualify for any public 
benefits. Most asylum seekers do 
not. Fortunately, once taken on as 
a client at CVT, Esme could access 
general medical assistance just by 
virtue of being in our care. 
Esme was persecuted in her 
home country in the Middle East 
because of false accusations of 
political involvement. A family 
member helped her get to the U.S. 
on a visa. Like most asylum seekers, 
Esme struggled to find housing. 
CVT is not a residential facility. 
Survivors must often rely on relatives, 
acquaintances, kind strangers or 
shelters for a bed at night. This and 
the added stress of a pending asylum 
case can compound symptoms of 
(see page 4) 
*For privacy and security reasons, name 
and some details have been changed. © Juan Moyano | Dreamstime.com 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friend, 
Human rights are for everyone, everywhere. Yet in the United States 
there is a very methodical shrinking—a major sustained crackdown—on 
protections for asylum seekers. 
People across the globe are fleeing war, violence, dire economic circumstances and torture. 
Thousands of asylum seekers at our southern border escaped horrific circumstances—gang violence, 
death squads, rape. They are desperate. They are simply trying to live, and as a result, they are 
being punished. 
If they make it into the U.S., they risk being detained, potentially prosecuted depending on 
how they entered, and separated from their families. Seeking political asylum isn’t a crime—it’s a 
human right. They are legally entitled to apply for asylum and have their claims adjudicated fairly, 
notwithstanding how they got here. 
U.S. law policy and practice must change. CVT’s healing care and advocacy is made possible 
by your generosity and your support today will strengthen our call for the following actions: 
•First, law and policymakers must speak out against the false and discriminatory 
rhetoric that treats asylum seekers as criminals. 
•Second, there needs to be vigorous and sustained oversight into the human rights 
violations that persist at our southern border, followed where appropriate by 
legislative solutions. 
•Third, Congress needs to provide, and government officials then need to effectively 
spend, sufficient funding to fairly and efficiently resettle refugees and evaluate 
asylum seekers’ claims. 
•Fourth, Congress should legislate a smart and humane immigration detention 
system, one that limits as much as possible the scope and length of detention. 
•Fifth, our government needs to put meaningful attention and resources toward 
addressing the root causes of the global immigration crisis. 
We rely on supporters like you to stand with all of the torture survivors, refugees and asylum 
seekers whose human rights are being denied. Your ongoing commitment allows us to create the 
change we seek by holding fast to the values and principles we share in our vision for a better 
world. Thank you for standing with CVT. 
With my thanks, 
Curt Goering ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
For the past 70 years, an inter- 
national non-governmental 
organization called SOS Children’s 
Villages Jordan has been caring for 
orphans and children legally deemed 
abandoned. In three Jordanian 
villages a full-time caregiver—a 
“mother”—is assigned to look 
after a household of five to seven 
children with another woman, 
an “auntie,” serving as a relief 
caregiver. 
CVT Jordan recently offered a 
three-hour self-care workshop for 
16 mothers and aunties in Amman. 
Topics included ergonomics educa -
tion, physical exercises, pain 
education and relaxation techniques. 
“For these women, self-care is 
such a unique concept,” said 
Physiotherapist Farah Al Dweik, 
who led the training with a small 
team of other CVT physiotherapist sand an interpreter. “Most of the 
activities the mothers and aunties 
do are related to caregiving and 
their children. It was a new 
experience for most of them to 
focus solely on themselves.” 
Prior to the workshop, participants 
completed a needs assessment to 
give staff a better idea of how to 
arrange the sessions. Needs among 
the mothers and aunties were 
extremely high. Farah was stunned. 
It was clear that they weren’t taking 
care of themselves, choosing 
instead to invest their energy in the 
children. Farah and her supervisor 
adjusted the workshop materials 
accordingly and developed a plan 
to teach simple self-care strategies 
and coping skills. 
When the workshop concluded, 
participants were emotional. 
Exploring the relationship between their bodies and minds was a new 
experience for many, and for some, 
a revelation. Farah disseminated 
materials outlining the concepts 
and exercises covered during the 
workshop, so mothers and aunties 
could embark on their own self- 
directed wellness journeys. 
The experience was unforget -
table for Farah and one she hopes 
to repeat soon. “I’m passionate 
about building external capacity,” 
she said. “Providing self-care 
workshops and building partner -
ships with national organizations 
and NGOs is an important goal 
for CVT Jordan.” Bringing hope 
and self-directed healing to women 
who give so much of themselves 
was a successful and invaluable 
step in that process. 
3Self-directed Healing for 
Mothers and Aunties in Jordan 
Funding for CVT's work 
in Jordan is provided 
by the United States 
Department of State's 
Bureau of Population,
Refugees and Migration 
and the United Nations 
Voluntary Fund for 
Victims of Torture.
Photo © Kristin Lucas 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 19 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 19-NB5 B The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Many Ways to Support Healing 
Charitable Contributions —CVT relies 
on the generosity of our supporters to help 
survivors and advocate for an end to torture 
worldwide. Thank you for your gifts of hope 
and healing, and for considering some of the 
many ways you can further support CVT. 
Circle of Hope, CVT’s Monthly Giving —
Both a hassle-free way to support CVT and 
help us work more efficiently, your monthly gift 
ensures a stable source of continuous funding. 
As a Circle of Hope member, you will help 
CVT decrease administrative costs so that more 
of your donation helps torture survivors directly, 
restoring human dignity and rebuilding thousands 
of lives worldwide. To sign up to be a monthly 
donor, visit cvt.org/donate. Workplace Giving and Corporate 
Matching Gifts —If your employer has a 
workplace giving program or will match your 
charitable contributions, designating CVT as 
the recipient is a convenient and easy way to 
leverage your generosity. Some companies will 
allow you to make a simple payroll deduction, 
and others will match your donations, doubling 
or even tripling your impact. 
Planning Y our Legacy —You can extend your 
support for CVT and leave a legacy of hope for 
torture survivors with a bequest in your will 
or another planned gift. You don’t have to be 
wealthy to make a meaningful gift, and there 
are many ways you can personally benefit as 
well as spare your loved ones from complex 
probate procedures and costly taxes. For more 
information on making a planned gift to the 
Center for Victims of Torture, please contact 
Anna Zaros at (612)436-4859 or azaros@cvt.org. (from page 1) 
trauma, especially now, when 
there is a mounting backlog of 
unprocessed asylum cases. 
“In the U.S. in particular there 
is a major sustained crackdown on 
protections for asylum seekers 
and enormous delay in processing 
most of their claims,” states Curt 
Goering, CVT executive director. 
“CVT’s clients are facing hearings 
three, four — or in the case of one 
client I spoke with recently — five 
years out.” 
Meanwhile, recent political 
rhetoric and action continues to 
surface new fears among CVT clients. For instance—in response 
to refugees fleeing violence and 
seeking safety at the southern 
border—President Trump signed a 
proclamation in November that 
makes them ineligible for asylum if 
they enter the United States outside 
an official port of entry. And yet, 
at the same time, Customs and 
Border Patrol are obstructing, and 
in some cases preventing entirely, 
asylum seekers from accessing 
ports of entry. Now, at nearly 
every counseling session, clients 
experience extreme fear and 
uncertainty over their unknown 
future in the U.S. Some ask, “Will I be sent to an internment camp? 
Will the police send my family and 
me to jail?” 
In spite of these challenges, 
clients persevere. At CVT, we 
work tirelessly to bring hope and 
rehabilitation to survivors, and to 
bring back an America that strives 
to be a safe haven for people like 
Esme. She obtained asylum and 
was finally, after five years, reunited 
with her children. Now she arrives 
at CVT with a smile, a reminder of 
how profoundly far she’s come. 
By Sabrina Crews, CVT marketing 
communications specialist Seeking Asylum After T orture 