Since 2006, the Center for Victims
of Torture (CVT) has been healingthe wounds of torture in the
Katanga province in the southeastregion of the Democratic Republicof Congo (DRC). During the lastthree years, more than 800 survivorshave been helped through individualcounseling and small therapy groups.Outreach, education programs andevents have touched at least 7,000people in this region. 
While rape is historically a
weapon of war, the frequency andintensity of sexual assaults duringthe conflict in the DRC are over-whelming. In war, sexual assault is a political tool used to humiliatemen and women. It is often committed in front of family orcommunity members. Individualsmay be forced to assault a loved oneor to applaud or laugh during anattack. Women who are assaultedare often shamed or ostracized bytheir families and communities.Both women and men are devastatedby the intrusion of sexual violenceand torture into their lives. 
With a near-plague of divorceand marital difficulties following
the war, CVT was spurred to pilotcouples therapy groups, focusing on women who survived sexualassaults and their partners.
Erin Morgan, who served as a
clinician and trainer in Pweto in the DRC and now works as anInternational Programs ClinicalConsultant, designed and conductedthe groups with CVT’s psychosocialcounselors. “Most women I metwere raped,” said Morgan. “And to find a woman who was rapedonly once is quite rare.” 
When a woman experiences a
sexual assault she typically with-draws from her husband becauseshe is so ashamed and physicallyand emotionally hurt. ManyCongolese women in Katangadescribe their experience by saying,“I was forced to become an adulter-er,” emphasizing how they perceivetheir own role in, and sometimesresponsibility for, the rape. 
Husbands are often angry and
humiliated by the victimization andassault. Frequently they were alsotortured by beatings or forcedlabor. They feel sad and defeated 
by the poverty and homelessnesscaused by the war.
CVT’s goal in working with
couples was to educate them about 
See page 3
Spring 2009, Volume 19, Issue 2    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Message from the Executive Director
4Pharmacist Tom Sengupta Serves Survivors
4Planned Giving Rebuilding Relationships through Couples Therapy
in the Democratic Republic of Congo
Our mission: To heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.
These Congolese women with a civil society
organization walked 45 kilometers in the
rain to attend a CVT training on sexual andgender-based violence.
In the DRC, rape was
used as a weapon of war to humiliate menand women and destroy communities. Mostwomen that CVT clinician Erin Morgan met in the DRC were raped, frequently more than once.PHOTO BY EDIE LEWISON2Letter from the Executive Director
The first credible reports that the United States was engaged in the use 
of torture and cruelty emerged in late 2002. Since that time CVT has worked to end this misguided policy. We were the first human rights organization to call for an executive order ending torture, and we secured strong, bipartisan support for that position from senior leaders in the nation’s military, national security and foreign policy sectors.
We were thrilled when, on only his second full day in office, President
Obama issued an
executive order banning torture andcruelty . Thank you for supporting our efforts to gain this
Presidential directive.
As I write this letter, the nation is still digesting the information contained in four memos 
written by the Office of Legal Counsel in 2002 and 2005. In the face of fierce protest, PresidentObama demonstrated extraordinary leadership in releasing those memos, which attempted theunthinkable: legalizing torture.
And with the release of those memos, our elation over the executive order turned to dismay 
and disgust at the cruelty that was inflicted on prisoners as part of the CIA’s interrogation program.
In addition to beatings, sleep deprivation, forced nudity, locking prisoners in small cages and
even locking a prisoner in a box with an insect (to exploit his fear of being stung), we learned that one prisoner was subjected to waterboarding 183 times in a single month. When interrogators told superiors of their great distress at watching the torment of a prisoner, they were told to resumethe torture.
Now the country is embroiled in a contentious debate over the question of whether there 
should be an investigation into who authorized and ordered the torture. We’re working hard for a nonpartisan investigation; those who authorized and ordered such sadistic treatment should beheld accountable.
For more information about CVT’s work, please sign up at our Web site (www.cvt.org) or by
using the reply card enclosed with this newsletter.
Thank you for taking the time to make your voice heard, and for supporting the Center for
Victims of Torture.
Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
From page 1
the effects of torture, renew trustand communication in the relation-ship and promote healing withinthe families.
The therapy groups ran ten
weeks with full group meetings andwomen-only and men-only time.The 13 couples also had time duringsome sessions to talk togetherabout their situations and feelings,before sharing with the group whatwas meaningful to them in theirdiscussions. To help couples processtheir experiences and feelings, thetherapy focused on couples inte-grating their experiences before,during and after the war. 
After the orientation session,
couples discussed what they enjoyedabout each other to build a base ofappreciation and respect. Spousesshared what was good in their relationship before the war, whatthey missed from that time in theirlives and how much easier thingswere before the torture.
The group members also
addressed how they had changedbecause of the war. First in gendergroups, and then in a large group,men explained how they becameangry and had blamed their wivesfor the actions of the soldiers. “We
talked about how much easier itwas to be angry at the person whowas still there, rather than at thesoldiers, who were long gone, andagainst whom they were powerless,”Morgan said. Women talked abouthow they had withdrawn from their husbands and wanted to avoid them. 
Follow-up sessions addressed
the darkest moments during andafter the war. As couples, groupparticipants reflected on how theytried to save each other or theirfamily. For some couples this wasthe first time they talked with eachother about their experiences andfeelings. They talked about sexualassault, surviving beatings, fleeingtheir homes, watching their childrenbeing harmed and losing theirincome. Finally, the couples talkedabout what they wanted to experi-ence in their relationships and theirfamilies. 
After the group ended, these
couples agreed to participate ininterviews to evaluate the effective-ness of the groups. “The couplesreported fundamental shifts in howthey relate to each other,” saidMorgan. “They changed how theytalk to each other, treat each otherand show compassion. Most ofthem reported that they appreciatetheir spouse in a more profound way than they had before the war.”
The feedback confirmed thatCVT’s initial work with couples
was tremendously successful.Several group members found ithelpful to talk with other men orwomen about the war’s impact ontheir marriage, especially the effectsof sexual assault. Many couplesreported feeling relief and solidarityafter learning that others had expe-rienced many of the same things,and wished more couples could gothrough the group.
Group members shared their
hopes to be better and more supportive spouses. With stronger marriages, better communicationskills and restored spirits, these survivors have a solid foundationfor parenting their children andrebuilding their community.
3
PHOTO BY EDIE LEWISON
Rebuilding Relationships
Young Congolese children playing soccer 
in Pweto. The lingering effects of torture
and sexual assault continue to tear familiesapart in the DRC. CVT’s initial work with acouples therapy group helped restore trustand communication between husbands andwives and rebuild families.
PHOTO BY EDIE LEWISON
Madeline Kabemba is a psychosocial
counselor in the DRC. Since 2006 
CVT has provided individual and group counseling to more than 800 torture survivors living in the DRC.For over 20 years pharmacist Tom
Sengupta has been serving CVTclients from his store, Schneider’s
Drugs, located just a few miles fromthe Minneapolis Healing Center. 
He plays a key role in helping
many survivors by preparing theirmedications to treat anxiety, depres-sion and other medical conditions resulting from their torture.
“My purpose is to take care of
people,” said Sengupta. Workingdirectly with survivors, he explainsthe side effects, benefits and interactions of their prescriptions. 
Sengupta personally connects
with survivors. “You can make animpact on people by doing simplethings,” he said. Sengupta routinelymails survivors their medications atno cost. He recognizes survivors’financial limits and insurance situa-tions, working within each person’sindividual circumstance. With warmthand concern Sengupta strives to makesurvivors’ lives easier.
“Tom’s commitment to survivors
is obvious in his work. He goes wayPharmacist Tom Sengupta
Caring for Survivors for 20 Years
Restoring the dignity of the human spirit
717 EAST RIVER PARKWAY    www .cvt.org     
MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55455 cvt@cvt.orgToll Free 1-877-265-8775    © 2009 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
9-NB5In today’s uncertain economic 
climate, we’re hearing from manydonors who are looking for cre-
ative ways to continue supportingCVT’s mission of hope and healing.An increasing number of donors are establishing Charitable GiftAnnuities. 
A Charitable Gift Annuity (CGA)
is a type of planned gift. 
In return
for a transfer of cash, marketablesecurities or other assets, donorsreceive a guaranteed lifetime income.The income is based on the donor’sage, and is especially favorable toolder individuals. 
Here’s what CVT’s long-time donor
Dudley Flamm from Northfield,Minnesota, said about setting up a CGA to benefit CVT:
Given the financial uncertainties
of the times and the confusing arrayof investment programs, the intentand clarity of a charitable gift annu-ity is really a blessing. And while I
am pleased to see the distributioncredited to my checking account eachquarter, I am even more pleased toknow that my gift is supporting anorganization I really believe in—CVT.
The gift officer simply took care
of all the paperwork. For me andany other older person who wants ano-fuss investment that makes yourheart and wallet both feel good, thegift annuity is a gift in itself.
CVT’s planned gifts are managed
by the Minneapolis Foundation(www.minneapolisfoundation.org).The expert staff there have arrangedthousands of CGAs and other typesof planned gifts.         
If you’d like to learn more about
Charitable Gift Annuities or othergiving options to support CVT,please contact Pete Dross at 612-436-4868 or pdross@cvt.org.Planned Giving for Hope, Healing and Your Future
Pharmacist
Tom Senguptahas filled prescriptionsfor CVT clientsfor over 20 years.
PHOTO BY C.C. STROM
beyond his work as a pharmacist,”
said Sharyn Larson, the nurse andclinic manager at the MinneapolisHealing Center. “Tom cares howour clients are doing emotionally as well as physically. He is truly aholistic pharmacist.”
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
Monthly Sustainers allow for 
on-going planning and delivery of healing services.
Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
In-Kind Donations of specific items
improve the lives of survivors.
Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send 
a check to 717 East River Parkway,Minneapolis, MN 55455, or call 1-877-265-8775 for other ways to give.Thank you for your ongoing commitmentto healing the wounds of torture.