INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Expanding Healing Care In Kenya 
4Alan Goldfarb: Supporter and CVT Advocate The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 27, ISSUE 4 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
NOVEMBER 2017 
Healing from Torment 
Peter* was beaten and stoned 
by his neighbors because he 
was gay. They wanted to 
kill him. 
Peter was living with his husband 
in a country in sub-Saharan Africa 
when his family learned he was gay 
and rejected him. The neighbors 
attacked Peter, calling him an 
abomination. Instead of taking 
him to a hospital, the police 
arrested him. 
Peter eventually escaped to 
Nairobi, where he found CVT ’s
LGBTI group counseling program. 
When he first came, he was feeling 
overwhelmed by his thoughts. He 
said he felt worthless, like no one 
cared whether he existed or not. 
Peter attempted suicide twice after 
fleeing to Kenya. 
Peter made great progress with 
CVT ’s help, but his life was still 
very difficult. He had no income 
and was forced to move time after 
time because his neighbors became 
hostile when they learned he was 
gay.  
At one point, police forcefully 
moved Peter and others to the 
Kakuma refugee camp in northern Kenya. Because he protested, Peter 
was detained for one month. He 
was humiliated daily by the police, 
who even forced him to sleep with 
a woman in an attempt to change 
him. 
Peter was able to return to 
Nairobi and he came back to CVT 
for individual counseling as part of CVT Nairobi ’s aftercare program 
for LGBTI clients. Today he says 
he still fears the police but has 
started taking walks in his neighbor -
hood and does breathing exercises 
when he feels overwhelmed. 
Peter says CVT made him feel 
like a person again. He realized 
not all people mean him harm. 
He said he felt 
worthless, like 
no one cared 
whether he 
existed or not. 
*Names and some details 
have been changed for 
safety and to protect 
confidentiality.
PHOTO © DREAMSTIME 
CVT’s work in Nairobi is made possible by a grant from the U.S. State 
Department’s Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration; the United Nations 
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture; the S.L. Gimbel Advised Fund at The 
Community Foundation — Inland Southern California; and Steven Walker. 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends, 
These are deeply unsettling times. The world is gripped by the worst 
refugee crisis since WWII, and it shows no signs of abating. 
More than 65 million people have been displaced, and we know from 
our own research that millions are survivors of torture and war atrocities. 
These are not numbers on a spreadsheet. They are real people—families, 
women, children, fathers and mothers, grandparents, fleeing unimaginable 
horrors, torture and terror. 
What is clear to you and me is not clear to everyone, that this refugee crisis is also a torture 
crisis. Today ’s challenges call us to do more, further strengthening our work against torture and 
rebuilding the lives of more survivors. But CVT must also be a beacon of moral leadership, hope 
and respect for human rights and human dignity. 
Now is a time for vigilance. The president has introduced discriminatory bans on immigrants 
and refugees, and dramatically cut U.S. refugee resettlement numbers. It is simply unconscionable 
that, with a refugee crisis of historic proportions, the United States is choosing instead to turn 
them away. 
We must fight back against the policies of cruelty, the policies of discrimination and the 
collapse of our moral authority. We must continue to expose the truth about torture, and to 
work for transparency, reform and accountability. We must seek justice for the millions of 
torture victims around the world, sending a clear message to those who think they can torture 
with impunity. 
And you are integral to this struggle, to fighting back. You represent the best of humanity. 
After people have survived the most extreme cruelty the human mind can devise, we are 
part of their extraordinary journey of healing, and your generosity makes a world of difference in 
their lives. By working together, we can rise to the challenge of these unsettling, very challenging 
times. Together, we can rebuild more lives, stop torture and heal its wounds. And we can be— 
we must be—that moral beacon. Together, we can care about the victims today and preserve 
humanity tomorrow. We can do no less. 
Thank you for being our partners in healing and for your generosity and compassion. 
Gratefully, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
3The horrific violence and growing 
humanitarian crisis in South 
Sudan is displacing tens of 
thousands of people who are now 
fleeing across the border to the 
Kakuma refugee camps in northwest 
Kenya. There are approximately 
180,000 refugees already in the 
camps, half of them women and 
children. Many are survivors of 
torture. 
Sadly, CVT ’s healing care in 
Dadaab and Nairobi is not enough 
to meet the rapidly growing torture 
crisis spreading through this region 
of Africa. 
The UN refugee agency estimates 
an additional 10,000 children and 
youth, many separated from their 
families and on their own, will 
have arrived at the Kakuma camp 
in 2017. They are in urgent need 
of life-saving, specialized care for 
the trauma and violence they are desperately trying to escape. At 
this moment, survivors in the 
Kakuma refugee camp have almost 
nowhere to turn for help as there 
is very little in the way of mental 
health or physiological care available. 
In advance of expanding to 
these refugee camps, CVT staff 
spoke with residents to assess 
trauma rehabilitation needs. CVT ’s
survey collected information from 
recently-arrived refugees and 
members of the host community 
in and around the Kalobeyei 
settlement of the Kakuma refugee 
camps. 
“The findings of this and 
subsequent surveys are invaluable 
for identifying areas where critical 
needs are going unmet and how 
that is making an impact on daily 
life,” said Shannon Golden, Ph.D., 
CVT research associate. “When 
the effects of trauma are neglected, attempts to improve other areas 
such as livelihood and education 
may be unsuccessful. Gathering 
rigorous data on an annual basis 
is built into our work in Kakuma 
to keep services responsive to 
needs and make adjustments as 
necessary.” 
CVT has already begun to set 
up its new healing work in the 
Kalobeyei settlement, and hiring is 
underway. In the coming months, 
members of the refugee and host 
communities in the region will 
have access to CVT ’s holistic reha -
bilitative care including counseling 
and physiotherapy, and, more 
immediately, psychological first aid. 
These men, women and children 
will now have access to the in-depth 
healing care they need to help them 
recover from their wounds and 
begin the long road to reclaiming 
their lives. 
The project is funded by a grant 
from the U.S. State Department ’s
Bureau of Population, Refugees 
and Migration. Expanding Healing Care In Kenya 
CVT staff are on the ground working hard to start providing healing care 
in the Kakuma refugee camps. Left to right: CVT staff Joseph Wesonga 
(physiotherapist/trainer), Samuel Orangi (field coordinator)  and 
Michael Kamau (psychotherapist/trainer). PHOTO © CVT 
“When the effects of 
trauma are neglected, 
attempts to improve 
other areas such as 
livelihood and education 
may be unsuccessful.” 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 17 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.18-NA5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE As an immigration lawyer, 
Alan Goldfarb has a special 
connection to the Center for 
Victims of Torture. 
He became interested in immi -
gration law through pro-bono 
asylum work with the Advocates 
for Human Rights, an organiza -
tion that helps many CVT clients 
in St. Paul, Minnesota, navigate 
the complex process of seeking 
political asylum in the United 
States. 
The majority of the survivors 
of torture at our St. Paul Healing 
Center are asylum seekers who 
have fled unspeakable abuses, 
leaving children and spouses in 
danger in order to get out alive. 
Unfortunately, they face compli -
cated legal processes and delays 
that can last years, while family members languish or perish back 
home. Being separated from their 
families and experiencing ongoing 
uncertainty about their status in 
the United States makes healing 
from the wounds of torture all 
the more difficult. 
Alan has witnessed firsthand 
the profound difference being 
granted asylum makes to a person 
who has survived terrible trauma. 
“I know that people can get 
stronger after difficult traumatic 
experiences, but it takes time. I 
have learned to appreciate the 
resilience to overcome hardship. 
I know the importance of CVT 
in helping refugees and asylum 
seekers when they need it most,” 
he reflected. “I have seen many 
clients who have struggled to 
stay in the United States become 
permanent residents and then 
citizens with families.” Those 
final moments of the asylum Alan Goldfarb: Supporter and CVT Advocate 
“CVT inspires me to do more.” 
process and 
seeing families 
reunited give 
Alan hope. These 
moments inspire 
him to continue 
standing with 
CVT to fight 
for refugees and 
asylum seekers 
on their healing 
journey. 
Taking his dedication to help 
refugees and asylum seekers a 
step further, Alan joined CVT ’s
Public Policy Committee several 
years ago. As the world ’s largest 
refugee crisis continues to grow 
every day, Alan reflects, “The 
challenges for refugees and 
asylum seekers are greater now. 
I am glad that CVT is there to 
confront torturers and help 
torture survivors. CVT inspires 
me to do more.” “I have seen many 
clients who have 
struggled to stay in 
the United States 
become permanent 
residents and then 
citizens with families.” 
— Alan Goldfarb 
Alan Goldfarb 
Make a Difference in the Life of a Survivor 
Your generous support brings healing 
to torture survivors worldwide. CVT 
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your 
legacy of support . 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors 
while offering tax benefits to donors.•In-Kind Donations of specific 
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or 
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a 
check to 2356 University Avenue W,
Suite 430, St. Paul, MN 55114, or call
612.436.4808 for other ways to give.
Thank you for your ongoing commitment 
to healing the wounds of torture.