INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Mexicali — A Mexican Border City That’s Often Forgotten 
4A Passion for Helping 
4Ways to Support Healing and Hope for Survivors The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 30, ISSUE 3 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
MAY 2020 
CVT joins millions around the world 
in remembering our common 
humanity as we all cope with the 
challenging reality of the coronavirus 
pandemic. 
We know that this time is very 
difficult for everyone. We are closely 
monitoring how this situation evolves 
and are assessing and addressing issues 
and impacts as they arise. 
The need to practice social distancing 
has required us to shift from in-person 
services to providing counseling to our 
clients remotely. We put new systems 
in place that allow us to engage with 
our clients by phone, video-conference 
and other means. We are conducting 
regular check-ins and continuing 
therapy sessions without interruption 
in as many locations as possible. 
Our first priority is—and always 
has been—the well-being of our clients 
—refugees and asylum seekers who 
have survived unimaginable torture 
and war trauma. While it’s a challenging 
time for all of us, for survivors whose 
lives are in pieces because of torture and atrocities they’ve experienced, 
what they’re feeling now can be utterly 
overwhelming. Fear and anxiety, 
hopelessness and despair, and other 
emotions they’re feeling are all so 
much worse. 
CVT is a lifeline for vulnerable 
survivors like Shira who has been 
having terrible nightmares about her 
torture. She’s new to the U.S. and had 
not made many friends before this 
crisis hit. She’s feeling scared and all 
alone in the world. Shira’s CVT 
therapist has been calling her more 
often than usual to check in, talk 
through her fears, offer coping tools 
and comfort so she doesn’t feel quite 
so isolated and cut off from everyone. 
Our therapists overseas are similarly 
making check-in calls with clients and 
conducting sessions remotely. A torture 
survivor in Jordan said her sessions 
make her feel more at peace and help 
her breathe a little easier, which is 
our hope for all of our clients in these 
difficult days. 
(see page 3) Supporting Torture Survivors 
in the Face of COVID-19 
Photo by Dreamstime 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends, 
In times of great uncertainty you think about what is most valuable 
to you. 
I’ve been thinking of you, our CVT supporters. For the empathy you offer to survivors of 
torture. For the larger CVT family we have created together—making hope and healing possible 
around the world. 
And I am thinking about the survivors of torture we work with every day. Having a crisis 
forced upon us is a feeling CVT clients know very well. And those same clients have shown how 
crises can be met with great resiliency.  
I think of Prudence—a young woman in Uganda who survived the LRA war. She said that 
coming to CVT for counseling helped her understand her own strength. She said, “Now when 
I’m going through difficulties, I know that this is part of life.” 
All our clinical teams are doing remarkable work connecting with survivors right now. In 
the midst of the COVID-19 outbreak, clients’ needs have shifted, and the care we provide is 
shifting right along with them. We anticipate that in the coming weeks, as isolation grows and 
fear increases, survivors may need more support from CVT than ever. 
It will take $2.4 million dollars over the next several months to say yes to tens of thousands 
of survivors around the world who need our care. And I’ll be honest—we may need to spend 
more than we were planning as we adapt our care because of coronavirus. 
But what I do know is that with you, and all our other supporters, we will weather this 
storm. Survivors have found healing because of compassionate friends like you before, and they 
will continue to get their lives back because of you, too. 
We will get through this together. From a safe distance, apart for as long as needed—but still 
together, united in our shared values and our mission to restore dignity, hope and wellness for 
people who have survived atrocities that are nearly unimaginable. 
Your partnership in this work is a gift we value greatly. Thank you for helping CVT and all 
the survivors we’re caring for in this moment of need. It means more than you may know. 
Gratefully, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
In January I traveled with a group 
of CVT staff to Mexicali, a city 
just across the U.S. border and 
approximately120 miles east of 
San Diego. We visited the city, 
among others, to assess the mental 
health needs of asylum seekers, 
humanitarian workers and attorneys, 
and determine how CVT may be 
of assistance. 
We chose Mexicali because it is 
one of the Mexican border cities 
where asylum seekers have been 
forced to wait while their U.S. 
Immigration cases are pending. 
This is the result of a policy created 
by the Trump administration 
referred to as the “Remain in 
Mexico” policy (officially, and 
inaccurately, known as Migrant 
Protection Protocols or MPP). 
While there are shelters in town 
where asylum seekers can stay, the 
number of people and the length of 
time each person is forced to wait 
has stretched the limits of existing 
resources. There are some trusted 
shelters, but others are known to 
be corrupt—besides things like charging people for basic articles 
necessary for personal hygiene— 
we were told that girls are taken 
from shelters at night. The reason 
is unclear. But we know that children 
and young girls are particularly 
vulnerable to violence and human 
trafficking at shelters all along the 
Mexican border. 
Every step in the asylum process 
is difficult and the barriers that 
MPP imposes on asylum seekers 
to obtain legal representation are 
impenetrable. They are retrauma -
tizing survivors and eroding the 
U.S.’s reputation for fairness and 
respect for due process. 
The horrific experience of asylum 
seekers on the U.S. southern border 
is compounded by the coronavirus 
pandemic. The overcrowded camps 
and shelters are dry tinder for the 
virus, particularly among vulnerable 
children and families who may be 
suffering from other illnesses.  
In addition to Mexicali, CVT 
has also assessed the urgent needs 
of several other Mexican border 
communities. Our goal is to design programs to assist asylum seekers 
with mental health care, psycho -
logical evaluations to support for 
their asylum claims, and training 
and support for local care 
providers. 
We are working with partners 
on both sides of the border with 
the hope that CVT can bring our 
healing services to help relieve the 
terrible human suffering on our 
border with Mexico.  
3Mexicali — A Mexican Border City 
That’s Often Forgotten 
by Andrea Cárcamo, CVT senior policy counsel 
(from page 1) 
At the same time we’re working 
to ensure our clients receive the 
healing care they so urgently need 
during this crisis, CVT is continuing 
our advocacy work for torture 
survivors. We are deeply concerned 
about the Trump administration’s efforts to close the border to asylum 
seekers—and the many thousands 
of torture survivors among them. 
This cruel action flies in the face 
of human decency and good public 
health policy, and it’s abhorrent. 
In the most fundamental ways, 
we rise and fall as a people—not just Americans, all of us—based on 
our willingness to practice the 
golden rule: treat others the way 
we would want them to treat us. 
That is the spirit with which our 
government’s decisions must be 
taken, as we face the COVID-19 
pandemic together. Supporting Torture Survivors in the Face of COVID-19 Photo by Urmy Shukla 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 19 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE A  Passion for Helping 
Kathleen Knepper is an unwavering 
supporter of CVT. She under -
stands the importance of 
compassion and generosity—values 
she tries to live by in her daily life 
and interaction with others. 
Recently, Kathleen traveled with 
CVT to visit our healing center in 
Amman, Jordan. While meeting 
with survivors, she was deeply 
moved by the story of a client from 
Iraq who had lost both his wife 
and young child. He had given up 
hope and felt that he had nothing 
to live for. But then he found CVT. 
And the services he received 
brought him renewed optimism and a sense of purpose. 
Kathleen is inspired to support 
CVT because of its unique role in 
providing lifesaving services to 
survivors like the Iraqi gentleman, 
services which heal the wounds of 
torture and other forms of trauma. 
Kathleen knows that her financial 
support helps to expand CVT’s 
services around the world. 
When asked why she decided 
to increase her support, Kathleen 
said that in the midst of a global 
pandemic, refugees, asylum seekers 
and other victims of trauma need 
help now more than ever. The 
economic downturn threatens financial support to meet their 
needs. Kathleen knows that sending 
an extra donation now will go a 
long way in helping CVT provide 
services to those who are most in 
need. She hopes that others will 
be motivated to do the same.  
Kathleen Knepper (right) and CVT’s Fawn 
Bernhardt-Norvell (left) Director of 
Development, on a recent visit to CVT Jordan. 
Ways to Support Healing and Hope for Survivors 
Charitable Contribution s—To help survivors heal and 
advocate for an end to torture worldwide, CVT relies on 
the generosity of our supporters. Your gifts restore the 
dignity of the human spirit and we thank you for also 
considering the many ways you can further support CVT. 
Circle of Hope, CVT’s Monthly Giving Progra m—
By providing a reliable, continuous source of funding, 
members of our Circle of Hope sustain all of CVT’s healing 
care and advocacy. Monthly giving is hassle-free and 
decreases administrative costs so that more of your generous 
support helps survivors directly as they rebuild their lives. 
Workplace Giving and Corporate Matching Gift s—
Designating CVT as the recipient of employer-matched 
charitable giving is an easy way to leverage your generosity. 
You may be able to arrange a simple payroll deduction 
and some companies will match your donations, doubling 
or even tripling your impact in healing survivors and 
working for an end to torture. 
Planning Your Legac y—Many donors who do not have 
the resources to make substantial gifts during their life -
times find it possible to be extraordinarily generous 
through their wills. A gift of this kind will extend your legacy of hope to future torture survivors while also offering 
potential financial benefits to you and your loved ones and 
sparing them complex probate procedures and costly taxes. 
•You can make a bequest by naming CVT in your will 
or living trust. 
•You can name CVT a beneficiary of your IRA or other 
retirement plan. 
•You can make a gift of appreciated securities—stocks, 
bonds or mutual fund shares—to CVT. 
•If you are 70½ years of age, you can make a qualified 
charitable distribution to CVT from your Individual 
Retirement Account (IRA). 
For more information on making a planned gift to 
the Center for Victims of Torture, please contact Anna 
Zaros at (612) 436-4859 or azaros@cvt.org .
Donate online at www.cvt.org , send a check to 2356 
University Avenue W, Suite 430, St. Paul, MN 55114, or 
call (612) 436-4808 for other ways to give. Thank you 
for your ongoing commitment to healing the wounds of 
torture. 
20-NC5 