INSIDE   The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
For decades, Li (not his real name),
a Southeast Asian man whoreceived care in our St. Paul
Healing Clinic, repressed the memo-ries of his torture. “He had nevertold anyone his full story and reallydidn’t think he would remembermuch of his experience,” sharedAndrea Northwood, CVT directorof client services. But his torturehaunted him continually.
Like Li, every torture survivor
has a story to tell. Left untold, itfesters and erupts in nightmares,anxiety, shame and panic attacks.But when survivors tell their storiesin a therapeutic setting, they startdown the path to healing from thedevastation of torture.
“Traumatic memories are stored
in our brains differently than everyday memories. Torture is sodisrupting and devastating that thememories often remain sensoryfragments rather than becoming astory or historical account,”explained Andrea. “What survivorsremember of their torture experiencemight be out of sequence chrono-logically. It’s often just sensory snippets such as the sound of bootson a cement floor or the smell of
blood.”  
In addition to nightmares, sur-
vivors might have a physiologicalreaction such as extreme panic tothe sound of laughter or revulsionto the smell of meat cooking on thestove. To cope, survivors like Limay purposefully try to block anymemory fragments that arise. Butthe trauma and memories of the torture are persistent and chronic. 
For many survivors, healing
involves recalling and telling, intheir own words, the truth of whathappened. Survivors in individualcounseling might take severalmonths to excavate the story fromtheir memories. “It was like findingour way through a fog,” saidAndrea, as she and Li unearthedmemories from his extended incar-ceration and torture. Together, theycategorized the memories into themessuch as family and hunger to putthe memories into a chronology ofLi’s life. 
Having a trusted therapist who
becomes a witness to the survivor’sstory is crucial. “Torture silences
See page 3Healing Through StorytellingVOLUME 22, ISSUE 4 •WWW.CVT.ORG
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 Donor Profile—Valerie Hurst: Expanding the Circle of Donors
4 Y our Y ear-End Gift Creates Hope
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human Spirit
Somali refugees in Dadaab, Kenya.
In our international projects, group
counseling gives survivors the space totalk about the unimaginable. At the endof their counseling sessions, a group ofmen from the Dadaab refugee campstood in a circle holding hands. As theyraised their hands they repeated,“Spirit is greater than force. We shallwork together in our group to overcomethis trauma and we shall prevail. ”     
PHOTO © SADıK GÜLEÇ / iSTOCKPHOTO
THEstory cloth
NOVEMBER 20122Letter from the Executive Director
As my tenure at CVT grows (six months as you read this), so too
has my understanding of CVT’s rising impact in the world. Recently, I visited two of our international healing initiatives and represented CVT at a meeting of global leaders working to implement innovativesolutions to the world’s most pressing challenges. Each trip impressed upon me that not only is our work urgently needed, but it is increasingly recognized and respected.
In September, I visited with CVT staff in Dadaab, Kenya, and in Jordan. The Dadaab
refugee camp (actually a four-camp complex) was built 20 years ago to hold 90,000 people.Today 500,000 refugees languish under extraordinarily difficult conditions. Our staff, expatriate and locally-hired and trained refugees, are doing incredibly important work under circumstances that couldn’t be more challenging.
I was equally impressed with our work in Jordan, where my visit coincided with the 
outbreak of anti-American demonstrations in the Middle East. Although Jordan experiencedsmaller-scale demonstrations, what I found during my visit is a highly committed and motivated staff providing essential and deeply appreciated services to the large community of torture survivors that have fled to Jordan. 
Finally, I was pleased to represent CVT at the 2012 Clinton Global Initiative (CGI),
where I made our Commitment to Action over the next three years to expand our mentalhealth and physical therapy services in Jordan to reach traumatized Syrian refugees. CGI’sinvitation to CVT will help raise the profile of our work in Jordan and open up new possibilities to further increase the impact of our work there.
I am deeply grateful for your support. This year, CVT and other torture rehabilitation
centers experienced significant cuts in funding from the UN Voluntary Fund for Victims ofTorture (the result of dwindling contributions to the fund by the world’s nations). With yoursupport, we did not reduce care to survivors. As we approach the end of 2012, know thatyour contributions to CVT are urgently needed and will help us close that gap in funding so we can continue to provide the best quality care to torture survivors, and maintain ourinfluence in the world to end torture.
Thank you,
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
CVT Jordan staff member and information
technology officer Ibrahim (left) and psychosocial counselor Samer (center), withCurt Goering outside the office in Amman.
PHOTO © CVT3From page 1Healing Through Storytelling
people because the experience is so 
traumatic,” said Andrea. “By tellingtheir stories to someone they trustsurvivors reclaim their voices anddignity. They must integrate thesensory fragments, emotions andfacts into memories. As they do that, survivors can move from 
a place of shame,humiliation and fear to one ofstrength and hope.”Survivors in bothour Minnesota and internationalhealing programs go through aprocess of tellingtheir stories. As partof the process, they
must put the storiesinto context. Theyreflect on what theirlives were like before
the torture, including their relation-ships and hobbies. Counselors canguide survivors through the storytelling process by asking questions:What did you do when the soldierstook your husband? How did youfeel after the beating? These questionshelp survivors incorporate thechronology of events with their
emotions and senses to create anarrative of their experience. By
remembering their pasts and even-tually thinking about their futures,survivors recognize that torture isjust one part of their lives.
Psychotherapist and trainer
Adam Horner recently finished tenweeks of group counseling withmen in the Dadaab refugee camp in Kenya. “Group clients need to be very gently led to talk about thatwhich is most terrifying for them,”he explained. “A skilled groupfacilitator listens intently and isalso observant and mindful of eachgroup member’s body language. Asimple prolonged vacant staring tothe ceiling or disconnected sidewayslook can mean a dissociativemoment, a flashback to a horrifyingmemory or an intrusive thought.”
Group counseling gives survivors
“the space to talk about theunimaginable, the horror of horrors,safely in a room full of other menthey hardly know. It’s not an easytask, but definitely doable. Ourmost recent men’s group ‘Kilmyu’[meaning togetherness] is a testamentto this group of men from differentcountries and religions comingtogether to work towards a commongoal of recovery,” continued Adam.At the end of each session, the menstood in a circle holding hands. Asthey raised their hands they repeated,
“Spirit is greater than force. Weshall work together in our group toovercome this trauma and we shallprevail.” As the men heard eachother’s stories, the isolation theyfelt diminished. 
It took Li and Andrea several
months to piece together Li’s memories. But eventually he had a written transcript of his story. For now, it’s locked in a safe place.Someday he plans to give it to hisfamily, proving that torture isn’tthe end of a story, but rather just a chapter in his life.
Andrea Northwood, 
Director of ClientServices
For some clients at our St. Paul Healing Center, narrative 
exposure therapy is a useful method for telling the untold story of their torture, including their physical and emotional sensations. Survivors reconstruct their lives bit by bit to desensitize themselves to the memories of their torture. In some cases, clients use rocks and flowers to mark good times and bad times on a timeline as they develop their autobiography.
PHOTO © PAVEL TIMOFEYEV / iSTOCKPHOTO
What survivors remember
of their torture experiencemight be out of sequencechronologically. It’s oftenjust sensory snippets suchas the sound of boots on a cement floor or the smell of blood.
—Andrea NorthwoodAmerica and
some friendswho are alsorecent graduates. “My friends don’thave much to contribute, but it’s away for them to learn about theorganization.” 
Valerie is committed to staying
involved with CVT. She is planninga benefit concert for the ExpandingCircles group and thinks aboutbecoming a befriender to a clientsomeday. “The work CVT doesmakes a huge difference in people’slives,” she said.
................................................................Valerie Hurst first donated toCVT when she was an under-graduate student studying
anthropology at the University ofMinnesota. She heard about CVTthrough her involvement withAmnesty International and waseager to get involved.
She soon began volunteering,
first by interning with the interna-tional capacity building work andthen identifying academic articlesfor use by the research department.Valerie is now serving as the co-
chair for Expanding Circles, agroup of young professionals whoare combining their support forCVT with social and special events. 
Most recently, Valerie served as
a table captain at the annualRestoring Hope breakfast. “I’vewanted to go, but always had classor work,” she said. Valerie’s guestsat the breakfast included one of herprofessors, a few co-workers fromthe Evangelical Lutheran Church in
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2012 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.12-ND5The final months of the year are a
time when many of our supporterschoose to make tax-deductible
gifts to underwrite our work. Thesegifts help us extend care to torturesurvivors, assess opportunities toopen new international sites, andadvocate for funding and for anend to torture. Gifts received in2012 also enable us to plan andallocate our resources for 2013more effectively. 
If you haven’t had a chance to
send a gift to CVT this year, pleasetake a moment to do so in the weeksahead. Or if you’ve already made a gift and you can make anothertax-deductible contribution, we willbe deeply grateful. Your annualsupport inspires us at CVT—but to survivors your gift is truly a message of hope—and makes apowerful statement about the compassion of our community. 
This year we are again offering
our donors an opportunity to giveGifts of Hope as holiday gifts. 
Your friends and family are sure toappreciate knowing that a person’slife is being restored in their honor.When you give a Gift of Hope , we
will be pleased to send you specialcards that you can use to announceyour gift.
Thank you for your continuing
generosity and commitment to torture survivors throughout theworld. Please feel free to make a tax-deductible gift by check, creditcard, or by donating online atwww.cvt.org. If you’d like to discuss a gift of stock or a bequestgift, please contact Rachel at 1-877-265-8775 (toll-free) or atrhughes@cvt.org.
Y our Y ear-End Gift Creates Hope
PHOTO © C.C. STROM
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Valerie Hurst: 
Expanding the Circle of Donors
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
..................................