In 2005 the Center for Victims of
Torture launched an ambitiousproject to bring healing to recent
African refugees and immigrantsnow living in the Minneapolis suburbs of Brooklyn Park andBrooklyn Center. Many of thesenewcomers endured torture or wartrauma and local organizationswere not experienced in workingwith survivors. 
Recognizing this need, CVT
developed the New Neighbors/Hidden Scars project by bringingtogether a network of schools, clinics, churches and social serviceorganizations to help these new residents heal from their physicaland emotional wounds. Meetingmonthly, the network planned waysto help the newcomers receive theirbasic needs and rebuild their lives.
Initial activities included training
sessions for the network membersand other professionals, as well asfor leaders of the refugee and immigrant community. As network participants learned about theeffects of war trauma and how topromote healing, they were better
able to help these newcomers.
CREATING SYSTEM CHANGE
Under CVT leadership the New
Neighbors/Hidden Scars networkdeveloped new and sustainable programs and promoted referralrelationships. Network membersprovided legal and health insuranceinformation in apartment buildingswhere refugees live and createdgroups for seniors and youth forsupport and socializing. A localpolice department strengthened itsrelationship with the communitythrough orientation classes for newcomers and supporting Liberiangirls in a kickball league.
To help younger survivors of
war trauma heal, CVT staff workedwith schools and a family socialservice agency to develop supportgroups. As a result, students learnedto identify and manage their emotions, recognize their personalstrengths and develop leadershipskills. Over 40 students participatedin the groups and found the experi-
ence helped them adjust to theirschools and new community. 
“It was helpful to talk about
what happened to us,” said one student. Another student said, “Ilearned how to control my anger.” 
See page 3Winter 2009, Volume 19, Issue 1    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Message from the Executive Director
4Boston Scientific: Committed to Healing
4Renewals Create Healing and Hope Building Service Networks 
for Healing and Basic Needs
Our mission: To heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.CVT social 
worker AliceTindi spoke atthe launch of the African FoodDistributionCenter.
Members of the New Neighbors/Hidden
Scars network created the African FoodDistribution Center to provide traditionalfoods to recent refugees.
PHOTOS BY C.C. STROM2Letter from the Executive Director
It’s only when we imagine for ourselves what it would be like to 
run from state terror, torture, rape, the destruction of our homes and families that we can understand how vital it would be to find a place that welcomed us and tried to heal our wounds. 
— Emma Thompson, actress
Here at CVT, we continue to build such a place—helping torture survivors heal from their deep
wounds and reclaim their lives. Thank you for being part of this healing community. Your moraland financial support makes this good work possible.
As we begin a new year, in the most challenging economic climate since the Great Depression, 
I am saddened to report that several of our partner centers have had to close their doors to the people who need them most. Here in the U.S., our colleagues in Lincoln, Nebraska, and Tucson,Arizona, couldn’t raise the funds they needed in order to stay in business. In Greece, one of the oldest and most well-established centers in the world succumbed to the same fate. These are devastating losses for the thousands of torture survivors who’ll no longer have access to care.
We expect 2009 to be a challenging year for CVT, too. But we have budgeted conservatively 
and are aggressively controlling costs. And we’ve worked hard to diversify our funding base. If we can retain the support of our generous individual donors, we’ll be able to sustain our programsof care, capacity-building and advocacy during these difficult financial times.  
In fact, this year we’re expanding our programs of care and capacity-building. The Rift Valley
Healing Initiative, a three-year project that began on January 1, will strengthen our ability to carefor torture survivors in the Democratic Republic of Congo by enabling us to work in an additionalcommunity. The project will also enhance clinical capacity at four partner sites in Central andEastern Africa, helping them build stronger programs of care.
In Jordan, where we’ve opened a healing center to care for Iraqi torture survivors, we have been
hiring staff, conducting training, identifying partners for referrals for non-mental health services,and conducting community assessments in and around Amman where the majority of Iraqi refugeeslive. We began extending care to clients in December.
While 2009 will bring fresh and extended challenges at CVT, we enter this new year with 
cautious optimism as we draw hope, courage and inspiration from the support of friends like you.Thank you again for all you do, and for being part of the healing community that helps torture survivors rebuild their lives.
Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
From page 1
Through the groups these 
students learned to develop trust in each other and communicatetheir feelings.
Because religious communities
play a significant role in the lives of many Africans a weekly supportand education group of Africanimmigrants and refugees was established through a local church.Initially led by a CVT social worker,the group is now coordinated by avolunteer health professional, localAfrican leaders and the church.Each session includes a meal, information about living in a newcountry, the effects of war trauma,grief and healing, as well as spiritualsustenance for group members. 
“There’s nothing that can stop
me from going,” said local LiberianCecil W. Bropleh, who co-leads thegroup and drives participants to themeetings. Bropleh is committed tohelping people heal from theirexperiences. Group participants“have confidence in one anotherand can share their problems” in a safe and confidential setting,Bropleh said. He witnesses individ-uals in the group begin healingfrom their torture experiences,rebuilding their careers, lives and
relationships.
For those experiencing culture
shock or the ongoing effects of torture, traditional foods can becomforting. But finding culturally-appropriate foods in a new countryis difficult for refugees and immi-grants. With CVT support, localAfrican community leaders createdthe African Food Distribution Center(AFDC) to provide traditionalfoods at no cost. The AFDC nowdistributes familiar African foodssuch as fufu flour and Titus sardinesto 150 families each month. Ateach distribution refugees whomight have suffered war trauma ortorture can also connect with healthprograms and social services.
REPLICATING SUCCESS
Having transitioned the New
Neighbors network to communityleadership CVT continues buildingon this successful project by raisingawareness of the effects of tortureand working to improve services torecent refugees living in the St. Paularea. While many African andHmong survivors of torture haveresettled in St. Paul, it is also 
home to newly arrivingrefugees from Myanmar(Burma) and Bhutan,whose languages, cultures and foodsare unfamiliar to manyservice providers. 
Through community outreach,
public education, and training,CVT will bring healing to refugeesliving in St. Paul who survived torture and war trauma. CVTpsychologist Patricia Shannon andsocial workers Evelyn Lennon andAlice Tindi who led the NewNeighbors/Hidden Scars project are now assessing needs, developingrelationships and planning ways toexpand the capabilities of localproviders. With a new network tohelp torture and war trauma survivors access health care, foodand other basic needs, CVT willcontinue the work of healing thewounds of torture and helping survivors rebuild their lives. 
3
PHOTO BY C.C. STROM
Building Service Networks
A public service announcement on local
cable reassured torture survivors they are not alone and healing is possible. The announcement was part of a public education campaign for the New Neighbors/Hidden Scars project. CVT is now replicating the successful project in St. Paul.
Rev. Samuel Emmanuel Vansiea spoke on how faith promoteshealing from torture during a workshop for religious and community leaders. CVT’s New Neighbors/Hidden Scars project brought together religious leaders, educators, medicalprofessionals and service providers to help heal the wounds of torture.
PHOTO BY ELLEN HINCHCLIFFECVT thanks the Boston Scientific
Foundation for its generous $10,000
grant to help provide healing services to survivors of torture in Minneapolis and St. Paul. 
“We are proud and humbled to
offer our support to CVT to helpsome of the most vulnerable members of our community,” said Robert Strand, an EmployeeCommunity Team Member withthe Boston Scientific Foundation.“A fundamental component of theBoston Scientific Foundation mission is to improve health and
welfare of disadvantaged persons,and CVT’s holistic approach tohealing the victims of torture supports this.”
Boston Scientific joins the 
following corporations in makingsignificant contributions to CVTduring 2008: Ameriprise Financial,
DLA Piper, Little & Company,Medica, Medtronic, Salesforce.com,and UCare Minnesota.Boston Scientific Foundation: 
Committed to Healing the Wounds of Torture
Restoring the dignity of the human spirit
717 EAST RIVER PARKWAY    www .cvt.org     
MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55455 cvt@cvt.orgToll Free 1-877-265-8775    © 2009 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
9-NA5At the beginning of each year, we
ask CVT members to renewtheir annual support for our
healing programs and advocacyefforts. Renewal gifts received earlyin the year have the greatest possi-ble impact because we can leveragethem throughout the year. Yourrenewed support helps underwriteCVT’s day-to-day operations ensur-ing that torture survivors have avoice in our society and a place togo to for help. 
The downturn in the economy 
is impacting all of us—individualsand organizations alike. Yet weheard from so many of you at theend of the last year because yourecognize the importance of indi-vidual giving for CVT. We aredeeply grateful for your supportand generosity. Annual renewal gifts are a mes-
sage of encouragement to CVT staffand volunteers. And for the torturesurvivors we serve, these gifts aretruly a message of hope. Yourrenewal gift does not have to belarge, but when it is pooled withgifts from other individuals it has a tremendous impact on CVT. 
CVT clients were told by their
torturers that they were alone, thatno one cared about them. But morethan twenty years of CVT’s ser-vices, made possible by financialcontributions from you, are an eloquent witness to compassion andour inspiring healing community.When you receive your renewalrequest, please respond. If you wish to renew with a secure onlinecontribution, visit www.cvt.org and click on “ donate .”
Annual Renewal Gifts Create Healing and Hope
Robert Strand (left) of Boston Scientific
with Lori Stone and Pete Dross of CVT
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
Monthly Sustainers allow for 
on-going planning and delivery of healing services.
Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
In-Kind Donations of specific items
improve the lives of survivors.
Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send 
a check to 717 East River Parkway,Minneapolis, MN 55455, or call 1-877-265-8775 for other ways to give.Thank you for your ongoing commitmentto healing the wounds of torture.
PHOTO BY C.C. STROM