INSIDE   The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
In July, I spent about a week at 
our Dadaab project to providesupervision and oversight on the
clinical work. The Dadaab refugeecamp was created at the start of the Somali civil war in 1991 and ishome to 365,000 refugees. Many ofthe men, women and children wholive in the camp have experiencedtargeted violence and random atrocities of war.
Our Dadaab headquarters is part
of the Dadaab Main Office (DMO),outside of the camp itself. TheDMO is a secure compound for the nongovernmental organizationsworking in the camps. We inheritedfacilities from a French disasterrelief organization, and our staff
live in buildings or tents close to thekitchen. 
The day starts early with breakfast
at 7:00 in the DMO. Then promptlyat 7:30, the daily convoy to thecamp leaves from the DMO. It isorganized by the office of theUnited Nations High Commissionerfor Refugees and travels with apolice car at the front and the back.One Tuesday morning, I traveledwith Mike and Judy, our psycho-therapist trainers, and a few localcounselors. It’s about a 20-minutedrive from the DMO to the campitself. Our offices are right insidethe camp borders, in the most
A Morning in Dadaab
By Paul Orieny, Ph.D., LMFT, CVT Clinical AdvisorVOLUME 24, ISSUE 4 •WWW.CVT.ORG
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 Jim Letts Sees the Best of Humanity  
4 Support CVT with T ribute Gifts
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human Spirit
THEstory cloth
OCTOBER 2014
CVT travels in a convoy
organized by the United Nations HighCommissioner forRefugees.
PHOTO © JOSEPH KURIAserene area you can
find in the Dadaabcamps. We water ourtrees and plants sothey have grown well and provideshade and comfort in the desert. You can imagine thatmany of our clients just come in to rest.
When we arrived at the camp,
the refugee counselors were waitingfor us, and we had a check-in tolearn about anything that mighthave happened overnight and thenprepare for the counseling groups. 
Because there are so many people
who need help, we run ten-weekcounseling groups and provide individual counseling only to thosewho are severely traumatized. Theten-week cycles are divided into 
See page 3
Paul Orieny2Letter from the Executive Director
At CVT, we work tirelessly to heal the devastating wounds of torture 
on individuals, their families and their communities.
Our healing projects rebuild the lives of men, women and children in
Kenya, Jordan, Ethiopia and the United States. Yet healing communities and societies can be even more complicated and requires the active cooperation of various segments of society, such as the justice system, media professionals and political actors.
Together, these systems must work to end impunity and hold perpetrators accountable for
their actions.
Impunity denies justice to victims of human rights violations, leaving them abandoned and
vulnerable to future abuse. Accountability — including criminal prosecutions at a national, regionalor international level — is essential.
While not frequent enough, we do see some successes.Established in 2002, the International Criminal Court created the first permanent, treaty-based
system to hold accountable perpetrators of serious international crimes. Other international courts,such as the Special Court for Sierra Leone, have produced successes including the prosecution andsentencing of former Liberian President Charles Taylor, prosecutions for crimes involving use ofchild soldiers, forced marriage and attacks directed at UN peacekeepers.
Most recently, a joint effort of the Cambodian government and the United Nations convicted
and sentenced to life imprisonment two leaders of the Khmer Rouge for their roles in that nation’sgenocide during the 1970s. The convictions fall far short of addressing the massive atrocities committed by the Khmer Rouge. But since the tribunal has only investigated and prosecuted three cases in the more than ten years in which it has been in operation, it is a step in the right direction.
Whenever egregious human rights violations are committed, including the U.S. government’s
past use of torture, there is often a desire to avoid a full and comprehensive investigation andinstead look toward the future. Yet, in doing so, we allow the culture of impunity to persist andforfeit an opportunity to prevent future abuses.
On behalf of countless torture survivors around the world, we will continue to press forward
in fighting impunity in our efforts to bring justice, hope and healing to societies ravaged by torture.
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
3A Morning in Dadaab
Tukuls, with a 
traditional makuti roof, provide a cleanand private spacefor counselinggroups. 
PHOTOS © PABLO TRASPAS
From page 1
three major sections. First is safetyand stabilization. You have toaddress safety concerns before youcan move on. During these first fewsessions, we build trust among thegroup members and stabilize theirreactions to trauma. The middlesessions are devoted to remembranceand mourning. In these sessions, wehelp survivors process their traumas.And then at the end, we empowerthe survivors to reconnect withthemselves and their communities. 
On the day I visited, two women
counselors were running the groups,starting with a group of youngSomali women. They were in their20s, but their faces didn’t look thatyoung. You can read a lot of whathas happened in people’s lives ontheir faces — the sadness in theireyes, the tightness in their facialmuscles. But when I introducedmyself to the women and asked if I could join the group, they welcomed me.
The counseling groups meet in
huts called tukuls. Inside, they are
very neat. We prevent the dust fromcoming in so they are very cleanand a nice shelter from the heat andwind. The women sit on mats onthe ground, but we’ve also providedpillows they can lean on for extraWhen she finished, there were wordsof support and more sharing. Thegroup continued with other womentelling their stories of torture, lossand grief. 
After about an hour and a half,
the group ended and we had asnack and the women becamesocial. We stayed with them, let allthe heaviness slow down, and hadsome chitchat before the womenreturned home. 
It was nearly lunchtime, so
Michael, Judy and I headed back to the DMO with the convoy. Most client activities happen in the morning, so Mike and Judy spendthe afternoon at the DMO doingadministrative work. The refugeecounselors, who are now fullytrained and skilled, return in theafternoon to run another group orsupport other survivors who showup for help. And with so manymen, women and children living inthe camp, there are many survivorswho need our help. But little by little,we see survivors learning how tolive healthier, more peaceful lives.
CVT’s activities in Dadaab are financed by
the United States Department of State’sBureau of Population, Refugees andMigration and the United Nations VoluntaryFund for Victims of Torture. Additionalfunding is provided by the United MethodistWomen. Staff residences and office facilitiesat CVT’s Dadaab healing center were constructed, in part, through a generousgift from Al and Diane Kaneb.comfort if they don’t feel well or
are worried.
On this day, we invited the
women to talk about their storiesof remembrance and mourning tohelp them process their experiences.One of the young Somali momsopened up about her trauma. Likemost refugees, she likely experiencedtargeted violence or random atrocitiesof war. But today she wanted totalk about what was currently happening in her life. In the camp,she married a Christian man fromanother African country. Thewoman’s family, who is Muslimand still in Somalia, has cut her off,and she really misses them. In thecamp, she’s also been isolatedbecause of the marriage. Eventhough she has escaped the violencein her homeland, she is dealingwith ongoing trauma because she’sbeen separated from her community.
As she talked, the counselors
and group members respondedwith facial expressions, noddingand non-verbal utterances. It’s acall-and-response that we see in allof our groups because we teach survivors how to support eachother without giving advice. Thecounselors and group membersreceived everything the woman said,and she felt completely supported.of the biggest 
unmet needs of these patients,” said Jim. “I worked with anamazing team from Roselawn and CVT to design and implementthe project.”
Jim’s work and connection to
CVT have given him a unique viewof the world. “In torture, I see theworst that humanity has to offer,”said Jim. “In CVT and in theresilience of survivors of tortureand war trauma, I see the best ofhumanity.”
.....................................................................................................Jim Letts, MD, first encounteredCVT as a college student. Later,as a medical student at the
University of Minnesota, he did aclinical rotation at CVT. What hewitnessed made a lasting impact.“Literally every interaction betweenCVT staff and clients was done withthis genuine kindness and gentleness,”Jim said. “It really made a lastingimpression on me.” 
Jim’s parents, Neil and Connie
Letts, influenced his work in familymedicine and equitable health care.“My parents are long-time CVTvolunteers and financial supporters,”Jim explained. “Growing up, theirwords and actions taught me that it is my responsibility to use my
strengths to help people whose circumstances have been less fortunate.”
This lesson led Jim, a family
physician and medical director atHealthEast Roselawn clinic in St. Paul, to play an active role indeveloping CVT’s Healing Heartsproject. Through the project,Roselawn and CVT are working to address the mental health needsof traumatized refugees. 
“At Roselawn, we serve more
than 2,500 patients who are refugeesfrom Burma. We recognized thataccessible, culturally competentmental health services were one 
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2014 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.14-ND5Tribute gifts are one of the many
unique ways you can support thework of the Center for Victims of
Torture. By making a contributionin honor of a loved one’s birthday,a friend’s wedding or any numberof special occasions and milestones,you are supporting the healing ofsurvivors around the world whilealso introducing others to our work.
In place of a gift, you may want
to encourage the guests at yournext event or celebration to make a personal contribution to CVT.Supporters may also designate CVTas the beneficiary of gifts made inmemory of a loved one who haspassed away. An in memoriam tribute is a thoughtful way to honorthe departed and is a meaningfulexpression of condolence to their
family members. 
For each recipient of a tribute
gift, we’ll send a special acknowl-edgement to the honoree or theirfamily, including a personalizedmessage from the generous donor.You will also receive recognitionfor your contribution in support ofhealing survivors and working foran end to torture. Whatever theoccasion, you can be confident that your generosity will make adifference in the lives of peoplewho’ve suffered in ways that arescarcely imaginable. 
For more information about
making a tribute gift to CVT, pleasevisit www.cvt.org or contact Steveat 612-436-4820 or shall@cvt.org.
Support CVT with T ribute Gifts Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Jim Letts Sees the Best of Humanity
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
PHOTO PROVIDED BY JIM LETTS