Summer 2010, Volume 20, Issue 3    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Letter from the Executive Director
4June 26 Policy Discussion
4Matching Gift OfferOur mission: To heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.On this day, supporters and staff
around the world joined together tohonor United Nations InternationalDay in Support of Victims of Tortureby speaking out against torture. Theday marks the anniversary of theenactment of the UN Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatmentor Punishment . 
In spirited and heartfelt events we
honored the resilience of survivorsworldwide and expressed our hopefor a world without torture.
Jordan
In Amman, Jordan, CVT clients
and staff planted flowers in individ-ual pots. For survivors who live indespair and fear, the blossoms are areminder of the hope and healingthat comes as they rebuild their lives.
In the Irbid, Jordan office, CVT
clients created a mural reflectinghow torture survivors are silenced
and isolated by their experiences.The project offered a place wheresurvivors’ voices are made visibleand barriers are broken. 
A poster competition was held
throughout June as a public educa-tion campaign about torture, itseffects and CVT’s healing serv ices.
Community members submitteddesigns representing how survivorscan heal from the devastatingwounds of torture. An exhibition ofall entries is scheduled for September.
The Democratic Republic 
of Congo
In the provincial capital of
Lubumbashi, CVT commemoratedJune 26th with partner organizations.Congolese counselor Regine MasengoKidjamba participated in a paneldiscussion for an audience of com-munity members, law enforcementofficers and social service and
health care providers.
In Pweto and Moba, motorized
caravans, speeches by local officialsand short skits by local youthbrought attention to the devastationLocal counselor Inshirah Musa displayed
the flower she planted to symbolize howtorture survivors rebuild their lives inAmman, Jordan.
PHOTO © REEM KLOUB
See page 3CVT Honors Survivors Around the World on June 26
“This is a day where we are reminded that our experience
is not forgotten and that there are important peoplefighting to make sure it never happens again,” said 
one CVT client about the significance of June 26th.2Letter from the Executive Director
When President Obama signed an executive order banning torture and 
cruel treatment last year, it marked a turning point in U.S. counterterrorismpolicies. 
As the first organization to call for the executive order, CVT celebrated 
this turn away from torture. At the same time, we knew there was an urgent need for more permanent restrictions against torture. A recent report by Physicians for Human Rights reinforces that need.
According to the report, doctors working for the CIA may have violated legal and ethical standards
for human subject research by directly monitoring the torture of detainees at the Guantanamo Baydetention center, and by producing medical data to refine interrogations. Records also show thatmedical personnel made suggestions for preventing the death of detainees. For example, they suggestedplacing a tracheotomy kit in each interrogation room so surgery could be done immediately if awaterboarding victim began choking. 
Most disturbing, the evidence suggests that, by establishing medical standards for “enhanced
interrogation techniques” the experiments could help to legally redefine them as something otherthan torture and cruel treatment.
The professionals on our staff use their expertise to heal the wounds of torture and rebuild lives.
We are appalled that medical professionals may have used their expertise to set a scientific and legalfoundation for torture.
CVT joined Physicians for Human Rights and other groups in a complaint filed with the Office 
of Human Research Protections (OHRP) requesting a full investigation of medical professionals’involvement in CIA interrogations. Unfortunately, OHRP declined to investigate, explaining that it did not have jurisdiction over the CIA. CVT is consulting with Physicians for Human Rights onother options. And we remain committed to our call for an independent, non-partisan commission toexamine and report on all forms of torture and cruel treatment of prisoners since September 11, 2001.
Read the full report at www.PHRTorturePapers.org. Then sign up at www.cvt.org for e-mail
alerts to receive updates on this and other issues. 
Thank you for being part of this movement to stop torture.
Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
Guests at the June 26th
commemoration inMinneapolis signed thePhysicians for HumanRights petition and created a collage of hopes for a world without torture.
STEPHANIE HYNES  WWW.STEPHANIEHYNES.COMcaused by torture. Authorities,
including police and military commandants, denounced torturein the strongest possible words.One police commandant declared,“If there is any police officer whotortures citizens, you come and tellme. Torture is not allowed here.” 
In Pweto, women played a soccer
game to protest the pervasivenessof sexual assault and demonstratethe resiliency of survivors. 
Sierra Leone
In Freetown, Sierra Leone, CVT
joined with several internationalnongovernmental organizations toorganize a two-day commemorationcalled “Hope for a Future WithoutTorture.” Activities were held inAberdeen and Calaba Town. TheSierra Leonean Police Force led amarch, followed by remarks bylocal officials and music by children’schoirs.
The national radio station held
a panel discussion on the issues oftorture. Academicians, politiciansand human rights activists spokeabout the prospects of a futurewithout torture. 
A particularly poignant part of
the day included the opportunityfor survivors to give testimony
3From page 1
 about their experiences. For some
men and women, this validation oftheir experiences serves an importantrole in their healing process. 
Washington, D.C.
In Washington, D.C., Elisa
Massimino, president and CEO ofHuman Rights First, received theEclipse Award for her efforts to end the use of torture and cruelty inU.S. interrogation policy. Featuredspeakers included Assistant Secretaryof State Michael Posner, Senator Al Franken and Congressmen Keith Ellison and James McGovern.Massimino expressed her gratitudeto the concerned military officialsshe worked with, calling them “lions”in the fight to change the policy. 
Minnesota
CVT clients, staff and supporters
gathered on the lawn of theMinneapolis Healing Center tocommemorate the day. Workingtogether, guests created a collage of written hopes for a peacefulfuture. During the formal program,a client shared how her life wastransformed from despair to meaning, and Unity Unitarian wasrecognized for the eight years ofimmeasurable support and servicesthe congregation provided to CVT.
Sierra Leonean counselor Thomas Bindi
marched to demonstrate against torturein Aberdeen.PHOTO © CVTCVT Honors Survivors 
Around the World on June 26
Assistant Secretary of State
Michael Posner with ElisaMassimino, president and CEO of Human Rights First inWashington, D.C. Massiminowas the Eclipse Award honoreefor her work in changing U.S. interrogation policy.
PHOTO © JAY PREMACK / WWW.JAYPREMACK.COMPolice Commandant Mambo joined
CVT and other officials in Moba, DRCto condemn torture.
PHOTO © MAKI KATOH
“If there is any police
officer who torturescitizens, you come andtell me. Torture is notallowed here,” saidCongolese PoliceCommandant Mambo on June 26th.The morning of June 26th, before
the public commemoration of UNInternational Day in Support of
Victims of Torture, elected officialsand board members joined ExecutiveDirector Douglas A. Johnson for abriefing on CVT’s policy priorities. 
Among others, Minneapolis Mayor
R.T. Rybak, State Representative PaulThissen and an aide to CongressmanKeith Ellison sat with Johnson at theMinneapolis Healing Center. 
“Our work with clients is our
moral base, but we expand on that,”Johnson told them. “We believe thatthe power of our clients’ experiencescan change policy.”
Policy makers were taken with
Johnson’s description of CVT’sInternational Services programs. In Africa and the Middle East, CVT
trains refugees and national staff tobe highly skilled paraprofessionalpsychosocial counselors. 
Johnson explained how this model
might be used to help refugees resettlein the U.S. Experienced clinicianscould train refugees to be peer coun-selors in the camps. As refugees resettlein the U.S., these counselors couldtravel with them, serving as interpretersand bicultural workers.
Refugees frequently experience
horrific traumas during war. Addressingthe mental health needs of refugeeswill help them resettle successfullyand regain economic independence. 
Mayor Rybak spoke enthusiasti-
cally about the connection betweenCVT’s work in refugee camps andJune 26 Policy Discussion: Connecting
International Work to Local Refugees
Restoring the dignity of the human spirit
717 EAST RIVER PARKWAY    www .cvt.org     
MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55455 cvt@cvt.orgToll Free 1-877-265-8775    © 2010 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
10-NC5Many CVT supporters step forward
each summer to help the Centerfor Victims of Torture in a very
special way—by participating in our$25,000 Matching Gift campaignwhereby contributions are matcheddollar-for-dollar by a longtime friendand former CVT board member. 
If you are able to make a gift
before August 31st, our former boardmember will match your gift and theimpact of your contribution will be doubled! CVT will have twice theresources to serve our clients thissummer.
This Matching Gift Offer couldn’t
come at a better time for CVT.  Thefact is, our support from individualsand foundations generally declines
during the summer months—and thiscampaign gives us $50,000 in urgentfunding that will help our healingcenters and training programs in Julyand August. Your contribution willhelp torture survivors here in theUnited States, Africa, and the MiddleEast who are working hard to rebuildtheir lives.
Please give as generously as you
can before August 31st, and knowthat your gift will be matched, dollar-for-dollar, by CVT’s special$25,000 Matching Gift Offer. Formore information, please contactAshley Gotreau at 1-877-265-8775or by e-mail at cvt@cvt.org.
Our Matching Gift Offer Will
Double Your Contribution to CVT 
Former Minneapolis mayor and U.S.
representative Don Fraser, CVTExecutive Director Doug Johnson, congressional aide Allison Harris andMinneapolis mayor R.T. Rybak discussed how CVT’s international programs can influence local policies.
PHOTO © HOLLY ZIEMER
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
In-Kind Donations of specific items
improve the lives of survivors.
Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send 
a check to 717 East River Parkway,Minneapolis, MN 55455, or call 1-877-265-8775 for other ways to give.Thank you for your ongoing commitmentto healing the wounds of torture.refugee communities in the U.S., 
such as the Somali community inMinnesota. A trauma treatment corps modeled on CVT’s work wouldgive refugees a positive opportunityto serve their communities whereverthey live. 