Ending the Drug War, 
Shaping the FutureDrug Policy Alliance
2019 Annual ReportContents
Letter from the Board Chair and Executive Director
Ending the Criminalization of Drug Possession for Personal UseCountering the Drug War’s Harms Beyond the Criminal Legal SystemChallenging Harsh SentencingResponding to the Devastating Overdose CrisisInterview: Hansel Tookes M.D., M.P.H., Harm ReductionistSafety First: A Reality-Based Approach to Teens and DrugsInterview: Joseph Rubin, Health TeacherEnding Marijuana Prohibition and Advancing LegalizationQueen Adesuyi: Building a Coalition for MOREOpposing the Global Drug War, Championing Reform AbroadDPA Hosts the World’s Largest Convening of Drug Policy ReformersAdvocacy GrantsAdvocacy Grants Spotlight: Interfaith Movement for Human Integrity Major ContributorsBoard of DirectorsDrug Policy Alliance FinancialsDrug Policy Action Financials489
10
11
13
14
15
16
20
22
24
25
2628
29
30
32
The work described herein includes that of the Drug Policy Alliance, a 501 (c)(3) organization, and 
Drug Policy Action, a 501 (c)(4) organization. References to “DPA” refer to the work of both organizations.
We are the Drug Policy Alliance
1The Drug Policy Alliance is the leading 
organization in the United States working to end the war on drugs, repair its harms, and build a better approach. We envision a just society in which the use and regulation of drugs are grounded in science, compassion, health, and human rights. We fight every day and at every policy level – local, state, federal, and international – to change laws, advance justice, and save lives.2Our Priorities
• Eliminating criminal penalties for possession of drugs for 
personal use and ending the vast array of other punishments – in both criminal and civil systems – people face for involvement with drugs. 
• Building alternative approaches to drug use that further people’s wellbeing and health, by providing support to those who need it and adopting practices that reduce the harms – such as death from overdose – associated with both drug use and drug prohibition.
• Ending marijuana prohibition and creating sensible regulations for adult use that protect health and public safety.
• Advancing racial justice through all our reforms and repairing the harms of decades of unequal and excessive enforcement of drug laws against communities of color and other oppressed people.DPA’s supporters agree that the 
war on drugs is among the most disastrous policies the United States has pursued. Together we work to 
ensure that our nation no longer 
arrests, incarcerates, punishes, and otherwise harms hundreds of millions of people around the world in the name of its drug war.   How We Work 
DPA advances cutting-edge drug policy 
reforms in the jurisdictions that present the greatest opportunities for victory and impact, and incremental reforms in places hit hard by the war on drugs. 
We build and run advocacy campaigns. 
We craft policy proposals, draft legislation, educate policymakers, 
mobilize our membership, drive 
institutional change, build power among grassroots activists, generate media coverage, lobby elected officials, and litigate when necessary.
While most of our efforts focus on 
changing public policies, we also help 
grow and diversify the drug policy reform 
movement and use communications to shift the narrative about drugs and the people who use them. 3sentencing and other excessive penalties (such as the Rockefeller Drug Laws in New York), rolled back civil asset forfeiture practices, expanded access to syringes and overdose prevention measures, 
expunged criminal convictions, reinvested 
in Black and Brown communities harmed by the drug war, and so much more.
As a result of our advocacy and 
movement-building efforts, there are tens of thousands fewer people incarcerated, and hundreds of thousands who were not arrested or did not go to jail or prison 
in the first place, or who spent less time 
behind bars. Millions more now have access to health services, saving countless lives over the years. Today we have a vibrant and growing movement for reform across multiple intersecting fields.Our Impact
Drug policy reform is among the most successful social justice and freedom movements in recent decades, largely because of DPA’s leadership. 
We have played a pivotal role in 
transforming the national conversation about drug policy in the United States, and in a very short period of time moved 
the issue from the fringes of American 
politics into the mainstream, most prominently with marijuana legalization. 
Since our inception, we have won 
multitudes of legislative reforms in  
dozens of states and have played a key role in more than 20 successful ballot 
initiative campaigns. 
We have helped enact reforms that 
legalized marijuana for medicinal and adult use, repealed mandatory minimum The criminalization of drug possession for personal use is 
the foundation on which the U.S. drug war stands. Simple possession is by far the single most arrested offense in the United States, with 1.4 million arrests in 2018, entangling more people in the criminal legal system than any other offense. 
At the same time, drug overdose is now the leading cause 
of death for people under the age of 50, creating a crisis in communities across the country, with more than 68,000 dead in 2018 alone. 
This is no coincidence. These lost lives are the inevitable 
outcome of decades of the war on drugs, and its policies and 
practices that put punishment ahead of compassion and drive 
drug use underground. 
Nor is it a coincidence that criminalization disproportionately 
impacts Black and Brown people, who are three times more likely to be arrested for drug possession than white people, Letter from the Board Chair and Executive Director
Now or Never
Ending the War on Drugs  
While Building the Futuredespite using drugs at the same rates. The war on drugs has served as an excuse for over-policing communities of color, even while it has done nothing to meaningfully achieve its stated aims of reducing the supply or use of drugs.
People who are struggling with problematic drug use need help 
and services, if they so choose – not handcuffs and prisons. All people, whether they use drugs or not, deserve to be treated with respect for their dignity and autonomy. The drug war must end, and given the horrifying impact of the twin crises of mass criminalization and overdose, it must end now. 
Thanks to donor support, DPA is hastening the end of the 
drug war and starting to shape a future in which drug policy is 
grounded in science, compassion, health, and human rights. 
Right now, the centerpiece of that work involves advancing 
a groundbreaking 2020 ballot initiative in Oregon. The Drug Addiction Treatment and Recovery Act would significantly expand drug treatment and health services infrastructure in Oregon using excess tax revenue from marijuana legalization, 
and it would eliminate criminal penalties for the possession 
of all drugs for personal use. The idea behind the initiative is straightforward: instead of arresting and punishing people for 4drug possession, Oregon would take a 
truly health-based approach to drug use. The campaign has been building for well over a year and is on track to launch in early 2020. This effort builds on our 
successful 2014 collaboration to reform 
marijuana laws in that state.
We have been working toward 
decriminalizing possession and making it a mainstream political issue for years. Our work is now paying off. Late last year, for the first time ever on a presidential debate stage, front-running candidates 
spoke about the need to decriminalize 
the personal possession of all drugs – not just marijuana. The validation of all-drug decriminalization in such a high-profile political moment demonstrates how far – and fast – we have moved.
Beyond our cutting-edge work on 
decriminalizing possession, over the  
last year we have had multiple  first-time victories.In November, the U.S. House of Representatives’ Judiciary Committee approved the MORE Act – the first comprehensive marijuana legalization bill to be approved by a congressional 
committee. The MORE Act would de-
schedule marijuana at the federal level, expunge past criminal records, and begin to repair the harms of prohibition in the communities where it has been most viciously enforced. DPA worked closely with the bill’s sponsors to shape the legislation and build bipartisan support.
In another first, in June, the House 
passed a bipartisan amendment to the appropriations bill that would prevent the Department of Justice from interfering in states that have legalized marijuana for adult use. Not only that, the amendment passed by a landslide 276-165 vote – the result of many years of relentless advocacy by our national affairs team in 
Washington, D.C. 
5 These lost lives are the 
inevitable outcome of 
decades of the war on drugs, 
and its policies and practices 
that put punishment ahead of 
compassion and drive drug 
use underground.DPA’s federal policy firsts have not been limited to marijuana 
and Congress. When the Justice Department filed suit to block a local Philadelphia organization from establishing a supervised consumption site – a critical harm reduction measure in a city that has been devastated by overdose deaths – DPA mounted a 
major friend-of-the-court effort, coordinating legal briefs signed 
by more than 100 organizations. In October, the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania ruled for the first time that establishing such a site would not violate the Controlled Substances Act. This victory is a powerful rebuke to the federal overreach – and if upheld, will help prevent overdose deaths and save lives.  
In the same month, we rolled out Safety First, a first-of-its-
kind harm reduction-based drug education curriculum aimed 
at providing high school students with honest, accurate, and balanced information about drugs and drug policy. The program provides teens with essential information to keep them and their friends safe.
While it is critical to continue breaking new ground, we must also 
help other parts of the country play catch-up. The places with 
the most challenging political environments often have the worst 
drug policies – with the most damaging consequences for the people living there.  That is why we are expanding our efforts into the hardest-hit states. 
In Florida, we played a pivotal role in the 2019 passage of a 
bill to authorize syringe exchange programs statewide. The bill 
was approved unanimously by the Senate, near-unanimously by the House, and signed into law by the Republican governor, Ron DeSantis. We worked in close partnership with the IDEA Exchange, a syringe exchange in Miami for which we had previously helped secure authorization, and which has had a remarkable impact in combatting the spread of HIV/AIDS and even preventing overdose deaths. 
In Mississippi, we are supporting a 2020 ballot initiative 
campaign to legalize medical marijuana. The measure has officially qualified for the November ballot. If it passes, it will be a remarkable step forward in one of the U.S. regions that have been hardest hit by the drug war, and may open the door for other reforms in the Deep South.
And in Missouri, we hosted more than 1,300 people for the 
2019 International Drug Policy Reform Conference, in part to 
bolster exciting movement toward drug policy reform that we are starting to see around St. Louis and throughout the state.
6These victories – and many more this past year, detailed 
in this report – add up to an impressive slate of wins for  
our movement. 
But let us not forget that this work is about more than policy 
change. We are fighting for values and ideals essential to a  
just society. 
Together we can build a future where people are treated with 
respect and compassion, where health and wellbeing are priorities, and where people are no longer punished in the name of the drug war. 
Thank you for making  
this work possible.
Maria McFarland  
Sánchez-Moreno
Executive DirectorDerek Hodel
Board Chair7
8
Ending the Criminalization of
Drug Possession for Personal Use 
Drug possession for personal 
use is the single most arrested 
offense in the United States.  
There were almost 1.7 million 
arrests for drug law violations 
in the U.S. in 2018, of which 
over 1.4 million were for simple 
possession offenses only. 8Hundreds of thousands of people endure incarceration for drug 
possession and other low-level drug offenses, and face multiple consequences from those convictions, including barriers to employment, housing, and education.
The criminalization of drug possession drives drug use 
underground and discourages people from seeking drug treatment and other services, which in turn fuels rates of addiction and overdose. It also increases prison, jail, and law enforcement costs. The ripple effects harm entire communities, disproportionately impacting people of color. Black and Brown people in the U.S. are three times as likely as white people to be arrested for drug possession for personal use, despite using drugs at a similar rate.
Decriminalizing the possession of drugs for personal use 
prioritizes health and safety over punishment, reduces the stigma around drug use, encourages people to seek support, and saves money and resources.
In close partnership, DPA and local allies in Oregon are working 
on a groundbreaking ballot initiative that is based on best 
policies from around the country and the world, and tailored specifically to Oregon. If passed, this initiative will establish a more humane, equitable, and effective approach to drugs. DPA has stepped up its advocacy for drug decriminalization in recent years. In 2017, we published a report offering a roadmap for how to decriminalize drug use and possession in the U.S., informed by a comprehensive review of domestic and international policy and literature. In 2018, we led a delegation 
of 70 U.S. advocates representing more than 35 advocacy and 
community organizations to Portugal, which decriminalized drug possession in 2001; the delegation overwhelmingly felt that it was transformative to learn about a national drug policy firmly founded on respecting the dignity and well-being of people who use drugs. 
The Oregon ballot initiative marks the beginning of our strategy to 
build power and momentum to advance innovative approaches 
across the country. Victory would show the rest of the country 
that a new approach to drugs is feasible, safe, and smart.
Countering the Drug War’s 
Harms Beyond the  
Criminal Legal System
In addition to possible incarceration, arrests for drug law 
violations create barriers to accessing housing, education, and employment that systematically oppress entire populations. 9But the drug war also punishes people who have never been 
arrested, in insidious ways that shape multiple systems. We are 
now finalizing a major report on the ways in which drug use is used as a justification for punishing people, particularly in Black and Brown communities, in many cases even absent an arrest.
As part of our effort to eliminate some of these harms, DPA 
helped found the Unlock Higher Ed Coalition, a national group of organizations fighting to increase educational access for people with criminal convictions and centers people directly impacted by these educational barriers in advocacy efforts. The coalition is advancing legislation that would eliminate the question about prior drug convictions on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) form that students must complete to obtain financial aid for higher education, as well as 
restore Pell Grants for incarcerated students. 
Another great example of this type of work is in New York City, 
where, following years of advocacy by DPA and our allies, the NYC Council passed two vital resolutions in 2019: one that prevents children from being taken from their families based on their guardians’ marijuana possession or use, and another that establishes fair regulations for hospitals on drug testing people 
who are pregnant or giving birth – including informing patients of 
their rights before any discussion of drug use or drug testing. 10Challenging Harsh Sentencing
In December, DPA released a groundbreaking report making the case for rethinking the way the United States responds to the “drug dealer.” Beyond being merely ineffective, the harsh criminalization of supply-side drug market activity actually makes drug use more dangerous, increasing overdose deaths 
and leading to more violence in communities. 
We are also countering policy proposals that seek to 
escalate the war on drugs. The administration of President Donald Trump is seizing the overdose crisis to stoke fear and xenophobia, and to propose a range of destructive policies – including increased mandatory minimums and harsh sentencing, deportations, and even the death penalty for drug offenses. DPA is spearheading the Washington, D.C. advocacy 
community’s push against the government’s increasingly 
regressive approach.There were more than 68,000 overdose  
deaths in the United States in 2018.Responding to the Devastating Overdose Crisis 
To combat this crisis, DPA is leading the charge to introduce 
evidence-based, health-centered policies that reduce the harms associated with both problematic drug use and drug prohibition. The reforms that we are championing will save lives.
Opening Supervised Consumption Sites
Over the past year, we have ramped up our campaign to establish supervised consumption sites, also called overdose prevention centers. These sites are a low-threshold intervention that allow people to use pre-obtained drugs in safer environments, with sterile equipment and drug checking 
supplies, and in the presence of trained staff or peers who 
can prevent a fatal overdose and help connect participants to services. Nobody has ever died in any of the hundreds of supervised consumption sites currently operating around the world, and thousands have been saved from overdose, HIV and hepatitis infection, and other blood-borne illnesses.The current administration has vehemently opposed supervised consumption sites and, in early 2019, the Department of Justice sued Safehouse, a community-based organization attempting to open such a site in Philadelphia. However, after DPA helped coordinate the submission of over a dozen amicus briefs in support of Safehouse, the federal judge on the case ruled that the proposed site would not violate federal law. This was a breakthrough in the pursuit of harm reduction access, and  a 
rebuke of the Trump administration’s ideological agenda of stigma and punishment. We have drafted and helped introduce bills in nine states that would authorize supervised consumption sites and have made significant progress in California and New York. We are also developing a strategy at the national level to prevent federal interference with states’ establishment of these facilities.
11Expanding Access to Treatment for Incarcerated People
Incarceration has a devastating impact on the overdose crisis. 
Research suggests that people recently incarcerated without access to evidence-based treatment may be at a 40-times greater risk of dying from an opioid overdose upon release.
DPA is fighting for incarcerated people to have access to 
the two medications that are the gold standard of opioid use disorder treatment – methadone and buprenorphine. Without access to these medications, many incarcerated people are inhumanely forced into withdrawal, and have a higher risk for overdose. DPA believes that access to this treatment is an essential right and that it must be universal.
In June, following a successful lobbying campaign organized 
by DPA, the New York legislature passed a groundbreaking bill that would have ensured all people under Medicaid qualified to receive medications to treat opioid addiction. New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, however, vetoed it. We are now demanding that every prison and jail in the state provide access to these crucial medications; a bill that would require this has already passed the state Senate.
Widening Access to Life-Saving Syringe Programs
Syringe access programs are proven to significantly reduce rates of overdose deaths and preventable diseases like HIV and hepatitis C. They also connect participants to treatment and healthcare services. Shamefully, many states still prohibit these life-saving programs.
In June, Florida became the 22nd jurisdiction in the country 
to authorize syringe access programs across the state. This was the result of a major campaign mounted by DPA and our 
partner, IDEA Exchange, a successful syringe access program 
in Miami whose naloxone distribution efforts helped cut opioid overdose deaths in Miami by one-third in 2018 (in fact, DPA worked to get Florida to authorize IDEA Exchange in 2016). With more syringe access programs opening across Florida, more lives will be saved in coming years.
Redirecting Resources to Public Health
While we pursue state and federal divestment from criminalization efforts, we are fighting for these resources to be reallocated to approaches that undo the harms of drug prohibition. DPA worked with Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY) on an amendment to reduce funding for the Drug 
Enforcement Administration and reallocate the money to a public 
health program. The amendment successfully passed the House of Representatives, and Ocasio-Cortez gave a shout-out to DPA on the House floor for our work on the issue.12How do you explain harm reduction to people  
who aren’t familiar with the term? 
Harm reduction is about meeting people where they are – 
whether they use drugs, experience homelessness, or live with HIV – to give them the tools to help themselves and their community. I didn’t save any of the thousands of lives that have been saved in South Florida. That was people in the community 
saving each other’s lives.
Why is it critical to focus on harm reduction in the South?
Most new HIV infections in our country take place in the South, 
but we’re denying the majority of the region basic public health measures. We know providing sterile syringes can decrease the HIV rate by 80 percent, so if we withhold this service from vulnerable people, it says we do not value their lives.Interview : Hansel Tookes M.D., M.P.H.,  
    Harm Reductionist 
What other benefits have you seen from  
the program’s expansion?
For decades, there was no mechanism for people experiencing homelessness and who use drugs to get into any sort of care in Miami. Now they can access sterile syringes and naloxone, see a doctor, and receive HIV testing. They are treated with dignity and respect by people who want to work with them. 
What do you see as the value that  
DPA added to the whole process?
DPA was instrumental in complex political maneuvering in Tallahassee – helping with the overall strategy and with drafting the bill language. DPA also invested in lobbying power in the capital and helped us strategize and troubleshoot to keep the bill advancing. Harm reductionist Hansel Tookes M.D., M.P.H., with support from DPA,  
led the campaign to pass the Infectious Disease Elimination Act in  
Florida, which authorizes syringe exchange programs across the state.  
Safety First : A Reality-Based 
Approach to Teens and Drugs
It is essential for young people 
to have access to accurate, evidence-based drug education resources. That is why DPA has launched Safety First –  
a first-of-its-kind harm reduction-based drug education curriculum aimed at providing high school students with honest, accurate, and balanced information about drugs and drug policy.The goal of the curriculum is to empower students to make safer 
and healthier choices about alcohol and other drugs. It helps young people access and evaluate information which can inform their behavior and understand the impacts of drug policies. 
Unlike failed abstinence-only programs like D.A.R.E., Safety 
First is based on the philosophy of harm reduction. While the curriculum foregrounds abstinence as the safest possible choice for young people to make regarding substance use, Safety First goes beyond that – by providing teens with essential information to keep themselves and their friends safe if and when they do encounter alcohol or other drugs.
DPA piloted the Safety First curriculum across six schools in 
California and New York, and received strong positive feedback from both students and teachers in subsequent evaluations. Now that we have refined and launched the curriculum, we intend to partner with public schools to roll out the program.14How do you feel about the drug education curricula that 
you’ve taught in the past?
The guidance previously offered to us has basically been an 
abstinence-only approach. It was suggesting you don’t need to teach people any facts about drugs as long as you tell them not to use drugs.
How do the old materials you were using compare to 
using Safety First in your classroom? 
Safety First is mind-expanding. As a non-drug user, I don’t have 
much knowledge about drugs, but Safety First gave me all kinds of guidance to share with students that made them feel empowered, that made them feel like they could not only help themselves but help other people. I really loved the fact that 
we look at our young people not as problems to be solved, but 
as potential heroes.Interview : Joseph Rubin,  
    H ealth Teacher
Often in the past, students would be afraid to come forward and talk about issues with either their own or family drug use, but Safety First was nonjudgmental and really opened the conversation. It made us able to process these issues together. 
Do you feel like adults are ready to change the way that 
we educate young people about drugs and drug use? 
Ready or not, we have to be there for the students. There’s a 
crisis in this country. There are people dying of overdoses and misinformation is not helping. We need to be able to have that conversation. And if it’s painful, it’s painful. I don’t care – we have to do it. As a health teacher, I believe that it’s the things 
that you don’t talk about that have the potential to harm you. If 
you can talk about it, you take power over it.
Joseph Rubin taught the Safety First curriculum as part of  
its pilot program in the San Francisco Unified School District. Marijuana prohibition is an utter 
failure. There were more than 
660,000 arrests for marijuana law violations in 2018, of which almost 609,000 were for marijuana possession only.  
At the same time, great progress is taking place: marijuana has now been legalized for adult use in 11 states and Washington, D.C. Ending Marijuana Prohibition  
and Advancing Legalization  
16DPA is at the forefront of the movement 
to legalize marijuana nationwide. We are currently leading legalization campaigns in New York and New Mexico, with bills that include a range of provisions 
to repair the harms of decades of 
prohibition and unequal enforcement.
Only two years ago, Gov. Andrew Cuomo 
was firmly against marijuana legalization. DPA’s multiyear campaign played a pivotal role in moving him into the support column and making legalization a key issue in the 2019 legislative session. In 
June, after a major surge in our campaign 
that brought the issue back from the dead, we came within days, if not hours, of victory.
While we did not achieve our ultimate 
goal – creating a responsible legal market for adult use and righting the 
wrongs of the decades of unequal 
enforcement – we made sure that the critical incremental reform that was passed codified record expungement for the first time in the state’s history, which will impact upward of 500,000 New Yorkers arrested for low-level 
marijuana possession. We also moved 
groundbreaking legislation through the New York City Council to ban marijuana drug testing in the job hiring process and remove marijuana as a reason to revoke probation – local laws that will have national reverberations.
DPA also made significant progress 
in New Mexico. The state’s House of 
Representatives approved a bill that would have legalized marijuana for adult use, but it stalled in the Senate. But, with a resounding majority, the legislature went on to pass a bill that decriminalized the first-time possession of up to half an ounce of marijuana, and all drug paraphernalia. After the session, New 
Mexico Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham 
17 DPA is at the forefront of 
the movement to legalize 
marijuana nationwide. We are 
currently leading legalization 
campaigns in New York and 
New Mexico, with bills that 
include a range of provisions 
to repair the harms of 
decades of prohibition and 
unequal enforcement.Influencing Federal Legislation
In November, the House Judiciary 
Committee voted to approve the Marijuana Opportunity Reinvestment and Expungement Act (MORE Act). The Act would both deschedule marijuana 
and take critical steps towards repairing 
harms caused by marijuana prohibition, including:
• Preventing the government from denying an individual federal benefits, student financial aid, or security clearances needed to obtain government jobs because of  
marijuana use.
• Providing an opportunity for those convicted under marijuana laws to petition for resentencing and expungement.
• Protecting noncitizens that are at risk of deportation or citizenship denial based on a simple marijuana infraction or use.18established the Legalization Task Force and appointed DPA’s NM State Director to it. In October, the Task Force published recommendations, including expunging marijuana possession 
convictions, allowing people with 
previous drug convictions to participate in the marijuana industry, and dedicating revenue to helping communities and small businesses access capital needed to start and grow businesses.
In Mississippi, DPA is supporting a 2020 
ballot initiative to legalize access to 
medical marijuana, an important step 
forward in a region where people still receive harsh sentences for simple marijuana possession. In November, activists had collected enough signatures to qualify the initiative to appear on the 2020 ballot.We moved groundbreaking 
legislation through the New 
York City Council to ban 
marijuana drug testing in the job hiring process and 
remove marijuana as a reason 
to revoke probation – local laws that will have national 
reverberations.In addition, the MORE Act establishes an 
Opportunity Trust Fund that would provide monies toward reparative and social good measures, including:
• Providing grants to communities negatively impacted by the drug war for the development of record expungement processes, employment programs, reentry guidance, youth 
resources, and more.
• Creating more access to substance 
misuse treatment.
• Encouraging socially and economically disadvantaged people to enter the marijuana industry.
• Incentivizing states to establish equitable licensing programs that benefit communities most impacted by prohibition.19The MORE Act is the first piece of comprehensive marijuana legislation to ever make it out of a congressional committee, and is set to be the first to ever receive a floor vote.
We also made history this year when 
the U.S. House of Representatives overwhelmingly passed the Blumenauer-McClintock-Norton amendment, which would have prevented the Department of Justice from interfering in states that have 
legalized marijuana for adult use. This had 
been decades in the making, with DPA leading the charge, and was the first time marijuana legalization had been affirmed in Congress. While the amendment was not approved by the Senate, we are now working on several other bills in Congress to end prohibition in a just and equitable way. Until the federal prohibition on marijuana falls, we are committed to 
blocking federal interference with state’s 
marijuana policies. For decades, low-income 
communities and people 
of color have borne the 
brunt of over-enforcement 
of failed marijuana laws 
and the life-long collateral 
consequences that follow a 
marijuana arrest.Queen Adesuyi : 
Building a Coalition for MORE
Queen Adesuyi, Policy Manager in DPA’s Office of National Affairs, has worked to 
build the Marijuana Justice Coalition, a broad coalition of 13 national groups that have joined forces to advocate for federal marijuana reform through a racial justice lens.
The coalition has its origins in the fall of 2018, and includes the 
ACLU, the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, the Center for American Progress, Human Rights Watch, and others, alongside DPA. 
“A new Congress created viable opportunities to pass marijuana 
legislation,” Queen said. “But we needed to broaden our allies in this space to see meaningful reforms.” 
A conviction for simple marijuana possession can cause lifelong 
barriers to employment, housing, federal financial aid, nutritional assistance, voting, and even a valid driver’s license in some states. It can also create harsh immigration-related consequences for non -
citizens. Black and Brown people are disproportionately impacted, being four times more likely to be arrested for possession of  
marijuana than white people despite equal rates of consumption.20“The war on marijuana has actually been a war on the poor, a 
war on the homeless, on veterans, on noncitizens, on children, on seniors. It’s been a war on public health,” Queen stated. “The engine that is marijuana prohibition affects individuals and communities so comprehensively. It seriously complicates 
stability and access to resources for the most vulnerable 
amongst us, even if you don’t know it. We needed a coalition of advocates working across economic, social, and criminal justice issues at the table to reflect this reality.”
In July, the Marijuana Justice Coalition released a set of 
shared principles to guide the fight for reform. They called on Congress to deschedule marijuana, create criminal justice reform provisions like expungement and resentencing, eliminate 
barriers in access to public benefits, and end other collateral 
consequences related to an individual’s marijuana use or previous arrest or conviction. They also called for an end to drug testing for public benefits or as a reason for separating children from their families, and to ensure that marijuana tax revenue be directed to communities most impacted by the war on drugs. The House Judiciary Committee went on to hold a historic hearing on the impact of marijuana laws on racial justice, and the need for reform. DPA worked with officials to ensure the hearing took 
place, and assisted witnesses in preparing their testimonies.Later that month, House Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerry 
Nadler (D-NY) and Senator Kamala Harris (D-CA) introduced the bipartisan MORE Act, along with various cosponsors, including Representative Matt Gaetz (R-FL). This goes even further than previous bills and echoes the set of principles for federal 
marijuana reform that DPA and other members of the Marijuana 
Justice Coalition developed, focused on racial justice and reinvesting in the communities most harmed by prohibition.
“We’ve been able to shape the bill since its inception,” Queen 
continued. “We are proud of the ways that our commitment to marijuana justice have manifested in the historic movement of a bill that both ends federal marijuana prohibition and reverses its most egregious consequences.” 
“For decades, low-income communities and people of color 
have borne the brunt of over-enforcement of failed marijuana laws and the life-long collateral consequences that follow a marijuana arrest,” said Queen. 
“While we won’t be able to repair that destruction overnight, the 
MORE Act ends prohibition in a fair and just way that begins to 
give back to those most affected.”
21Opposing the Global Drug War,  
Championing Reform Abroad
22flee drug war-related violence – often to find that U.S. 
officials perversely label them drug traffickers. 
As the leading organization in the United States working to end the war on drugs, we play a pivotal role in educating U.S. policymakers and the public about the harms of these approaches, and pressing for alternatives.
At the same time, we are highlighting effective models from 
abroad, including Portugal and other countries that have decriminalized possession of drugs for personal use. One 
example is in Vancouver, Canada – the site of North America’s 
first supervised consumption site – where the city council is calling on the government and health professionals to allow for a safe supply of opioid drugs to reduce deaths from unregulated drug use. This call has been endorsed by the Vancouver Police Department, including Inspector Bill Spearn, whom DPA honored for his work at the International Drug Policy Reform Conference. 
Where useful, we are continuing to provide advice and 
support to reform efforts beyond US borders, and are monitoring progress in Mexico, where legislators are exploring models of marijuana regulation that could be introduced as soon as April 2020.For decades, the United States has poured billions of dollars into policies designed to stem the supply of drugs from abroad, including through eradicating crops, interdicting drug shipments, and arming and training foreign military and police forces. The consequences have been devastating, with security 
forces criminalizing and killing countless people in the name of 
the drug war, even as the illegal drug trade – made possible by prohibition – fuels violence, corruption, and despair in multiple countries around the world.
Today, the United States is doubling down on the global drug war:
• President Trump has praised the governments of the 
Philippines, where President Rodrigo Duterte has overseen a brutal drug war campaign that has resulted in more than 12,000 extrajudicial killings, and Brazil, where police killings  
of alleged offenders are skyrocketing under President  
Jair Bolsonaro.
• The Colombian government has expressed interest in restarting the aerial spraying of coca crops – with chemicals that the World Health Organization categorized as carcinogens – following pressure from the Trump administration.
• President Trump has called for an intensification of the drug war in Mexico – despite over 200,000 people being killed in the country’s drug war since 2006. These harsh drug policies contribute to regional instability and a refugee crisis as people 23In November 2019, DPA hosted the biennial International Drug 
Policy Reform Conference, the premier gathering of the reform 
movement, in St. Louis, Missouri. The event attracted nearly 1,300 people representing 50 countries, all eager to listen,  
learn, and strategize about local, state, national, and international drug policy issues.
We chose to host the conference in St. Louis in part because 
Missouri is one of the states that the overdose crisis has hit worst. There were an estimated 1,635 overdose deaths in the state in 2018, an increase of around 16% from the previous year. The Greater St. Louis metropolitan area has also become a focal point of racial injustice and excessive policing – particularly after the fatal shooting of Michael Brown by a Ferguson police officer, and the protests that followed. We were thrilled to 
work with three extraordinary St. Louis-based organizations – 
Ava’s Grace Scholarship Program, Hands Up United, and the Missouri Network for Opiate Reform and Recovery – to not only strategically engage the community in and around St. Louis with the Reform Conference, but to also further the impact of our work at a local and regional level.We were delighted to honor several stalwarts of drug policy reform for their exceptional accomplishments in our movement. Recipients included Deon Haywood, human rights defender and executive director of Women With a Vision in New Orleans; Marsha Rosenbaum, DPA’s California director emerita and founder of the Safety First drug education program; and the 
Nightcrawlers, a group of courageous nightshift journalists 
covering the Philippines war on drugs. To further highlight support for those working to expose the devastation caused by the drug war in the Philippines, a conference gathering took place under cultural collective RESBAK’s iconic “Stop the Killings” banner in a united show of support.
The Reform Conference was a huge success. Our movement is 
stronger than ever because of the 1,300 reformers who joined 
us in St. Louis. We look forward to building upon the innovative 
ideas discussed over the three days of the conference – about supervised consumption sites, all-drug decriminalization, models of regulation, people who sell drugs, tobacco harm reduction, and vaping – and to continue our work to end the war on drugs with fresh energy.
24DPA Hosts the World’s Largest Convening  
of Drug Policy ReformersSpecial Opportunities Program 
A New Way of Life Reentry Project  
Capitol Area Reentry Program Chicago Recovery Alliance  
Council for Court Excellence 
Global Exchange  Legal Services for Prisoners with Children Los Angeles Regional Reentry Partnership 
New York Harm Reduction Educators  
Orange County Needle Exchange Program Project Inform Rice University’s Baker Institute for 
 Public P olicy  
Salvation and Social Justice  San Francisco Drug Users Union 
Southern Colorado Harm Reduction 
 Association  
Suncoast Harm Reduction Project 
The Black Futurists Group 
The Center for HIV Law & Policy DPA’s Advocacy Grants Program builds the national movement for drug policy reform and advances policy change at 
the local, state, and national levels by strategically funding smaller, geographically limited, or single-issue projects. Funded annually at a level of roughly $1.2 million, the program raises awareness and promotes policy change through two vehicles: the Special Opportunities Program and the Promoting Policy Change Program.Advocacy Grants
The Influence Foundation, Inc. 
Urban Survivors Union Women Make Movies 
Promoting Policy Change Program A New PATH 
A New Way of Life Reentry Project 
Atlanta Harm Reduction Coalition Baltimore Harm Reduction Coalition Brotherhood/Sister Sol, Inc.  
California Society of Addiction Medicine 
Center for Learning and Living  Chicago Urban League Colorado Criminal Justice Coalition  Down East AIDS Network 
DRCNet Foundation 
The Drug Policy Forum of Hawai’i Drug Truth Network  Harm Reduction Action Center  
Independent Media Institute Alternet Institute of the Black World 21st Century 
Intercambios Puerto Rico  Interfaith Movement for Humanity Integrity  
Justice Strategies 
LatinoJustice Legal Services for Prisoners with Children  New York Academy of Medicine  
New York Harm Reduction Educators  
North Carolina Harm Reduction Partnership for Safety and Justice People’s Harm Reduction Alliance Protect Families First 
Public Defender Association  
Samuel Dewitt Proctor Conference San Francisco Drug Users Union  The Ordinary People Society: 
 The Prodigal Child Project  
Truth Pharm VOCAL-NY 
William C. Velasquez Institute 25Advocacy Grants Spotlight:  
Interfaith Movement for Human Integrity
Through our Grants and Partnerships program, we 
have invested enormously in supporting grassroots 
activists across the United States, in ways that have lasting impact. For example, we were among the first funders to support the leadership of formerly incarcerated people, who in turn are now on the front lines of the fight for criminal justice and drug policy reform and ending felony disenfranchisement.
Longtime DPA partner Interfaith Movement for Human 
Integrity works at the intersection of spirituality and social justice, to mobilize congregations to take a stand on issues like immigration and mass incarceration. Through the Promoting Policy Change grants programs, DPA has 
provided more than $60,000 since 2017 in support of the 
organization’s work to engage people of faith, including those formerly incarcerated, to develop their own leadership to stand up against the racism and discrimination that permeate the drug war.
Partners in a Movement 
Our relationship with DPA is deeper than funding. It’s 
a conversation. DPA provides us with resources and expertise to build our capacity and helps us network with organizations doing similar work across the country. We are also included in their planning and strategy for campaigns like Prop 47 and other policy campaigns. It’s helpful to be a part of a larger movement and know that our wisdom and experience are being valued.  
Building Capacity for Social Change 
DPA’s support for capacity building has been especially important. The faith-based community is an integral part of the movement to address the harms that have been done through the criminalization of drug use, and of people of color overall. With DPA’s help, we have built a strong local organizing base and developed long-term community support to advocate for reforms to the criminal legal system, such as bail reform and the realignment of law enforcement priorities to reinvest in effective re-entry programs.Significant Victories and More to Come 
Our Justice Not Jails project seeks to dismantle the system of mass incarceration and criminalization in Los Angeles County, home to the world’s largest jail system. Justice Not Jails could have been a flash in a pan, but DPA enabled us to create space to think larger and longer term about what the LA County criminal justice system should look like. Since then we have successfully prevented any new jail construction in LA County. We are now focusing on Measure R, which would grant a civilian oversight committee subpoena power to investigate criminal justice complaints and create non-carceral solutions to address mental health and homelessness.Rev. Deborah Lee, Executive Director of Interfaith, and Rev. Larry Foy, an organizer for  
their Justice Not Jails program, share the significance of their partnership with DPA: 
Rev. Larry Foy
 Rev. Deborah Lee 
Christine Downton
Former Vice Chairman and Founding 
Partner of Pareto Partners 
James E. Ferguson, II
Senior Partner, Ferguson, Stein, Chambers Law Offices, Charlotte, North Carolina
Joy Fishman
Harm Reduction Advocate
Jason Flom
President, Lava Records
Ira Glasser
Former Executive Director, American Civil Liberties UnionDrug Policy Alliance Board of Directors
Derek Hodel
President of Board; Independent Consultant
Susan Kane
Lawyer
David C. Lewis, MD
Founding Director, Center for Alcohol and Addiction Studies, Brown University
Pamela Lichty
President, Drug Policy Forum of Hawai’i
Alejandro Madrazo
Professor of Law, Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas, Mexico City
Angela Pacheco
Former District Attorney, 1st Judicial District, New MexicoJosiah Rich, MD
Professor of Medicine and Community Health, The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University
Rev. Edwin Sanders
Senior Servant, Metropolitan Interdenominational Church; Coordinator, Religious Leaders for a More Just and Compassionate Drug Policy
George Soros
Chairman, Soros Fund Management
Ilona Szabó de Carvalho
Director, Igarapé Institute29Drug Policy Alliance  Financials
Cash & cash equivalents
Investments
Accounts receivable
Grants receivable (net)Prepaid expenses & other assets
Deposits
Property, equipment & leasehold improvements (net)Liabilities
Net Assets94,894
383,181
17,472
3,629,846
86,172
111,700
4,947,801146,437295,294
2,536,988
2,157,911
4,134,436$
$$
$
$$
$$
$
$
$$Statement of Financial Position, June 1 2018–May 31 2019
Assets Liabilities and Net Assets
Total Liabilities and Net AssetsAccounts payable & accrued expenses
Accrued compensated absences
Mortgage payable
Unrestricted
Temporarily restricted
$9,271,066$9,271,066 Total Assets $2,978,719
$6,292,347  Total Liabilities
Total Net Assets309,786,179
2,813,723
1,805,91313,965,242
(715,556)
12,104,191
(647,153)
(5,164,691)
6,292,347$
$
$$$
$
$
$
$Statement of Activities 2019
Expenses Support & Revenue
Change in Net Assets
Change in Net Assets
Total ExpensesProgram expenses
Management
FundraisingContributions unrestrictedContributions temporarily restricted
Unrestricted
Temporarily restricted
Net assets, beginning of year
Net assets, end of year
$14,405,815$ 13,249,686 Total Income
$14,405,815Total Expenses
31Drug Policy Action  Financials
Several Drug Policy Alliance and Drug Policy Action donors have made 
multi-year pledges to these organizations. These unfulfilled pledges are 
projected future revenue that will be received within one to nine years 
and does not constitute an endowment. These donor commitments 
reflect a strong current and future financial outlook for the Drug Policy 
Alliance and Drug Policy Action.Cash & cash equivalents
Investments
Grants receivable (net)Liabilities
Net Assets8,844,800
6,661,332
7,753,09617,472
15,388,660
7,853,096$
$$$
$
$Statement of Financial Position, June 1 2018–May 31 2019
Assets Liabilities and Net Assets
Total Liabilities and Net AssetsAccounts payable & accrued expenses
Unrestricted
Temporarily restricted
$23,259,228$23,259,228 Total Assets
$23,241,756 Total Net Assets324,269,254
(2,245,399)
(2,710,020)
(2,245,399)
28,197,17523,241,756$$
$$
$
$Statement of Activities 2019
Support & Revenue
Change in Net Assets
Change in Net AssetsContributions unrestricted
Contributions temporarily restricted
UnrestrictedTemporarily restricted
Net assets, beginning of year
Net assets, end of year$2,023,855 Total Income
33
6,736,880
240,083
2,311$$
$Expenses
Total ExpensesProgram expenses
Management
Fundraising
$6,979,274$6,979,274Total ExpensesDrug Policy Alliance Headquarters
131 West 33rd Street, 15th Floor 
New York, NY 10001
212.613.8020 phone 
contact@drugpolicy.org
www.drugpolicy.orgSocial icon
Rounded square
Only use blue and/or white.
For more details check out our
Brand Guidelines.
@DrugPolicyOrg
@drugpolicyalliance
@drugpolicyDrug Policy AllianceDrug Policy Alliance
