Wasted assets:
The cost of excluding Ohioans with 
a record from workWork & Wages, Criminal Justice December 18, 2018
Michael Shields
Policy Matters Ohio
Pamela Thurston
Ohio Justice & Policy CenterPhoto: Debbie Quigg / Towards Employment
WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORGii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Key Findings
Otis’ Story
INTRODUCTION
COLLATERAL SANCTIONS
What are collateral sanctions?
Sanctions vary in severity and triggers
How we got here
Criminal convictions are not as clear as they seem
Flow Chart: Unequal before the law
Who is affected?
IN-DEMAND JOBS RESTRICTED
Public Sector Jobs  
Sweeping Collateral Sanctions
Health Care Jobs
Certificates of Qualification for Employment
Collateral sanctions close off access to better jobs
Table 1: Occupations adding the most jobs with collateral sanctions
Table 2: Sample criminal record restrictions
THE COST TO INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES
Table 3: Ohioans with convictions lack needed education for better jobs
Sanctions discourage educational attainment
CONCLUSION  & RECOMMENDATIONS
APPENDICES
A: Methodology
B: Impacted jobs
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSContents
iii
iv
v
1
3
4
4
5
6
7
8
10
11
12
13
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
24
25
25
26WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORGiii
Executive Summary
Photo: Ohio Department of Rehabilitation & CorrectionsWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORGiv
Executive Summary
The consequences of a criminal conviction extend 
far beyond the sentence imposed in court. Once-
convicted Ohioans face legal restrictions—called 
collateral sanctions—that can block access to 
housing, civic rights and jobs. As explored in this 
paper, Ohio’s expansive collateral sanctions limit 
access to more than one in four jobs statewide, cost 
individuals an estimated $3.4 billion in foregone 
wages in 2017, and artificially constrain access to 
talent for businesses. Unchecked, the consequences 
to people and businesses will only grow. With 
increased criminalization in recent decades, an 
estimated one in 11 adult Ohioans is living with a 
felony conviction and as many as one in three has a 
criminal record of some kind.
Used narrowly with best practices, collateral 
sanctions may help protect public safety and 
vulnerable populations. However, limiting economic 
prospects for Ohioans with convictions may 
undermine the very safety collateral sanctions were 
designed to protect. With fewer opportunities 
for legitimate work, the likelihood of re-offending 
increases. And the cost of overbroad restrictions for 
Ohioans with a record is high: for those workers and 
for employers.
Decreasing the economic cost of collateral 
sanctions calls for action on several fronts. 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Collateral sanctions are far-reaching. Fixes at 
various levels of policy and practice include: 
• The state legislature should eliminate excessive 
and arbitrary collateral sanctions against 
licensing and hiring.
• The Certificate of Qualification for Employment 
(CQE) process should be made both better 
understood and more widely available: 
Workforce development organizations 
can help their clients to navigate the CQE process. The state supreme court should issue 
uniform guidelines, and the process should be 
simplified with a $50 fee cap and movement 
toward an automated granting of CQE after 10 
years.
• Prosecutors and criminal defense attorneys 
should account for collateral sanctions in 
reaching plea deals, and defense attorneys 
should fully advise clients.
• Hiring managers should use Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) guidelines 
to weigh all the relevant factors when a 
prospective employee has a criminal conviction
• The state legislature should ban the box for all 
Ohio jobs while allowing managers to consider 
convictions later in the hiring process.
• Licensing boards should track the number and 
cause of criminal records-based denials.
Key findings
Collateral sanctions hold Ohioans –  
and Ohio - back
• Some 850 laws and administrative rules limit job 
opportunities for Ohioans with convictions who 
have already served their time.
• Around 1 in 4 Ohio jobs (1.3 million) is blocked or 
restricted for those with a conviction.
• Jobs affected by collateral sanctions pay $4,700 
more on average and are growing at twice the 
rate of other jobs.
• The typical Ohioan out of work after serving time 
for a felony conviction lost $36,479 in wages in 
2017. Total lost wages reached an estimated $3.4 
billion across the state.
• Collateral sanctions prevent Ohioans with 
convictions from pursuing higher education.WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORGv
Otis’s story
A grandfather still pays the price for a 30-year-old offense
Otis thinks he was 20 years old when he got the 
call that changed the course of his life forever.1
It was 1986. He and his live-in girlfriend were set to 
start a family, with their baby on the way. He was 
working at a food processor in Lorain when he got 
her call: her ex-boyfriend, just out of prison, had 
learned she had moved on. Now he was on their 
porch, kicking in the door and shouting that he 
would kick the baby out of her.
Otis didn’t call the police, didn’t even clock out. 
When he pulled up to the house, the man took off 
running. Otis chased him down and tackled him in 
a laundromat.
When police arrived, shotguns drawn, Otis heard 
an officer chamber a round. 
“I’ll blow your brains out!” the officer shouted, with 
racial expletives.
The judge sentenced both men on the same assault 
charge, a felony. Otis spent 18 months in prison.
Afterward, determined to avoid more legal trouble, 
Otis sought out a career. His advisor at Cuyahoga 
Community College steered him toward the 
medical field, which would boom over the next 25 
years. Otis would start with a State Tested Nursing 
Assistant certification and work up from there. Otis 
spent 18 months in the program (and still owes 
$5,000).
1 From interviews conducted by Policy Matters Ohio with individuals participating in workforce development classes hosted by Passages, 
and who have a criminal record that has hurt their work lives. Otis’s story is a transcription of his memories and views. Policy Matters has 
verified through public records that Otis’s criminal history is consistent with his telling. However, Policy Matters and its partners cannot 
guarantee the accuracy of Otis’s memories as recounted here.
2 See Table 2But when he finished, he couldn’t find work. 
Human resources managers looked no further than 
his conviction. They told him he’d never work in 
the medical field. Several Ohio laws limit access 
to nursing careers for Ohioans with a criminal 
record, some triggered by far less serious issues 
than the altercation that led to Otis’s conviction. 
The most expansive can cost a Medicaid provider 
their license for employing a worker with any 
conviction.2
Today Otis is 51 and raising his three grandchildren 
alone. He has held together a life for them working 
construction—the only line of work, it seemed, 
where his conviction didn’t result in a closed door. 
But his age and a bad knee mean he can’t carry on 
there much longer. 
A few months ago, Otis and his grandkids—eight, 
nine and 11 years old—moved from Cincinnati to 
Cleveland so the kids could be closer to their dad. 
When their Section 8 rental fell through, they were 
left homeless, a place Otis never thought he would 
be.
Otis has not had a run-in with the law in 32 years.
With better second chance policy, Otis could have 
been a nurse assistant, and maybe, by now, a nurse. 
Instead he is raising his family in a shelter.WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG1
Introduction
Photo: Ohio Department of Rehabilitation & CorrectionsWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG2
INTRODUCTION
In the world of work, a conviction 
for a felony - sometimes less - 
carries a type of life sentence, 
placing one in four jobs officially 
or practically out of reach, and 
countless others off limits at the 
discretion of the employer. A 
conviction is a life-altering event 
that can change a person’s course 
forever, knocking them out of the 
running for good jobs with financial 
security and a career ladder, and 
in times of economic hardship, for 
any job. Because a lifetime on the 
economic fringe can push people 
toward desperate or illegal acts, 
our current treatment of Ohioans 
with convictions also puts our 
communities at greater risk of 
crime. The intersection of economic 
opportunity and the criminal justice 
system is the focus of this report.
WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG3
Collateral sanctionsPhoto: Ohio Department of Rehabilitation & CorrectionsWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG4
WHAT ARE COLLATERAL SANCTIONS?
Collateral sanctions are state laws and administrative 
rules that restrict access to jobs, housing and civic rights 
for Ohioans with convictions. The Ohio Justice and Policy 
Center has identified nearly 1,100 collateral sanctions in 
the Ohio Revised Code. More than 850 restrict access to 
jobs, including more than 250 that restrict employment 
in specific occupations and 600 that restrict licensing, 
contracting and other paths to livelihood. In addition to 
collateral sanctions defined in law, in practice, businesses 
screen out candidates with criminal records due to 
perceived hiring risk. 
Many collateral sanctions apply to jobs that require 
proximity to vulnerable populations (e.g., health care 
and support, childcare and teaching), could put public 
safety at risk (e.g., truck and bus driving), or give workers 
substantial power (e.g., policing jobs). Narrowly defined, 
specifically relevant sanctions can make sense; there is a 
public interest in minimizing the risk posed to vulnerable 
clients or to the public at large. 
However, collateral sanctions in Ohio are not consistently 
narrowly defined or specifically relevant to targeted 
jobs. Many collateral sanctions are broad, apply to the 
entire place of employment rather than to particular 
work activities, and allow for unguided discretion in 
enforcement. For example: 
• All 644,200 state and local government jobs in 
Ohio are restricted for Ohioans with convictions.3 4 
A person can have his or her application to take the 
Civil Service Exam denied for any felony.5
• Sanctions that restrict employment in nursing homes 
exclude even workers with limited patient contact, 
like food service workers, janitors and other support 
staff; and 
• A criminal background check is required to obtain a 
3 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages March 2018, https:/ /data.bls.gov/PDQWeb/en
4 Federal sanctions outside the scope of this report limit access to another 78,000 jobs. 
5 http:/ /codes.ohio.gov/orc/124.25v1
6 Ohio Revised Code 3721.121 literally restricts hiring for positions that “involve[s] providing direct care to an older adult.” O.R.C. 3721.121(A)(2). The statuto -
ry language is ambiguous. In practice, some employers simply bar anyone with a disqualifying criminal record from applying for any position at all. See, e.g., 
MetroHealth System Policy No. II-60 “Eligibility for Employment in Long-Term Care/Skilled Nursing Facilities,” available at https:/ /www.metrohealth.org/
about-us/key-metrohealth-policies/human-resources-policies .
7 OAC 5160-1-17.6(G)(2).state license for professions like physician, registered 
nurse (RN), and licensed practical nurse (LPN). The 
state licensing board has the power to reject any 
applicant whose record includes a felony, a drug 
offense of any kind, or a crime involving “moral 
turpitude” (a term the law does not define). Rejection 
can be based not only on a conviction but on an 
offense for which the person was not convicted after 
successfully completing an intervention or diversion 
program.6
SANCTIONS VARY IN SEVERITY AND TRIGGERS
Collateral sanctions vary greatly in scope and severity. 
Factors that determine how deeply a sanction will affect 
residents with a conviction include:
• the scope of crimes that trigger it; 
• the range of jobs it affects; 
• whether the sanction is mandatory or automatic 
versus discretionary; 
• the severity of the sanction itself – ranging from a 
background check to an outright ban on employment 
or required licensure; and
• how long the restriction is in effect 
Sanctions vary in severity, likelihood of being invoked, 
and the type of crime that triggers them. Some sanctions 
require use of a background check, with no specific 
bar to employment if a conviction is found; others bar 
employment outright or access to a required license. 
Some sanctions are triggered by funding source, like 
the administrative rule that says the indictment of any 
employee for any criminal offense can lead to denial or 
revocation of a provider’s Medicaid contract.7 Finally, 
sanctions might be triggered by specific and narrowly 
defined conviction types or may be as broad as having 
any felony conviction. COLLATERAL SANCTIONSWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG5
Sanctions can be broad in some ways and narrow in 
others. They can apply narrowly to specific crimes, 
and cover an enormous array of jobs, or vice versa. For 
instance, a person convicted of bribery is automatically 
barred from working in the public sector for life.8 
Restricting access to positions of power makes logical 
sense in this case, yet the sanction is likely overbroad, 
because the public sector employs many workers in 
positions that command little power and who are in no 
position to take bribes. 
Many sanctions are triggered by a wide array of crimes—
often by any felony—but apply only narrowly to a small 
number of jobs. Any felony conviction, for example, bars 
a person from ever being appointed as Ohio Inspector 
General, which seems reasonable.9 Still, there are at least 
284 sanctions triggered by any felony committed ever, 
as well as others triggered by any felony committed in a 
specified time frame.  Taken together, these “any felony” 
restrictions potentially place a significant share of Ohio’s 
legitimate jobs beyond reach of the 994,000 Ohioans 
with felony records.
Collateral sanctions are appropriate in some 
circumstances. The problem arises when they are applied 
in general and overbroad ways to jobs for which a 
particular applicant’s conviction is not relevant. Using a 
one-size-fits-all standard to exclude people with criminal 
records is harmful in the first instance because a criminal 
record does not actually predict who will be a trustworthy 
worker and who will not.10 Nor do such exclusions assure 
8 http:/ /codes.ohio.gov/orc/2921.02
9 Ohio Rev. Code §124.49(B).
10 Recent research studies have produced such conclusions as the following: Employees with criminal records in the private sector have longer average 
tenures than employees without records, are less likely to leave voluntarily, and are no more likely to be terminated involuntarily. (Dylan Minor, Nicola Per -
sico, and Deborah M. Weiss, “Criminal Background and Job Performance” (Chicago: The Society of Labor Economists, 2017), available at http:/ /www.sole-
jole.org/17537.pdf ). A 2018 academic survey of 1,052 managers and regular employees reported that “82 percent of managers think employees with crimi -
nal records perform as well or better than workers with a clean sheet.” (A Survey by the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) and the Charles 
Koch Institute (CKI), https:/ /www.shrm.org/hr-today/trends-and-forecasting/research-and-surveys/Documents/SHRM-CKI%20Workers%20with%20Crimi -
nal%20Records%20Issue%20Brief%202018-05-17.pdf ). One study that compared on-the-job performance of military enlistees with felony records to other 
enlistees found that those with felonies were just as likely to execute their contracts and were no more likely to be terminated. (Jennifer Lundquist, Devah 
Pager, and Eiko Strader, “Does a Criminal Past Predict Worker Performance? Evidence from America’s Largest Employer,” American Sociological Review 
(forthcoming), available at https:/ /paa.confex.com/paa/2016/mediafile/ExtendedAbstract/Paper2871/ASRDraft01222016.pdf ). Evolv, a data provider that 
uses analytics to study employee retention, found workers with criminal convictions were actually 1.1 percent more productive than those without a criminal 
record. (Vivian Giang, Why Criminals Might Make Better Employees, (Dec. 4, 2012), https:/ /www.businessinsider.com/a-criminal-record-might-increase-pro -
ductivity-2012-12#ixzz2vCNI0Rn1 ).
11 See National Employment Law Project (NELP) Fact Sheet, Research Supports Fair-Chance Hiring Policies (August 2016), https:/ /www.nelp.org/wp-con -
tent/uploads/Fair-Chance-Ban-the-Box-Research.pdf .
12 The City of Cleveland’s second chance hiring policy fell under scrutiny in November 2018 when the community was rocked by the alleged murder of 
Shaker Heights teacher Aisha Fraser, by her ex-husband Lance Mason. Mason served nine months in prison for brutally assaulting Fraser in 2014 and lost his 
position as a common pleas judge. After release, Mason was appointed Minority Business Development Director for the City of Cleveland. As a well-con -
nected figure in local and state politics, Mason’s story may be more about privilege than about second-chance hiring. https:/ /bit.ly/2EtJncN
13 See, e.g. Rand Paul, Op-Ed: Fighting racial bias in the federal judicial process, Louisville Courier Journal (June 13, 2013), available at https:/ /bit.ly/2UD -
NuHZ .
14 https:/ /assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3479617/StatehouseToPrisonPipeline2017.pdf
15 https:/ /bit.ly/2BeL0H9safety in the community: such sweeping restrictions can 
close off so many avenues to those with a crime in their 
past that the person is unable to find legitimate work and 
reverts to crime.11 
Reducing barriers to work cannot prevent every crime.12 
But smart second-chance hiring policies can reduce 
repeat offenses that are motivated by financial hardship.
Another major policy concern is that due to excessive 
policing and racism in the criminal justice system, people 
of color face conviction at such a higher rate that ruling 
out applicants with a criminal background amounts to 
racial discrimination.13 We discuss below how the criminal 
justice system catches up Ohioans of color at much 
higher rates at each point of interaction.
From a business perspective, firms that can’t or won’t 
consider an applicant with a conviction are cut off from 
a significant (and highly motivated) segment of Ohio’s 
workforce. Such employers in Ohio are increasingly likely 
to take a hit to their bottom line as the economy grows 
and the labor market begins to tighten.
HOW WE GOT HERE
The criminal justice approach over recent decades 
has expanded the scope of criminalized activities and 
prioritized punishment over treatment.14 In Ohio, the 
prison population has seen a more than three-fold 
increase with no corresponding population growth or 
surge in crime.15WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG6
Ohio’s state prison population grew from fewer than 
14,000 in 1980 to 50,000 by 2018.16 This growth has 
not followed any increase in criminal behavior, but 
rather a decades-long policy shift toward criminalizing 
more activities and stiffening penalties. The American 
Civil Liberties Union of Ohio reviewed all 1,004 bills 
introduced before the Ohio legislature in the 2015-2016 
legislative session and found that nearly one in 10 would 
have created a new crime.17 The United States is an 
extreme outlier, accounting for 5 percent of the world’s 
population, but 25 percent of its inmates. Among states, 
Ohio ranks 14th, with 444 of every 100,000 residents in 
prison.18 If Ohio’s combined jail and prison population 
were a city, it would be the state’s eighth largest.19
These policies have not improved public safety.20 21 22 
One reason may be that getting caught in the criminal 
justice system weakens an individual’s chances of making 
a legitimate living afterward, and can trigger a cycle 
of repeat offenses, often as a means of subsistence. 
Criminal involvement disrupts career and educational 
paths, through the trial process and incarceration that 
severs existing work relationships or delays school 
completion, and later, through parole obligations that 
limit opportunities by making it harder to maintain a 
regular work or class schedule. 
Successful reentry after a prison or jail sentence hinges 
on the ability to secure legitimate income.23 Failed reentry 
can be as innocuous as a missed parole appointment, or 
it can mean the person commits a new crime. That means 
there is a public safety interest in ensuring that Ohioans 
with a criminal record have the opportunity to remake 
their lives. Gainful work is a critical component of that.
Much of the challenge in finding work post-conviction 
16 Ohio had 49,512 inmates in state prisons as of January 2018, Bennie, Craig R. 2018. January 2018 Census. The Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and 
Correction.
17 http:/ /www.acluohio.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/StatehouseToPrisonPipeline2017.pdf
18 https:/ /bit.ly/2JVoSEy  . Ohio ranks 15th including the nation as a whole, and 14th among states.
19 Ahead of Canton, 2018 population 70,239. http:/ /worldpopulationreview.com/states/ohio-population/cities/
20 In an extensive review of more than 30 studies of the impact of sentencing on crime, including replication of several regression analyses, David Rood -
man found a net impact of incarceration on crime of zero. While incarceration prevents repeat crime during the sentence, longer prison stays increase the 
likelihood of recidivism post-release, fully offsetting the reduction during time of sentence https:/ /www.openphilanthropy.org/files/Focus_Areas/Criminal_
Justice_Reform/The_impacts_of_incarceration_on_crime_10.pdf
21 Using the fact that Seattle defendants were randomly assigned to more or less punitive judges to perform a control study, Roach and Schanzenbach 
found that longer sentences resulted in less recidivism, but that the effect only lasted one year http:/ /www.americanbarfoundation.org/uploads/cms/docu -
ments/specific_deterrence_abf_presentation.pdf
22 Noting that nationally, prison sentences for the same crime increased an average of 36 percent from 1990 to 2009, Pew Trusts found little to no impact 
on recidivism https:/ /bit.ly/2QMH1vd
23 Bruce Western, author discussion of Homeward: Life in the Year After Prison, at Case Western Reserve University, October 26, 2018.is not based on the sentence itself, but instead is the 
result of an expansive array of laws that restrict where an 
Ohioan with a criminal conviction can work. Some even 
extend to Ohioans without convictions but with some 
involvement in the criminal justice system.  
Certain convictions may merit exclusion from some jobs, 
but Ohio’s expansive and, at times, arbitrary collateral 
sanctions exclude a large and growing population 
from significant sectors of the labor market. Collateral 
sanctions reduce opportunities for once-convicted 
Ohioans to participate in the legitimate economy, and 
mean that Ohio businesses forego the productive 
potential of a significant portion of the labor force. 
Compounding the problem, many private business 
owners follow suit, and overlook Ohioans with a past 
conviction, even when no law says they must.
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS ARE NOT AS CLEAR AS THEY 
SEEM
Criminal convictions are a poor indicator of workforce 
performance, as we discuss in further detail below. 
One reason may be that a conviction – or the lack of a 
conviction in an applicant’s background check – carries 
tangled information not only about the individual’s 
actions, but also about how they navigated the criminal 
justice system. That process often plays out very 
differently based on the accused person’s resources and 
race.
Interaction with the criminal justice system entangles 
Ohioans in a complex web of encounters. The process lies 
outside the core focus of this report, but a short overview 
shows how, at each step, factors including race and 
poverty can compromise access to justice. Compounded, WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG7
they produce a population of residents marked with 
a criminal record that skews heavily toward people 
of color and others with limited means of advocating 
for themselves. This process has such a disparate 
effect on Ohioans of color that the Equal Employment 
Opportunities Commission has issued guidance to 
employers discouraging over-reliance on a criminal 
background as a means to evaluate job candidates.24
Most Ohioans with a criminal record never see their 
day in court. Just 2.4 percent of criminal convictions 
in Ohio are actually reached through a trial.25 Pretrial 
detention creates major life disruptions that can cost 
individuals their jobs, homes and children.26 This places 
immense pressure on them to navigate the process 
quickly. Ohioans routinely plead to charges they don’t 
fully understand, with overworked and under-resourced 
counsel by their side. Accused Ohioans may not even 
be aware of the collateral consequences that will follow 
them long after they’ve served their time, dogging their 
efforts to get onto a career path that would make it 
possible to turn a new leaf in their lives. 
Because they affect the work opportunities that are the 
focus of our report, we explain some of the key touch 
points in the criminal justice system Ohioans encounter 
when charged with a crime through this brief flow chart . 
It is not comprehensive, and the process is not truly 
linear.27 Prosecutors wield tremendous discretionary 
power to halt the process at any point by accepting a 
plea deal or dropping charges. 
The process leaves those who encounter the justice 
system less secure, with fewer avenues to participation 
in civic and economic life. These factors have in turn 
exposed communities to heightened risk of repeat 
crimes from offenders who find themselves with few 
alternatives to crime as a means of subsistence.
24 EEOC Enforcement Guidance No. 915.002, Consideration of Arrest and Conviction Records in Employment Decisions Under Title VII of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964 (4/25/2012), available at http:/ /www.eeoc.gov/laws/guidance/arrest_conviction.cfm .
25 https:/ /www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/Publications/annrep/150CSR/summary/20150CS.pdf
26 Conversation with Dorianne Mason of Ohio Justice and Policy Institute, October 2018.
27 For instance, an arrest follows a grand jury indictment when a person is detained in connection with an investigation and police obtain an advance 
warrant. But when a person is arrested in a sweep or random stop, the officer or prosecutor must take the case to the grand jury afterward to establish 
sufficient evidence to move forward.
WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG8
WHO IS AFFECTED? 
The population affected by collateral sanctions in Ohio is 
significant and growing. An estimated 994,000 Ohioans 
are living with a felony conviction—approximately one in 
11 adults in the state—and as many as one in three Ohio 
adults has a criminal record of some kind.28 Each year, 
an estimated 10,000 adults are incarcerated for the first 
time in Ohio’s prisons.29 
A growing number of Ohioans
The number and share of Ohioans caught up in the 
criminal justice system has surged over recent decades. 
Ohio’s state prison population grew from fewer than 
14,000 in 1980 to nearly 50,000 by 2018.30 This growth 
has not followed any increase in criminal behavior, but 
rather a decades-long policy shift toward criminalizing 
more activities and stiffening penalties.31 
Mostly men – but women’s share is growing faster
Men comprise the vast majority of incarcerated Ohioans 
(84.4 percent in 2016), but women are more likely to be 
first-time offenders32 and the number of incarcerated 
women grew by 7 percent between 2014 and 2016.33 
Black Ohioans
Black Ohioans are six times more likely to have a 
criminal conviction than white Ohioans and are more 
likely to serve time. When charged with a felony in the 
US, a person is 11 percentage points more likely to be 
convicted if he or she is black.34 In 2017, an estimated 
405,800 black Ohioans had felony convictions, nearly 
one in four black residents. That same year, an estimated 
588,000, or one in 17, non-black residents had felony 
records. 
Because black Ohioans are treated so differently by our 
criminal justice system, collateral sanctions fall much 
more heavily on black communities. They can steer 
black Ohioans to the bottom of the workforce, or lock 
28 Policy Matters Ohio. See methodology section, Appendix A.
29 https:/ /drc.ohio.gov/Portals/0/FY2018%20COMMITMENT%20REPORT_1.pdf
30 https:/ /bit.ly/2ErruLB
31 https:/ /bit.ly/2BeL0H9
32 In 2016, 73.1 percent of incarcerated women were first time offenders, vs. 48.2 percent of incarcerated male first-time offenders.
33 https:/ /www.drc.ohio.gov/reports/institution-census
34 https:/ /bit.ly/2atNJBu
35 EEOC Enforcement Guide No. 915.002, Consideration of Arrest and Conviction Records in Employment Decisions Under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964 (4/25/2012) available at http:/ /www.eeoc.gov/laws/guidance/arrest_conviction.cfm .them out of jobs altogether. Barring job candidates 
on the basis of a conviction can even amount to racial 
discrimination. The 1964 Civil Rights Act outlaws 
discrimination on the basis of membership in a protected 
group, including race, even if the discrimination was not 
malicious or intentional on the part of the employer. 
Practices that disproportionately harm a class of people 
based on race are said to have a disparate impact on 
them. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
finds that the use of criminal convictions as a screening 
tool carries a disparate impact because African 
Americans face higher rates of criminal conviction. The 
EEOC has issued guidelines, discussed below, to help 
employers navigate hiring decisions when an applicant 
has a conviction.35
Less educated Ohioans – and criminal justice 
involvement can disrupt education
Educational attainment rates are lower among 
incarcerated Ohioans than the general population. In 
2013, 37.7 percent of Ohioans admitted to Ohio prisons 
never finished high school, compared to 10.5 percent 
of the over-25 statewide population. More than a third 
of Ohioans over age 25 have a bachelor’s degree or 
higher, compared to only three percent of Ohioans 
with prison time. A negative feedback loop exists 
between educational attainment and incarceration. Once 
incarcerated, options to continue educational attainment 
are limited. Following release, many jobs requiring 
training and education are barred by collateral sanctions, 
which provides a disincentive for continued education. 
We detail this issue below.
Ohioans with a drug charge
Drug abuse accounts for a major share of Ohioans with 
convictions, especially for women. Many Ohioans face 
obstacles to careers despite having nothing worse on 
their record than a drug charge. The Ohio Justice and 
Policy Center has identified 524 distinct laws that limit WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG9
Ohioans’ work opportunities based on a drug conviction. 
Nearly half, 44 percent, penalize not only felonies, but 
also misdemeanors. Even participation in a diversion 
program, a reasonable step for someone making a 
proactive effort to avoid drug use, can trigger exclusion 
from jobs.36
Drug-related crimes constituted 25.5 percent of all 
felonies resulting in prison sentences in Ohio in 2014.37 
Drug convictions accounted for 38.9 percent of all Ohio 
women sent to prison in 2015, and 25 percent of men. 
Drug offenses were the most common reason for women 
and the second most common reason for men to be sent 
to prison, after crimes against persons.38
Reported drug use in Ohio is on the rise; an Ohio 
Department of Public Safety report found an increase 
of 57.8 percent in the rate of drug possession crimes 
from 2004 to 2014.39 But a punitive policy response 
to drug use also contributes heavily to the number 
of Ohioans with drug convictions. In 2015, The Ohio 
Sentencing Commission identified “War on Drugs”-era 
sentencing changes from the 1980s and ‘90s that made 
penalties more severe for drug-related offenses than 
36 See Table 2 .
37 https:/ /bit.ly/2Pzpz8R
38 http:/ /www.ciic.state.oh.us/docs/Population%20Brief%202016.pdf
39 http:/ /www.publicsafety.ohio.gov/links/ocjs_DrugCrimesReportedOIBRS2016.pdf
40 https:/ /www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/Boards/Sentencing/Materials/2015/April/commissionPriorities.pdfsame-level crimes in which drugs weren’t involved – and 
recommended dialing back those policies.40  
While opioids get substantial attention due to their 
growing use and potentially catastrophic health impact, 
marijuana possession exceeded incidents for all other 
drugs combined, and grew by 72.5 percent. Drug 
addiction can compromise job performance if a drug 
is used at or before work. Yet it is difficult to justify 
exclusion from work over minor drug possession on 
safety grounds. This is an area where sanctions are likely 
overly expansive.
Drug convictions exclude many Ohioans from jobs that 
could help them to overcome past drug abuse. Reducing 
their opportunities to work in turn increases the 
likelihood of recidivism. Virgil, featured in Policy Matters’ 
blog, was on track to become a gym teacher when a 
marijuana possession conviction derailed him. Since then, 
Virgil has worked odd jobs instead. But he has run into 
more legal trouble too, nearly all stemming from financial 
hardship: a conviction for a bad check and defaults on 
child support payments. WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG10
In-demand jobs 
restrictedWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG11
More than 1.3 million—or nearly one in four—Ohio jobs 
are specifically restricted by one or more collateral 
sanctions.41 Sanctions restrict at least 147 distinct 
occupation types in some of Ohio’s largest and fastest-
growing industries. This estimate is based on a new 
analysis that links Standard Occupation Classification-
coded jobs from the Bureau of Labor Statistics to the 
CIVil Impact of Criminal Convictions (CIVICC), an online 
database of collateral sanctions developed by the Ohio 
Justice and Policy Center. The open, searchable database 
is the first comprehensive mapping of Ohio’s collateral 
sanctions and affected jobs. You can find it at: https:/ /
civicc.opd.ohio.gov/Home.aspx/Agree . A listing by 
job title is included in Appendix B  of this report as an 
attachment for conciseness.
This is a conservative estimate of the number of jobs 
affected because the methodology underestimates job 
exclusion for Ohioans with convictions in two important 
ways: 
• The analysis relies on occupation codes, but many 
sanctions apply to the entire workplace, not to 
occupations within the workplace. For example, 
linking job codes to sanctions that restrict school 
employment captures teaching and child care 
occupations but does not capture food preparation 
workers, janitors or other support staff who work in a 
school but whose occupation code does not specify 
education.
• Employers make individual decisions and may 
screen out candidates with criminal records based 
on either real or perceived risk. Some of these 
41 Our jobs estimates match Standard Occupation Classification coded jobs from the Bureau of Labor Statistics with a state database of collateral sanc -
tions, the Civil Impact of Criminal Convictions (CIVICC), developed by the Ohio Justice and Policy Center. Sanctions are written into Ohio Revised Code 
and Ohio Administrative Code. They are not part of the court-imposed sentence for an individual’s crime, but are broadly applied to all Ohioans who have 
a conviction of the type they reference and who seek to work in the occupation or setting they cover. We have matched SOC occupation codes to legal 
sanctions based on descriptions of the jobs affected in the Ohio Revised Code as listed in CIVICC. Because many sanctions are based not on job title, but 
on the workplace, our estimates underreport the true number of jobs to which sanctions apply. For example, sanctions that restrict school employment 
capture many teaching and child care jobs, reported in our estimates, but also cover food preparation workers, janitors or other support staff who work in a 
school. They are not captured in this report. The report thus forms a conservative estimate of the share of the labor market that is restricted for those with 
a criminal record.
42 http:/ /codes.ohio.gov/orc/124.25v1
43 https:/ /civicc.opd.ohio.gov/Home.aspx/DoSearchvoluntary choices have roots in the legal restrictions. 
For example, a contractor who does business in 
workplaces with legal restrictions (e.g., schools or 
health care settings) may refuse to hire individuals 
with records for any position at all. Occupation codes 
do not allow for quantification of this impact. 
Even so, the number of known impacted jobs is 
staggering. While previously convicted Ohioans aren’t 
uniformly barred from all 1.3 million jobs, some of the 
most sweeping restrictions include are described here.
The next sections detail how sanctions impact job 
accessibility in some of Ohio’s largest and fastest 
growing sectors, including health care and public sector 
jobs.
PUBLIC SECTOR JOBS
Some of the most sweeping collateral sanctions apply 
to all public sector jobs: the most severe bar eligibility 
entirely. Ohio has about 644,200 state and local 
government jobs.
Residents can have their application to take the Civil 
Service Exam denied on the basis of any felony.42 
Besides these catch-all laws, Ohio has an array of laws 
that limit entry to specific public sector jobs. Any felony 
is an absolute bar to any “peace officer” job, including 
work as a tax investigator, or village volunteer firefighter, 
even if the felony occurred more than 20 years in the 
past.43IN-DEMAND JOBS RESTRICTEDWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG12
Sweeping collateral sanctions  
A handful of laws block access to hundreds of thousands of jobs
• One sanction exposes workers with any felony 
to exclusion from the Civil Service Exam – 
potentially barring them from most of Ohio’s 
644,200 state and local government jobs.44 This 
sanction is one of the broadest in Ohio law. The 
measure is discretionary, which carries a trade-
off: while this makes it potentially less onerous 
and captures fewer job seekers, it also provides 
cover for administrators to exclude applicants 
based on race, religion, or other suspect factors 
without raising scrutiny.
• Health care professions are among the state’s 
most common and fastest growing occupations, 
with 412,700 jobs in 2017, projected to add 
53,000 through 2024. All are subject to 
collateral sanctions, often connected with 
licensure. Qualifying for a license nearly always 
requires a criminal records check, and certain 
findings require exclusion.
• For the most highly educated professions, 
most grounds for exclusion are broad but 
discretionary. The state licensing board and 
medical board have power to reject any 
applicant whose record includes a felony, a 
drug offense of any kind, or any crime involving 
“moral turpitude” (a term the law does not 
define). Rejection can be based not only on 
a conviction but on an offense for which the 
person was not convicted after successfully 
completing an intervention or diversion 
program.
44 http:/ /codes.ohio.gov/orc/124.25v1
45 http:/ /ohiolmi.com/proj/Projections/Ohio_Job_Outlook_2016-2026.pdf
46 Ohio Admin. Code §5160-1-17.6(G)(2).• Ohio’s Medicaid law tightly restricts eligibility 
for work in home health care and community-
based services. These jobs are an entry point 
into medical professions. They are among the 
state’s poorest quality jobs: many leave workers 
in or near poverty.45 However, these jobs are 
important career prospects for Ohioans with 
convictions because they have lower educational 
requirements, which more closely match the 
educational profile of that group than most jobs 
with sanctions do. One-hundred-and-twenty-
seven statutes bar access to these jobs for 
periods ranging from five years to life. Ohio has 
260,300 affected jobs.
• Ohio’s Medicaid rules additionally discourage 
health care providers from employing anyone 
with any criminal record, no matter how minor, 
by stipulating that a Medicaid provider contract 
can be denied or terminated if the provider, 
or “any ... employee of the provider, has been 
indicted or granted immunity from prosecution 
for, or has pled guilty to, or has been convicted 
of, any criminal offense...”46
• Commercial driving jobs, including 193,500 
truck and bus drivers, are all subject to a host 
of collateral sanctions. The harshest apply to 
school bus and “special client” drivers, in a field 
projected to face particularly high demand for 
workers in the next decade. These drivers must 
undergo criminal background checks in addition 
to driving record checks. The lists of mandatory 
disqualifiers include offenses such as passing 
bad checks that have little if any relevance to 
the work these jobs require.WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG13
Johns Hopkins
A pioneering hospital shows the wayHEALTH CARE JOBS
Health care jobs are among the fastest growing in Ohio, 
and hospitals support a number of other jobs not related 
to direct care. Many sanctions apply to health care 
jobs, including licensing barriers and broad prohibitions 
against Medicare contracts that can trigger when facilities 
employ workers with a record in any capacity, even when 
they are not in contact with patients.
Health care is a field in which foreclosed opportunities 
not only restrict access to good jobs for individuals, but 
also reduce access to workforce for providers facing a 
tightening labor market. That can hurt both providers and 
patients. The need for health care workers has become 
so severe that some direct care providers, especially in 
nursing homes, have been cited for understaffing under 
new Affordable Care Act inspection procedures that 
provide more accurate staffing reports.47
Despite the web of laws that separate prospective 
workers from health care providers that need them, there 
are ways providers can navigate hiring in communities 
with high rates of conviction. The National Employment 
Law Project has created a manual to guide healthcare 
employers through the process.48 Noting the pervasive 
scope of Americans carrying a criminal record, it 
recommends that employers consider mitigating factors. 
Many of the sanctions that apply to workers in hospitals 
and residential facilities give hiring managers discretion 
to use a conviction as grounds for exclusion, but do not 
require them to do so.
Individuals can also take steps to re-qualify for jobs 
that exclude them based on their conviction history by 
petitioning the courts for relief from sanctions through a 
Certificate of Qualification for Employment (CQE). A CQE 
lifts the automatic bar of a collateral sanction, and creates 
a legal presumption that the person’s conviction history 
does not make them unfit for a job or license. CQE’s are 
especially relevant to health care jobs, but also extend to 
other jobs walled off by legal restrictions. Employers who 
hire workers with CQE’s gain immunity from civil liability 
for negligent hiring. This means the CQE can increase 
the applicant’s chance of being hired even for jobs where 
there is no sanction, but where an employer may hesitate 
to hire the person.
47 https:/ /www.leadingageohio.org/aws/LAO/asset_manager/get_file/147860?ver=14775
48 https:/ /bit.ly/2QMHuOc
49 https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=7QnMW2glErk
50 https:/ /bit.ly/2QMHuOcJohns Hopkins Medical Center (Johns Hopkins) 
was a pioneering employer in expanding hiring 
practices to recruit workers with a criminal 
record. Their policy of non-exclusion dates to 
the 1990s, when the hospital began running 
background checks. Johns Hopkins discovered 
that given the number of residents in Baltimore 
and the surrounding area who had a criminal 
record, exclusion would result in chronic staffing 
shortages. Johns Hopkins continues to run 
background checks but not until after extending 
an employment offer. The hospital does not 
automatically exclude those with records, but 
instead considers length of time since the 
conviction and other factors. Human Resources 
Vice President Pamela Paulk reported in a 2012 
web-based lecture that Johns Hopkins had no 
incidents of theft, drug diversion or other crime 
involving an employee with a criminal record that 
warranted termination.49 In a three-year study 
of almost 500 employees with convictions, the 
hospital found higher three-year retention rates 
for these employees than those with no record, 
saving on recruitment and training.50
CERTIFICATES OF QUALIFICATION FOR EMPLOYMENT
Ohio’s Certificate of Qualification for Employment (CQE) 
program, implemented in 2013 and expanded through 
a 2016 amendment, gives individuals with a conviction 
relief from sanctions that restrict entry to a given field. 
CQEs are awarded through the courts on an individual 
basis once the person has demonstrated that she is 
unlikely to commit a new crime and is qualified to work in 
the field. 
The process of obtaining a certificate is challenging to 
navigate, because each certificate must be awarded 
through a court on the basis of individual petition. The 
process can be intimidating and costly, and the procedure 
varies by county. These factors create space for WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG14
workforce development organizations, universities, and 
career training programs to help clients enter careers by 
alerting them to and helping them to obtain CQE’s.
Streamlining the CQE process would also help more 
Ohioans get relief from sanctions that blockade their 
entry or progress on a career path. While counties have 
authority to structure their CQE processes, the state 
Supreme Court could issue guidance to encourage 
standardization of the process. And because non-
recidivism over a number of years is a good indicator that 
a person will not commit new crimes, the state legislature 
should automate it so that individuals with no repeat 
offense after 10 years receive a CQE without having to 
petition the court.
COLLATERAL SANCTIONS CLOSE OFF ACCESS TO 
BETTER JOBS
Not only do sanctions considerably shrink the number 
of jobs available to Ohioans with a conviction and the 
pool of workers available to employers, the sanctions 
specifically wall off good jobs in fast-growing sectors. 
Closing good quality career pathways for those with 
convictions relegates them to lower paying and less 
predictable positions. In 2017, Ohio jobs restricted by 
collateral sanctions paid 10.3 percent more than those 
without: $50,453 versus $45,757.51
Jobs available in legally restricted fields are expected 
to grow at twice the rate (11.0 percent) of those without 
sanctions (5.4 percent) through 2024. The state is 
expected to add 144,000 jobs with restrictions linked 
to job type. Another 205,700 jobs are projected where 
no sanction attaches to the type of job, but workers in 
those fields could face sanctions depending on the place 
of work.52 Of the 10 occupations projected to add the 
most jobs in Ohio by 2024, four are subject to collateral 
sanctions (home health aides, registered nurses, nursing 
assistants, and childcare workers).53
Table 1  summarizes the 15 fastest growing jobs with 
collateral sanctions. In general, jobs with collateral 
sanctions offer better careers and have higher 
51 We group data and derive weighted averages. However, since averages are skewed upward by high earners, the median is generally a more accurate in -
dication of what the typical worker earns. For 2017 the statewide median—the earner in the very middle of the spectrum—made $36,500, while the average 
earner made $46,950. This means our average estimates likely overstate true earnings, but they still provide a good illustration of the earnings premium for 
jobs that are subject to sanctions. In fact, because jobs with collateral sanctions tend to cluster in the public sector, where earnings are more uniform, the 
bias of averages is likely more pronounced for non-sanctioned jobs, and thus our reported wage gap may be under-stated.
52 Occupations for which there is a lack of clarity about whether sanctions apply are projected to add 40,400 jobs by 2024.
53 See Appendix B  for a list of Ohio’s 10 occupations adding the most new jobs through 2024.educational attainment requirements than jobs without 
such hurdles. 
As shown, sanctions can be either mandatory or imposed 
at the discretion of the hiring manager or licensing 
board. Among sanctions that apply to the jobs in Table 1 , 
mandatory sanctions are generally triggered by specific 
lists of offenses, which comprise a minority of offenses 
committed and currently listed in Ohio law. The 11 felony 
barriers often listed by name as barriers to high level 
professional jobs include violent and sexual crimes. The 
majority of convictions fall outside of these crimes. This 
means that, for most Ohioans with a record, employers 
can and should give individual consideration to each 
applicant, taking the presence of a criminal record into 
account alongside other aspects of the application that 
could mitigate any risk suggested by the conviction.
Some sanctions are both sweeping and puzzling. A 
worker can lose any license to practice – including a 
Commercial Driver’s License, cosmetology license, 
or social work license – for alleged nonpayment of 
child support. This sanction is itself often the result of 
indigency: then it locks the affected Ohioan out of work 
opportunities, creating a destructive cycle that makes 
it less likely that the person will be able to pay child 
support. 
Perhaps the most concerning type of obstacles are those 
that arise even when the person has not been convicted 
of anything. Participation in a diversion program, a 
method the individual can pursue to get treatment 
and overcome a past mistake, can close off work 
opportunities.
Table 2  describes some of Ohio’s most far-reaching and 
common sanctions. This information sheds further light 
on what makes public sector and healthcare occupations 
such large categories of restricted jobs, and details more 
specifics of jobs facing many work obstacles (from Table 
1, below). Table 2  is an overview of some of the most 
affected areas in the labor market, limited by space and 
not comprehensive.WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG15
Table 1  
Occupations adding the most jobs with collateral sanctions  
Job title 2017 
jobs Projected 
2026 jobs Growth Percent 
Growth Median 
wage 
2017 Sanctions 
Mandatory Discretionary PLUS Table 2 
Home health aides  62,447  94,098  31,651  43.7%  $10.33  127 statutes, exclusions 
form 5 years to life   x 
Registered nurses  129,954  148,344  18,390  14.2%  $30.43  11 listed felonies or 
registered sex offender  Any felony, drug 
charge, or “Moral 
turpitude”  x 
Personal & home 
care aides  30,913  42,182 11,269  36.5%  $10.61  127 statutes, exclusions 
form 5 years to life   x 
Medical Secretaries  34,390  40,237  46,182  16.3%  $15.52    Depends on employer  
Medical Assistants  23,153  27,790  4,637  20.0%  $14.72    Depends on employer  
Licensed practical 
nurses & 
Vocational nurses  40,254  44,069  3,815  19.5%  $20.21  11 listed felonies or 
registered sex offender  Any felony, drug 
charge, or “Moral 
turpitude”  x 
Nursing assistants  68,537  72,119  3,582  5.2%  $12.54    Depends on employer  
Hairdressers, 
stylists & 
cosmetologists  30,193  33,609  3,416  11.3%  $10.68  Human trafficking, 
violation of 
cosmetology laws or 
rules; offense 
committed on salon 
premises   x 
Teacher assistants  34,956  38,166  3,210  9.2%  $25,5201 80 listed statutes 
barring license, 12 
barring employment  Intervention /diversion 
for an offense on 
mandatory exclusion 
list + any felony, drug 
offense, theft offense + 
others  x 
Truck drivers2 76,084  79,093  3,009  4.0%  $20.09  Outstanding arrest 
warrant, license 
suspension or 
disqualification  “Adverse information” 
on driving record  x 
Child care workers  41,155  43,936  2,781  6.8%  $9.86  100 listed statutes or 
child removed from 
home, possible 
exceptions for 
“rehabilitation”  violating child care 
laws or rules  x 
Medical & health 
services managers  16,073  18,607  2,534  15.8%  $43.67   Depends on employer  
Accountants & 
auditors  47,433  49,962  2,529  5.3%  $31.02  Any felony: felony 
record places burden 
on applicant to show 
“good moral character” 
based on conduct 
since conviction.   x 
Elementary school 
teachers3 45,363  47,844  2,481  5.5%  $9,5601 80 listed statutes 
barring license, 12 
barring employment  Intervention/diversion 
for an offense on 
mandatory exclusion 
list + any felony, drug 
offense, theft offense + 
others  x 
1| Annual salary 2|  Heavy equipment and tractor -trailer 3| Except special education teachers, its own category  
Source: Policy Matters Ohio from Ohio Job Outlook, by Ohio Department of Job and Family Services Labor Market Information; an d CIVICC by Ohio Justice and Policy Center  
 WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG16
Table 2  
Sample criminal record restrictions based on employer type or workplace  
Example Obstacle 
ANY work requiring a license 
(including a driver ’s license)  Mandatory : Notice of default from a child support enforcement agency to any licensing board requires denial 
or suspension of license.  
ANY Medicaid provider  Discretionary : Any criminal offense by an employee can lead to denial or loss of provider’s contract.  
ANY public (civil service) 
employer  Discretionary : Any felony can lead to exclusion from civil service exam.  
Autism program, any position  Mandatory : 51 listed offense statutes [97  offense statutes for worker licensed by Dept. of Education]  
Community -based long -term 
care (provider or employee)  * Mandatory : 127 listed offense statutes; exclusion from 5 yrs. to forever depending on offense + others   
Community health, certified 
comm unity health worker  Mandatory : 11 listed offenses (violent felonies); sex offender required to register    
* Discretionary : any felony or drug law violation; offense involving moral turpitude (undefined);  offense in the 
course of practice ; violation of Nurs ing Board statute. Possible exception based on “rehabilitation” and/or 
restitution  
Developmental Disabilities 
provider (public or private), 
nearly all jobs and facilities  Mandatory : 127 listed offense statutes; exclusion from 5 yrs. to forever depending o n offense  
Developmental Disabilities 
provider (private)  
  certificate to administer 
meds + perform health -
related activities  
 RN trainer certificate  Discretionary : 130 listed offense statutes  
 
Driver, school bus  Mandatory : Specified driving violation  in past y ear; > 6 pts or > 1 serious traffic violation in  past 2 y ears; Listed 
non- traffic offense in last 5 y ears; Listed “major mv offense” incl. DUI in last 6 y ears; Listed drug or theft 
offense in last 10 y ears; Listed “violence -related offense” in la st 20 y ears; Any of 29 listed offenses ever  
Driver, special clients or 
wheelchair van  Mandatory : 6 or more points on DL  
+ (depending on employer):  
Mandatory : 102 listed offense statutes, possible e xception based on “personal character standards”  
OR 127 listed offense statutes; exclusion from 5 yrs. to forever depending on offense   
Elder Care  (hospice, nursing 
home or adult day program), 
direct care position  Mandator y: 55 listed offense statutes; possible e xception based on “personal character standards”    
Foster care  Mandatory : 65 listed offense statutes, possible exception based on “rehabilitation standards”  
Home health agency, direct care 
position  * Mandatory : 127 listed offense statutes; exclusion from 5 yrs. to forever depending on offense   
Medi caid School Program, direct 
contact position  Mandatory : 130 listed offense statutes  
Medication Assistance, certified 
medication aide  Mandatory : 11 listed offenses (violent felonies); sex offender required to register  
* Discretionary : any felony or drug l aw violation; offense involving moral turpitude (undefined);  offense in the 
course of practice ; violation of Nursing Board statute. Possible exception based on “rehabilitation” and/or 
restitution  
Mental health care, licensed 
residential facility, any posi tion 
with unsupervised access to 
residents  Mandatory : 127 listed offense statutes; exclusion from 5 yrs. to forever depending on offense  
Ohio Dept. of Mental Health 
&Addiction Services (ODMHAS), 
any position  Mandatory : Any felony or offense that is M1 on first conviction and a felony on later conviction, if the offense 
“bears a direct and substantial relationship to the position being filled”  
“Out -of-home care” for 
child(ren) (including coach or 
other person supervising after -
school activities)  Mandatory : 65 listed offense statutes, possible exception based on “rehabilitation standards” S6, 2151.86  
Pain management clinic, any 
position  Mandatory : Felony drug offense or felony theft offense   
Pediatric respite care, direct care 
position  Mandatory : 55 listed offense statutes, possible e xception based on “personal character standards”   
Public children’s agency, direct -
care position  Mandatory : 65 listed offense statutes, possible e xception based on “ rehabilitation  standards”   
School, any position  Mandator y: 51 listed offense statutes, possible exception based on “rehabilitation standards”  
School, teaching position  Mandatory : 92 listed offense statutes, possible exception based on “rehabilitation standards”   
* indicates exclusion can be based on complet ing intervention or diversion program with no conviction.  
SOURCE: Ohio Justice and Policy Center, CIVICC database.  
 WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG17
The cost to individuals 
& communitiesPhoto: Ohio Justice & Policy CenterWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG18
The average formerly incarcerated Ohioan who 
sought but couldn’t find work due to criminal history 
lost $36,479 in wages in 2017. Total lost wages 
reached an estimated $3.4 billion across the state. 
Of the estimated 994,000 Ohioans living with a 
felony, 734,431 have been to prison.54 Of these, an 
estimated 552,00055 are now working or seeking 
work. A 2018 report by the Prison Policy Initiative 
found that the average 2008 unemployment rate 
of formerly incarcerated individuals was 4.7 times 
higher than the national rate. Extrapolating to Ohio 
in 2018 yields an estimated unemployment rate for 
formerly incarcerated Ohioans of 21.2 percent.56 
Accounting for working age population and labor 
force participation rates, an estimated 117,000 
formerly incarcerated Ohioans are likely unemployed, 
92,000 more than would be expected if their 
unemployment rate mirrored that of the general 
public.57
Those 92,000 sidelined Ohioans are wasted assets: 
workers left untapped by growing businesses and 
potential earners unable to contribute to their 
families. 
How much of the $3.4 billion lost goes to other 
workers and how much is lost to the state economy 
from positions going unfilled is difficult to estimate. 
However, broad exclusions apply to growing sectors 
where firms report hiring shortages. In those 
markets, collateral sanctions may be artificially 
shrinking the pool of workers available. If firms are 
leaving positions unfilled due to collateral sanctions, 
that translates into lost business revenue as well.
54 See methodology section, Appendix A .
55 See methodology section, Appendix A .
56 A 2018 report by the Prison Policy Initiative compared the 2008 national unemployed rate to the 2008 unemployment rate of formerly incarcerated 
individuals (the only year for which data are available on unemployment rates of formerly incarcerated individuals). The 2008 national unemployment rate 
was 5.8 percent; the rate for those formerly incarcerated was 27.3 percent, or 4.7 times higher; those who had served time were more likely to be looking 
for work.  In July 2018, the unemployment rate in Ohio was 4.5 percent. If this relationship holds, an estimated 21.2 percent of Ohioans who have been to 
prison are jobless.
57 See methodology section, Appendix A  for full details.THE COST TO INDIVIDUALS & COMMUNITIES
Table 3  
Ohioans with convictions lack needed 
education for better jobs  
 Ohioans 
with prison 
time All 
Ohioans 
age 25+ Jobs with 
collateral 
sanctions 
Less than 9th 
grade  6.1% 3.0%  7.0%  
Some high 
school, no 
diploma  31.6%  7.5%  7.0%  
High school 
diploma or  
GED  59.1%  54.4%*  19.4%  
College 
degree or 
higher  3.2%  35.1%**  33.2% Associates, 
40.4% Bachelors+  
*Includes both high school only (33.8%), and some college, no 
degree (20.6%)  
**Includes associate’s, Bachelor’s and advanced degrees  
Source: Policy Matters Ohio from Ohio Job Outlook, by Ohio 
Department of Job and Family Services Labor Market Information  
 WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG19
SANCTIONS DISCOURAGE EDUCATIONAL 
ATTAINMENT
Involvement with the criminal justice system disrupts 
education. As a result, there is an educational attainment 
mismatch between Ohioans with convictions and the 
jobs limited by collateral sanctions—which tend to be 
better jobs – and the achievement of Ohioans who have 
convictions. 
This mismatch has two main effects. First, it makes it 
difficult to fully quantify the economic cost of collateral 
sanctions, since many sanctions apply to jobs that 
individuals with a criminal record could not otherwise 
qualify for. Where this analysis estimates lost earnings, 
we use a wage weighted to the educational attainment 
of Ohioans who have been incarcerated.58
More troubling, collateral sanctions serve as a 
disincentive for Ohioans with a criminal conviction 
in their past to pursue education going forward. 
This challenge came up in interviews Policy Matters 
conducted in connection with this research. Otis, whose 
story introduces our study, did obtain a certification 
in nursing. However, he was never able to work in the 
58 This data point is chosen due to availability: We have educational attainment information for those admitted to prison, but not for all Ohioans with a 
conviction.
59 https:/ /www.policymattersohio.org/blog/2018/10/16/a-case-for-issue-1-virgils-storyfield, and now owes student debt he has been unable 
to repay. Another Clevelander, Virgil, featured on Policy 
Matters’ blog, planned to work as a gym teacher and 
was enrolled in a program at Cuyahoga Community 
College when he was arrested for possession of 
marijuana.59 He served six months in jail, but he knew his 
felony conviction meant he could probably never work in 
a school. So Virgil never went back to college.
Collateral sanctions are among the many challenges 
that complicate a successful reentry. But while some 
challenges can be mitigated over time, the fact 
that collateral sanctions discourage Ohioans with a 
conviction from pursuing education reinforces a system 
that sorts them into the bottom of the labor market, 
and can keep them there for life. This makes collateral 
sanctions—not imposed by a judge, and lingering long 
after an individual has served his or her sentence—one of 
the most festering aspects of our criminal justice system. 
To enhance public safety and avoid unintended damage, 
sanctions must be reimagined to apply narrowly and 
specifically to relevant crimes, and must account for 
mitigating circumstances including non-recidivism and 
time elapsed since a crime.WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG20
Conclusion & 
Recommendations Photo: Ohio Justice & Policy CenterWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG21
Collateral sanctions limit access to a quarter of Ohio jobs 
for nearly a million Ohioans with a felony conviction, 
and potentially many others who have lesser convictions 
and even charges with no conviction. These jobs pay 
better than the average Ohio job, relegating those with 
a record to the bottom of the labor market, or pushing 
them out completely. Black Ohioans are at heightened 
risk. Collateral sanctions mean a criminal conviction at a 
young age can derail a person’s career prospects for life. When good workers are overlooked due to a conviction, 
firms lose earning potential, the state economy is smaller, 
and communities are left less safe. Access to a job can be 
the deciding factor in whether a person with a previous 
conviction leaves that part of his or her past behind to 
enter the workforce, or turns back to crime as a source of 
income. Below are our recommendations for mitigating 
the negative impact of collateral sanctions.CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS
1
2
3The state legislature should eliminate excessive, arbitrary collateral sanctions 
against licensing and hiring. 
Today in Ohio, around 850 laws and rules create barriers to more than 1.3 million jobs for people with 
criminal convictions. They restrict some categories of work, jobs in certain locations, licensure and 
government contacting. Ohio’s General Assembly and regulatory agencies should replace blanket 
restrictions with narrowly defined, targeted provisions designed to protect the public in ways that make 
sense. New rules should account for factors including the number of convictions, time since the offense, 
age of the person at the time of a crime, and demonstrated recovery. Sanctions should be time limited. 
All blanket rules that extend to all felonies should be eliminated, as should rules that cover the vague 
concept “moral turpitude” – which is not a crime defined in Ohio Revised Code.
Criminal lawyers and judges should account for collateral sanctions in plea 
negotiations and sentencing. 
Just 2.4 percent of criminal cases in Ohio go to trial: most are resolved through plea deals.60 Accused 
people face enormous pressure to plead guilty, especially when they are jailed while waiting, so that they 
can return to their lives and work as soon as possible. But the aftermath of a criminal conviction may 
be far from mind when the decision is being made. Defense attorneys should be aware of the workforce 
hurdles their clients will face when they agree to a plea deal. Prosecutors should know that in pursuing 
a charge, they may be locking a person out of certain career opportunities and making the communities 
they serve less safe by increasing the likelihood that the person will reoffend.
Hiring managers and employers should use EEOC guidelines to weigh all relevant 
factors when a prospective employee has a criminal conviction. 
Following these guidelines protects businesses from running afoul of the law through inadvertent 
discrimination. Recognizing that a conviction does not mean a candidate will be an ineffective employee 
broadens the pool of available workers and could enable an understaffed organization to fill tough 
vacancies.
60 https:/ /www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/Publications/annrep/150CSR/summary/20150CS.pdfWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG22
The legislature should ban the box for all Ohio jobs, while allowing managers to 
consider convictions later in the hiring process.  
Ohio is among 31 states with some sort of “ban-the-box” policy.61 Such policies do not prevent managers 
from considering criminal convictions in hiring decisions. They do prohibit the use of a check-box or 
other requirement that applicants disclose criminal convictions in their initial applications. Banning 
the box delays discussion of any criminal record until the candidate has had the opportunity for fair 
consideration alongside other candidates. 
Without such a policy, employers can and often do use a check-box to sort job applicants with 
convictions to the rejection pile without considering any of their qualifications. The potential for such 
blanket exclusion may discourage many applicants from even approaching such businesses when 
seeking work. 
Two recent studies criticized “ban the box” efforts as leading employers to bypass black men generally 
in hiring, regardless of each applicant’s criminal record.62 The National Employment Law Project (NELP) 
responded that “The core problem raised by the studies is not ban-the-box but entrenched racism in the 
hiring process, which manifests as racial profiling of African Americans as ‘criminals.’”63 NELP concludes: 
“The studies highlight the need for a more robust policy response to both boost job opportunities for 
people with records and tackle race discrimination in the hiring process—not a repeal of ban-the-box 
laws.”
Ohio’s 2015 “Fair Hiring Act” and statewide policy for state agency hiring practice creates a useful model 
for all employers, both public and private.
State government, employers and service organizations should expand the use and 
availability of Certificates of Qualification for Employment (CQE). 
Ohio passed the CQE law in 2012 to grant exemptions from specific collateral sanctions that bar workers 
from a given job or field.64 Each CQE also serves as validation from a court, assuring employers that the 
candidate is considered safe to hire, and providing immunity from civil liability for “negligent hiring” 
when an employer hires on the strength of a CQE.  
Fewer than 900 Ohioans have obtained CQEs since the law was enacted. This is partly because acquiring 
a CQE requires petitioning the court and puts the onus on each individual to navigate a technical legal 
process with few resources, all while overcoming other hurdles to landing a job. Compounding the 
challenge is the courts themselves, which have been slow to systematize the process for filing and 
granting CQE petitions as they navigate a new form of legal relief. 
61 https:/ /www.nelp.org/wp-content/uploads/Ban-the-Box-Fair-Chance-State-and-Local-Guide.pdf
62 Amanda Agan and Sonja Starr (“Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Statistical Discrimination: A Field Experiment”), Univ. of Mich. Law & Econ. Research 
Paper No. 16-012 (June 14, 2016), http:/ /papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2795795 . Jennifer Doleac and Benjamin Hansen (“Does Ban the Box 
Help or Hurt Low-Skilled Workers? Statistical Discrimination and Employment Outcomes When Criminal Records Are Hidden”) (July 2016), http:/ /papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2812811 .
63 Maurice Emsellem & Beth Avery, Racial Profiling in Hiring: A Critique of New “Ban the Box” Studies (National Employment Law Project, August 2016).
64 http:/ /drc.ohio.gov/cqe54WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG23
Multiple players can contribute to making the CQE system more effective: 
• Workforce development organizations  can educate employers about the benefits a CQE 
provides, and they can help workers navigate the application process to obtain certificates. 
Community service and advocacy organizations  can do the same.
• The State Supreme Court  can issue guidance to streamline the CQE process and make it uniform 
across the state.
• The legislature  can automate the CQE process for individuals who have not had a repeat offense 
in 10 years. 
Ohio government should work to improve data collection and integrity. 
Criminal record data.  No comprehensive data exist on the number of Ohioans with criminal convictions, 
or who have served time. Ohio’s 88 counties vary widely in what data they collect, how they organize 
it, how long they retain it, and when (if ever) they transmit it to state or federal recordkeepers. Uniform 
anonymized data collection and central reporting of the number of individuals with new and first-
time offenses, broken down by offense type and level, would improve measures of the true costs and 
effectiveness of our criminal justice system.
Licensing data.  Licensing entities should track license denial and discipline decisions where criminal 
record is a factor, identifying the relevant offenses and reasons for denial. Over time such records would 
help to inform policymakers and the public about the value of collateral consequences in licensed 
occupations.
Most Ohioans with a conviction will return to our communities someday. Whether they come back to 
gain a foothold in productive jobs or cycle back into the system, is in many ways up to us.6cont...WASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG24
AppendicesWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG25
APPENDIX A
REPORT METHODOLOGIES
Despite the overall increase in the numbers of people with criminal records, there are no comprehensive data on the 
number of Ohioans or Americans living with felony convictions, much less a criminal record of any kind, including 
misdemeanor convictions, and arrests or criminal charges that did not lead to convictions.  This paper draws on a small 
but growing body of research to estimate the affected population in three ways:
1. Following Bucknor and Barber (2016), and the method developed by Schmitt and Warner (2010), we estimate 
the population of Ohioans with felony convictions, based on those who have served time in prison.65 
This method results in an estimate of 807,000 first-time felony convictions over the past 30 years.
2. Using Shannon et. al., we take an estimate of Ohioans with convictions through 2010 and extrapolate to today 
based on population and demographic change since then.66
This method results in an estimate of 994,000 Ohioans with a felony conviction, and 734,000 who have served 
prison time.
3. Following the Urban Institute, we compare court cases reported in Ohio courts (they studied DC), to the share 
of the national population with a record. 
65 Bucknor and Barber give US estimates http:/ /cepr.net/publications/reports/the-price-we-pay-economic-costs-of-barriers-to-employment-for-former-
prisoners-and-people-convicted-of-felonies , Schmidt and Warner, http:/ /cepr.net/documents/publications/ex-offenders-2010-11.pdf
66 http:/ /users.soc.umn.edu/~uggen/Shannon_Uggen_DEM_2017.pdfIMPACTED JOBS
To view and/or download a comprehensive spreadsheet of Ohio jobs impacted by collateral sanctions, please visit:
https:/ /www.policymattersohio.org/files/assets/copyofcollateralsanctionsappendixcembed.xlsxAPPENDIX BWASTED ASSETS / / POLICYMATTERSOHIO.ORG26
Acknowledgments
Thanks to our partners, the Fund for Our 
Economic Future, for collaboration and funding 
support of this project.
Thanks to the Ohio Justice and Policy Center for 
their collaboration, and for building the CIVICC 
database, which made this report possible.
Thanks to all our readers, at:
The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, The Social Justice 
Institute at Case Western Reserve University, The Cuyahoga 
County Office of Reentry, Cleveland State University, The Ohio 
Poverty Law Center, Cleveland Neighborhood Progress, Towards 
Employment, Passages, the Vincentian Action Network and the 
Ohio Domestic Violence Network.
We are grateful to the George Gund Foundation for support of 
ongoing research to improve our criminal justice practices.CLEVELAND
3631 Perkins Avenue, Suite 4C-East
Cleveland, OH 44114
COLUMBUS
125 East Broad Street, 4th Floor
Columbus, OH 43215CONTACT
Michael Shields
Researcher
(216) 361-9801
mshields@policymattersohio.org
@PolicyMattersOH policymattersohio.org