CSVANW June 2022 NewsletterPride Month - Kinship is TogethernessJune 2022 NewsletterHappy Pride!Join us as we celebrate & honor our LGBTQ2S+ relatives in our lives and communities.Now more than ever, our LGBTQ2S+ relatives need community to show up for them and advocate for their rights to safety, respect and dignity. We know that our LGBTQ2S+ relatives disproportionately experience high levels of violence, high rates of sexual assault & face unique barriers and challenges when seeking support, help and healing. It has been especially challenging for our trans and non-binary Black, Indigenous and relatives of color to navigate access to life preserving resources during ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as well as support services, state & national policies, and medical institutions. But there are ways we can show up and come together for our LGBTQ2S+ relatives: Listen. Believe. And support them in all they do. We must take their lead in building solutions from the most impacted. Share your appreciation for them, let them know they are loved and valued for all that they are and celebrate their lives!This year, CSVANW partners with the Transgender Resource Center of Central New Mexico to amplify our theme and message of Kinship is Togetherness! Kinship is Togetherness is a call to action to connect, show up and be in solidarity with our LGBTQ2S+ relatives during these times of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, institutional racism, homophobia and transphobia, and attacks on trans and non-binary bodies. We ask community to pledge for justice, unharmful support, and visibility for our trans and non-binary relatives.Together, let’s be good relatives and show up as a community to celebrate and honor our LGBTQ2S+ relatives. Show up to honor their gifts, leadership, visibility and their contributions to our communities. Our LGBTQ2S+ relatives are valuable, sacred, and vital in our communities. By accepting, supporting, honoring, and loving our LGBTQ2S+ relatives, we can empower, strengthen, and validate their voices and their true existence in our communities.Get involved this month to show up and support LGBTQ2S+ relatives:Follow CSVANW and TGRC on social mediaInstagram: @tgrcnmFacebook: TGRCNMShare, Comment, Like and Repost social media graphics of NM LGBTQ2S+ Ancestors and NM LGBTQ2S+ Cycle BreakersShare our Spa Day & Pizza Party at TGRC event with LGBTQ2S+ relatives in New MexicoIf you have access, come out to the ABQ Pride Parade on Saturday, June 11th and show your supportLearn more about the Transgender Resource Center of Central New Mexico and how you can get involvedAmplify the upcoming 2022 U.S. Trans Survey!Reach out to your local LGBTQ2S+ resource centers, groups, and organizations to discover how you can support their work and mission.As a community and allies, it is our responsibility to reconnect the ceremonies, prayers, songs and sacred existence of our LGBTQ2S+ relatives back to our tribal and Pueblo communities. In many tribal nations and Pueblos, Kinship is a sacred and valuable medicine that connects and balances relations and communities. So we ask you all to reconnect the teachings and existence of our LGBTQ2S+ relatives back to your community.Kinship is trans rights, kinship is safe and healthy communities for all our relatives, kinship is togetherness!To our beautiful and fierce LGBTQ2S+ relatives:We see you.We hear you.We support you.We love you.We respect your beauty!#KinshipIsTogetherness #PrideMonth2022 #Pride2022Get Involved this Pride MonthCongratulations to our June Advocate of the Month: Honey Sunday!Honey is living evidence that any person who grows up being from a broken home and disdained for being different, can create having a mind-set of overcoming any barriers to become triumphant, and being admired for the work they carry out. Having no barriers to get in her way, and with the support of other CSVANW employees, Honey plans to become an advocate or a case manager to help bring awareness to the needs of the Indigenous Transgender community.﻿As the Project and Media Assistant, Honey is responsible for helping the Coordinators at CSVANW with the trainings and workshops CSVANW organizes. She is always down to offer fresh ideas in ways to increase awareness in understanding the issues with domestic and sexual violence happening to our elders and youths in our Native communities to the public. Currently, she is working on a project with the National Center for Transgender Equality to get the indigenous transgender community to commit to participate in the 2022 U.S Transgender Survey this summer. She is also working with Albuquerque’s Transgender Resource Center of New Mexico’s (TGRCNM)Spa Day to empower the sheltered and especially the unsheltered transgender community in Albuquerque.^ Click PDF above to read more ^‌‌‌‌Missing & Murdered Indigenous People Day of ActionMay 5, 2022 - May 5th is Missing & Murdered Indigenous People Day of Action. Today, CSVANW attended the New Mexico Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Relatives (MMIWR) Task Force State Response Plan Release at the Indian Pueblo Cultural Center. CSVANW staff provided support to the families affected and helped them prepare responses as they were acknowledged and heard this morning by the city of Albuquerque, Mayor of Albuquerque, Albuquerque Law Enforcement, the New Mexico District Attorney, and many others wanting to support.Conference on Crimes Against WomenMay 23 - 26, 2022 - National training for professionals who are responders and advocates to victims of the many varied forms of crimes against women including domestic violence, human trafficking, sexual assault, and strangulation.CSVANW staff Tiffany Jiron and Ryder Jiron along with our April Advocate of the Month, Mrs. Reyes Abeita from Isleta Social Services are in Dallas, Texas attending the Conference on Crimes Against Women. We are glad to be here this year in person to learn at a national platform of high level training and information as advocates of domestic violence, sexual assault, human trafficking, and strangulation in tribal communities. We are engaged in the important conversations ensuring our Indigenous relatives are at the forefront of solutions and resource development. We are excited to come back to our member advocates and member organizations with a wealth of information. We truly wish all our members could be here with us.CSVANW at Berna Facio APS Professional Building EventMay 21, 2022 - CSVANW tabled at the Berna Facio APS professional building. We reached out to youth of different ages with information about CSVANW‘s Native Youth Summit and the Native Youth Council. Many of them we’re wanting to get involved and find ways to participate. Some parents came up and told us their youth joined our Native Youth Summit the past year and told us how their youth were happy to have spent their time learning about how to be an ally and how to organize for topics they are passionate about.CSVANW Provides Air Purifiers to Member OrganizationMay 9, 2022 - CSVANW is continuing to meet our member organizations to provide them with air purifiers. Our Advocate Coordinator met with the Tribal Social Caseworker from Santa Clara Pueblo Social Services, Terrie Chavarria, and our Youth Leader ,Than Povi Baca to assist their advocacy programing while also combating the smoke from the fires in the north and the on-going Covid-19 pandemic. We gave them three air purifiers and Clorox wipes. They gifted the coalition with three beautiful shawls. We appreciate the love we receive. Thank you Terrie and Than Povi for your courageous advocacy!CSVANW in Community for MMIWGRMay 12, 2022 - CSVANW was in O’Gah Po’geh (currently called Santa Fe) to be with relatives who have been impacted by MMIWR to gather, tell their stories, be uplifted by one another and the sacred land holding them. Thank you to Three Sisters Collective for hosting such a powerful and prayerful event, and the many youth who contributed. Featured was Yang from YUCCA sharing how to become part of the movement to end violence and restore healthy communities.CSVANW distributes DIY CR box air purifiers and educational tools to northern NM Pueblo communitiesMay 13, 2022 - Kuu da woha to ndncollective, poehculturalcenter and puebloactionalliance for your support in helping us distribute DIY CR box air purifiers and educational tools to northern NM Pueblo communities impacted by wildfire smoke. We were able to support many families needing clean air support for their respiratory systems.CSVANW at Matriarch Health FairMay 13, 2022 - Daa'waa'e @poahhsd for hosting the Matriarch Health Fair, and inviting CSVANW to share space. The purpose of this fair is to uplift all Self-Identifying Women and Matriarchs, with the focus on promoting healthy lifestyles, self care & well being, MMIWR, and traditional Roles as Matriarchs.No More Stolen Relatives: Examining Intersections of Gender-Based Violence and MMIWRMay 12, 2022 - This virtual training provided participants an understanding of gender-based violence and MMIWR by illustrating their connection of DV/IPV/SV, and how advocates/providers can recognize how they can utilize their advocacy to help fight the MMIWR crisis. Gender-based violence are harmful acts committed against folks from varying gender identities, which include DV/IPV, sexual violence, sex trafficking, interpersonal violence, stalking, etc.Areas of focus included:Discussion of the correlation of DV/IPV/SV that can lead to the causation of MMIWRDetermined how advocates and providers can better serve and protect transgender women and relatives to end gender-based violenceEngage in a workshop with a MMIWR family advocate to determine how you can recognize ways to support survivors and be a part of the solution to the MMIWR crisisOur trainers Christine Means and Renae Gray provided valuable knowledge to providers -- both of whom are MMIWR advocates or have experienced the system gaps as it relates to MMIWR and violence against women. They facilitated workshops that incorporated lived knowledge and understanding of the systems that are intended to support survivors, and provided training on how advocates can utilize this knowledge in their every day advocacy.Advancing Advocacy TrainingMay 24 2022 - Last week, CSVANW completed our Advancing Advocacy Training in Tribal Communities and certified between 30-40 new advocates who will be assisting survivors of violence in the state of New Mexico and the Four Corners Region. This was our first in-person training in over 2 years, and it felt so good to be able to interact and engage with one another for 3 days. CSVANW was able to accommodate our advocates with a safe space for discussion and learning, provided scholarships to 15 participants, and fed everyone each day. We found it important to care for our advocates and create an environment that fostered learning and discussion.Additionally, we implemented a COVID-19 mitigation plan to ensure safety and that our training space was accessible to all relatives. CSVANW was able to provide N95 masks to participants, placed air purifiers throughout the training room, and used a CO2 monitoring device that provided us with a clear reading of safe air levels. We understand that we are still operating in a pandemic, and it is a priority of our coalition to continue to take necessary steps to mitigate COVID-19.‌‌‌‌Follow us on social media to stay updated when CSVANW is in the community.Mutual aid efforts ahead of the state on COVID and wildfiresMutual aid efforts ahead of the state on COVID and...As coronavirus surges and wildfires grow, local community mutual aid organizers in New Mexico have responded much differently than state officials. Rather than placing responsibility on individuals, Indigenous-led mutual aid groups approach the...Read moresourcenm.comNDN Collective and local Native organizers provide support for those impacted by wildfires in New MexicoNDN Collective and local Native organizers provide...NDN Collective Today, NDN Collective 's Climate Justice team and the Coalition to Stop Violence Against Native Women announced distribution of dozens of air filters to use for those impacted by the wildfires in New Mexico. The groups will provide ...Read moreindiancountrytoday.comLong-haul COVID impacts Indigenous communitiesLong-haul COVID impacts Indigenous communitiesSince the onset of the global pandemic that flourished in March of 2020, COVID-19 alone has become the third leading cause of death among Americans - falling just behind heart disease and cancer. But perhaps more striking is how the increasing...Read morewww.lcsun-news.comTHANK YOUTO OUR CHANGE MAKERSMay 2022 DONORSGeneral contributions and donations from individual supporters and organizational partners are essential for CSVANW's sustainability and effectiveness. Your donation helps make it possible for us to cultivate and strengthen our ability to advocate for Native women and children and breaking of cycles of violence.Donate todayNOTE: All presentation requests for Sexual Violence initiatives and Native Youth initiatives will be put on hold till we find a coordinator for both positions. And as soon the position is filled we can go back to taking requests.Share our Spa Day & Pizza Party at TGRC event with LGBTQ2S+ relatives in New MexicoShare our Spa Day & Pizza Party at TGRC event with LGBTQ2S+ relatives in New MexicoThe U.S. Trans Survey (USTS) is the largest survey of trans people in the United States. The USTS documents the lives and experiences of trans people in the U.S. and U.S. territories.The US Trans Survey is for all trans people age 16 and up.The USTS is for people of all trans identities, including binary and nonbinary trans identitiesThe USTS is the main source of data about trans people for the media, educators, policymakers, and the general public, covering health, employment, income, the criminal justice system, etc.USTS reports have been a vital resource, including the reports on the experiences of people of color and reports by state.In 2015, nearly 28,000 people took the USTS, making it the largest survey of trans people in the U.S. A lot has happened since then – and it’s time to conduct the USTS again in 2022.More than ever, it's important to ensure that trans voices will shape the future.Help us continue to be the largest, most diverse sample across all identities. Please spread the word to ensure that people of color, older people, those who live in rural areas, immigrants, Spanish speakers, those who are HIV+ hear about the survey.*By submitting this pledge form, you’ll receive email updates from NCTE about the USTS*Pledging to take the survey does not obligate you to take the survey. Participation is voluntary. You will be asked to consent to take the survey later when the survey enrollment beginsTAKE PLEDGEJoin Bold Futures for the 11th annual Family Pride Celebration!The celebration is FREE, and features music, dancing, family-friendly activities, face painting, games, and more. Folks are welcome to bring their own food or purchase something from local food trucks.Bold Futures acknowledges people and families of all kinds. Come by yourself, with friends, with a tia/o/x--whoever makes you feel like celebrating! Open to people of all ages, genders, and orientations.40-Hour CertificationTo receive your 40-hour certification, you must complete the 16.25 hours of the OVC-TTAC Online Training. When you complete that training, you may upload your hours to an AirTable link that will be provided at a later date. Here is the link to OVC trainings:VICTIM ASSISTANCE TRAINING ONLINEGENDER-BASED VIOLENCE PROJECT COORDINATORPOLICY AND ADVOCACY DIRECTORSEXUAL VIOLENCE PROJECT COORDINATORKeep checking back for more opportunities here.Become a MemberDonate TodayFollow us on Social Media‌‌‌‌Stay Updated: Sign Up for Our Emails