  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
THE CENTER FOR VICTIMS OF TORTURE POLICY 
REPORT : 
U.S.  BI-PARTISAN LEADERSHIP AGAINST TORTURE  
 
25TH ANNIVERSARY OF PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN SIGNING THE CONVENTION 
AGAINST TORTURE AND OTHER CRUEL , INHUMAN OR DEGRADING TREATMENT 
OR PUNISHMENT  
 
APRIL 2013  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Center for Victims of Torture is a n international non -governmental organization  
with offices in  Minnesota , Washington, D.C., Africa and the Middle East  
 
 
 
 
1776 K Street NW, Suite 200 ● Washington, D.C. 20006 ● 202.822.0188 ● cvt@cvt.org  ● www.cvt.org  
The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  INTRODUCTION  
On April 18, 1988, the United States signed the 
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or  Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment (“Convention Against Torture” or 
“Convention”  or “CAT” ).  President Ronal d 
Reagan , upon transmitting the Convention to 
the Senate for advice and consent , stated  that 
the Convention “marks a significant step in the 
develop ment during this century of 
international measures against torture and 
other i nhuman treatment or punishment.…  
Ratification of the Convention by the United 
States will clearly express United States 
opposition to torture, an abhorrent practice 
unfortunately  still prevalent in the world 
today.”1 
Twenty -five years later, this strong, public 
opposition in the United States to torture has 
been clouded by U.S. policies that authorized 
the use of torture and cruelty in 
counterterrorism operations following the 
terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001.  
These policies have severely damaged U.S. 
national security and foreign policy interests – 
compromising international cooperation and 
support from allied nations. The country’ s 
credibility as a human rights leader was  also 
seriously harmed. Government officials, human  
  
 
rights advocates and defenders, who were part  
of the international movement to end torture, 
felt that they lost a critical ally.  As a Republican 
Senator in 2008, Secretary of Defense Chuck 
Hagel war ned, “[I] n our effort to protect the 
nation, we must remember our greatest 
strength: the principles of human rights that we 
have upheld throughout our country's wars and 
conflicts. It is vital that the world can trust what 
we say and have confidence in wha t we do. 
There must be no doubt that this great nation 
does not torture.”2 
 
 
Damage was also done at home as fear and 
misinformation began dominating public 
discourse. The public perception of torture and 
its horrors began to shift and that “clear 
oppositi on to torture,” President Reagan spoke 
of in 1988, dwindled. Today, U.S. public polling 
shows a majority of Americans are in favor of 
torture.3  It also shows that Americans are 
  
“Ratification of the Conventi on by 
the United States will clearly 
express United States opposition to 
torture, an abhorrent practice 
unfortunately still prevalent in the 
world today.”  
 
– President Ronald Reagan  
“It is my sincere st hope that we Americans, for all of our many disagreements, can nonetheless 
manage to agree that torture … is unworthy of our national honor and should no longer be a matter 
for discussion.  It is my hope that we can reach a consensus in this country tha t we will never again 
engage in these horrific abuses, and that the mere suggestion of doing so should be ruled out of our 
political discourse, regardless of which party holds power.”    
– Senator John McCain, December 2012  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  “more pro -waterboarding, pro -threatening 
prisoners with dogs,  pro-religious hu miliation, 
and pro-forcing prisoners  to remain  naked  and 
chained  in uncomfortable  positions  in cold 
rooms.”4  Moreover, when the U.S. media uses 
misleading euphemisms for torture, like 
“enhanced interrogation,” public opposition to 
torture decreases.5 
 
Torture’s efficacy continues to be debated, 
oftentimes in partisan terms.  Despite evidence 
to the contrary, some policymakers and 
politicians argue that the [past illegal] policies 
of torture and abuse employed under the Bush 
Administration were necessary to  save lives and 
that the discontinuance of those harsh tactics 
has made the United States less safe.  This on -
going political debate has eroded the once 
unified, non -partisan opposition to torture that 
existed before 9/11.  
 
As an international rehabilitat ion center that 
has extended care to nearly 24,000 survivors of 
torture and severe war -related atrocities from 
around the world, the Center for Victims of 
Torture (CVT) has a unique, first -hand insight 
into the ways in which the U.S. decision to 
engage in torture and abuse had serious 
ramifications for the anti -torture movement 
and survivors’ healing worldwide.  
 
When U.S. attention became gripped by 
counterterrorism concerns, the obligations to 
which our nation  committed itself in decades 
past faded into t he background of our leaders’ 
consciousness.  But the duties to which the 
United States  pledged itself —and the enduring 
significance of those duties —did not vanish.  
Departure from these obligations during 
moments of supposed necessity  is not 
permitted.   
 
Article 2 of the CAT plainly reads: “No 
exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether 
a state of war or a threat or war, internal 
political instability or any other public 
emergency, may be invoked as a justification of 
torture.”  On January 22, 2009, the United States turned a 
page when President Obama signed an 
Executive Order banning torture and cruelty.  
We took a step away from the brutal tactics 
that had marked the nation’s counterterrorism 
practices over the previous eight years. But 
significant work  remains.  
 
 
If the United States is to regain global 
leadership against torture, a full and public 
accounting of how U.S. government policies and 
practices failed to conform to our legal and 
moral obligations underpinning the Convention 
Against Torture – a Convention championed by 
the United States twenty -five years ago with 
strong bi -partisan support - is required.  
 
BI-PARTISAN OPPOSITION OF TORTURE 
AND SUPPORT FOR CAT 
 
A 1984 bipartisan joint resolution in Congress  
states , “The United States Government opposes 
acts of torture wherever they occur, without 
regard to ideological or regional considerations, 
and will make every effort to work 
cooperatively with other governments and with 
nongovernmental organizations to combat the 
practice of torture worldwid e.”6  Critical to 
combating torture —as recognized by President 
Reagan in his CAT signing statement and 
reaffirmed by President Clinton when he signed 
legislation criminalizing torture into U.S. law —
are domestic and international efforts to ban 
“No exceptional circumstances 
whatsoever, whether a state of 
war or a th reat or war, internal 
political instability or any other 
public emergency, may be invoked 
as a justification of torture.”  
 
– Convention Against Torture , 
Article 2.  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  torture and hold perpetrators accountable. 
From the years of the Reagan Administration to 
those of the George H.W. Bush and Clinton 
Administrations, U.S. Presidential and 
Congressional leadership shared a unified 
opposition to torture and bipartisan support for 
the CA T. 
 
NEGOTIATION AND SIGNING OF CAT:  
REAGAN ADMINISTRATION  
 
The United States actively participated in the 
preparation and negotiation of the Convention.  
During 1978 -1984, the United States  was one of 
53 members of the UN Commission tasked with  
preparing th e treaty.7 The preparatory work of 
the Convention shows the United States’ active 
role in submitting proposals and negotiating 
text for the Convention.8 President Reagan 
celebrated the active and effective role of the 
United States in the Convention’s nego tiations.9   
 
 
Similarly, U.S. Secretary of State George Schultz  
noted that the United States “contributed 
significantly to the development of the final 
Convention, especially in proposing that [it] 
focus on torture, rather than on other relatively 
less a bhorrent practices.”10 According to the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee report, the 
United States also “strengthen[ed] the 
effectiveness of the Convention by pressing for 
provisions that would ensure that torture is a 
punishable offense.”11 
 In fact, the United States  was a strong 
supporter of the principle of universal 
jurisdiction  – which requires each State Party 
either to prosecute torturers who are found in 
its territory or to extradite them to other 
countries for prosecution.  In his transmission to 
the Senate, President Reagan emphasized, “The 
core provisions of the Convention establish a 
regime for international cooperation in the 
criminal prosecution of torturers relying on so -
called ‘universal jurisdiction.’”12  As Secretary of 
State Schultz  noted,  the purpose of this 
provision was “to prevent a loophole that 
would create potential safe -havens for 
torturers.”13 
 
Three years after the Convention was adopted 
by the United Nations, John C. Whitehead , 
Deputy Secretary of State in the Reagan 
Administratio n, signed the Convention on April 
18, 1988.14  One month later, President Reagan  
transmitted the Convention to the Senate for 
ratification stating, “By giving its advice and 
consent to ratification of this Convention, the 
Senate of the United States will de monstrate 
unequivocally our desire to bring an end to the 
abhorrent practice of torture.”15 
 
RATIFICATION OF CAT:  GEORGE H.W.  
BUSH ADMINISTRATION AND BI-PARTISAN 
CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT  
 
While the Convention was submitted to the 
Senate under the Reagan Admini stration, it was 
under the leadership of George H.W. Bush  that 
the Convention was ratified in 1990.  Upon 
taking office, the Bush Administration declared 
that the Convention Against Torture was a 
matter for which there is an “urgent need for 
Senate approva l.”16  
 
To that end, the Bush Administration worked 
with interested stakeholders and critics of the 
original proposed package to strengthen the 
protections provided individuals under the 
Convention and to solidify the absolute ban on 
torture by ensuring the  United States would not 
“The core provisions of the 
Convention establish a regime for 
international cooperation in the 
criminal prosecution of torturers 
relying on so -called ‘universal 
jurisdiction.’”  
– President Ronald Reagan  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  accept any justifications for torture. Specifically, 
the Bush Administration substantially reduced 
and revised the reservations, understandings, 
and declarations in order to address concerns 
that the original package could be inter preted 
to raise “the threshold of pain that an individual 
must suffer” and permit “certain circumstances 
and justifications for torture.”17 
 
On January 30, 1990 , the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee , including then Senators 
Joe Biden and John Kerry , voted  10 to 0 (all 
Democratic Senators) to recommend approval 
of the Convention by the entire Senate.18 In the 
Committee report on the Convention, the 
Senators noted that the Convention is a “major 
step forward in the international community’s 
efforts to elimina te torture and other cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment.” It “…takes a comprehensive 
approach to the problem of combating torture. 
… and that “[t]he strength of the Convention 
lies in the obligation of States Parties to make 
torture a crim e and to prosecute or extradite 
alleged torturers found in their territory.”19 
 
 
Although the nine Republican members of the 
Committee  were not present for the vote and 
criticized the chairman for taking a vote in their 
absence, they also went out of their  way to 
issue a written statement expressing their 
strong support for the Convention. They stated, “We believe that prompt ratification of the 
convention will demonstrate the abhorrence of 
our Nation toward torture, and encourage more 
widespread prompt rat ification of the 
convention among the community of nations.”  
They went on to say, “The absence of 
Republican members in no way reflects a lack of 
support for the convention. Indeed, the 
Convention Against Torture was negotiated 
with bipartisan support.”20 
 
Working with Republican Senator Jesse Helms, 
Democratic Senator Claiborne Pell introduced 
the Convention with four amendments to the 
full Senate. On October 27, 1990, the Senate 
approved the Convention for ratification.  
 
IMPLEMENTING LEGISLATION : CLINTON 
ADMINISTRATION AND BI-PARTISAN 
SUPPORT OF CONGRESS  
 
Before U.S. ratification of the Convention could 
be submitted to the United Nations, the United 
States had to adopt implementing legislation.  
President George H.W. Bush  proposed 
implementing legislation that he said “would 
provide a tougher and more effective response 
to the problem, putting in place for torturers 
the same international ‘extradite or prosecute’ 
regime we have for terrorists.”21 
 
On April 30, 1994, the required implementing 
legislation pass ed Congress with bi -partisan 
support and was signed into law by President 
Clinton .22 
 
 
AFTERMATH OF 9/11  ATTACKS : BREAK IN 
AND DAMAGE TO U.S.  LEADERSHIP 
AGAINST TORTURE  
 
Given the firm and non -partisan opposition to 
torture, the history of true bi -partisan support 
of the Convention Against Torture and U.S. 
leadership in combatting torture globally, the 
decision made under the administration of 
“We believe that prompt ratification 
of the convention will demonstrate 
the abhorrence of our Nation 
toward torture, and encourage 
more widespr ead prompt 
ratification of the convention 
among the community of nations .”  
 
– Republican Senators of Foreign 
Relations Committee  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  George W. Bush to authorize and implement a 
policy of torture and cruelty in its counter -
terrorism efforts post -9/11  was an 
uncharacteristic break with long -standing U.S. 
commitments.  
 
In the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, the U.S. 
government made a range of illegal and unwise 
decisions that led to the widespread and 
systematic use of torture and cruelty in U.S. 
detenti on facilities in Iraq, Guantanamo, 
Afghanistan and secret prisons around the 
world. From the decision that the Geneva 
Conventions – which require humane treatment 
of detainees in times of war – did not apply to al 
Qaeda and Taliban prisoners in Guantanamo or 
Afghanistan , to the decision to authorize the 
CIA to employ interrogation tactics constituting 
torture and cruelty in so -called “black sites ,” to 
the message given to U.S. troops by then 
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld to “take 
the gloves off,” sen ior officials of U.S. 
government sanctioned detention and 
interrogation policies that violated U.S. law and 
international legal obligations prohibiting 
torture and cruelty.   
 
Moreover, a series of legal memoranda 
contorted the law and ignored well -establi shed 
legal precedent - “failing to provide ‘thorough, 
candid, and objective’ analysis” – in order to 
provide a legal cover to tactics constituting 
torture and cruelty.23   
 
The Senate Armed Services Committee  found: 
“The abuse of detainees in U.S. custody ca nnot 
simply be attributed to the actions of ‘a few bad 
apples’ acting on their own.  The fact is that 
senior officials in the United States government 
solicited information on how to use aggressive 
techniques, redefined the law to create the 
appearance of their legality, and authorized 
their use against detainees.”24 The results were 
costly.  U.S. actions damaged relationships with 
close allies.  U.S. standing with world leaders 
and with citizens of strategically important 
nations plummeted.  As the Senate A rmed 
Services Committee stated, “Those efforts damaged our ability to collect accurate 
intelligence that could save lives, strengthened 
the hand of our enemies, and compromised our 
moral authority.”25 
 
WHY U.S.  GLOBAL LEADERSHIP TO 
COMBAT TORTURE MATTERS  
 
The United States, as a democratic society that 
respects the rule of law, has an interest in 
abiding by its legal obligation under both 
international and domestic law to uphold the 
absolute prohibition against torture.  
Additionally, the United States has b oth a 
foreign policy and national security interest in 
being a global leader on human rights generally, 
and a leader in combatting torture specifically.  
Generally, U.S. global leadership on human 
rights promotes good will and cooperation from 
allies and w orld citizens in furtherance of U.S. 
interests.  More specifically, U.S. leadership on 
combatting torture helps to build democratic 
societies and institutions abroad – where often, 
torture is used to repress and destroy 
democratic freedoms.  Additionally, because of 
the U.S. economic, military and political power 
on the world stage, U.S. global leadership 
against torture has serious ramifications for the 
torture movement and survivors’ healing 
worldwide.  
 
INTERNATIONAL AN D U.S.  DOMESTIC 
LEGAL OBLIGATIONS  
 
The absolute prohibition against torture is a 
universally recognized legal obligation under 
international law from which no exception is 
ever permitted.  In addition to the Convention 
Against Torture, torture is unequivocally 
banned under the Universal Decl aration of 
Human Rights,26 International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights,27 Geneva Conventions,28 
and in every regional human rights treaty.29  
Indeed, the prohibition against torture is well 
established under customary international law The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  as a legal norm  in which no country can 
derogate.30 
 
Torture is also banned under U.S. law under the 
federal Anti -Torture Act,31 the War Crimes Act,32 
and the Detainee Treatment Act.33  Torture also 
violates rights established under the U.S. 
Constitution , including the Eight h Amendment’s 
right to be free of cruel or unusual 
puni shment.34 
 
As the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for 
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Harold 
Koh, testified to a United Nations committee: 
"Torture is prohibited by law throughout the 
United State s. It is categorically denounced as a 
matter of policy and as a tool of state authority. 
In every instance, torture is a criminal offense. 
No official of the government —federal, state, or 
local, civilian or military —is authorized to 
commit or to instruct a nyone else to commit 
torture. Nor may any official condone or 
tolerate torture in any form. No exceptional 
circumstances may be invoked as a justification 
for torture."35 
 
The United States has long embraced the 
principles and values underpinning democratic  
societies such as justice, fairness and individual 
rights.  Enforcing and upholding the rule of law 
is an essential pillar of democracy.  The U.S., 
therefore, should embrace its international and 
domestic obligations to prohibit torture.  As 
Koh wrote in 2008, “ Official cruelty has long 
been considered both illegal and abhorrent to 
our values and constitutional traditions. The 
commitment to due process and the ban 
against cruel and unusual punishment are legal 
principles of the highest significance in 
Amer ican life. ”36 
 
Furthermore, international treaties are a 
practical step toward creating international 
cooperation and consensus toward a more 
stable world. Reducing risk and creating a more 
manageable global community are in the United 
States’ interest.  William H. Taft, IV , Legal 
Adviser for the U.S. State Department, under President George W. Bush, warned “A decision 
that the [Geneva] Conventions do not apply to 
the conflict in Afghanistan in which our armed 
forces are engaged deprives our troops there of 
any claim to the protection of the Convention in 
the event they are captured and weakens the 
protections afforded by the Conventions to our 
troops in future conflicts.”37 
 
U.S.  FOREIGN POLICY  
 
The U.S. State Department  has repeatedly 
acknowledged that U.S. funding to the UN 
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture “supports 
the U.S. foreign policy goal of promoting 
democracy and human rights.”38 In 2002, the 
U.S. State Department affirmed, “The use of 
torture presents a formidable obstacle to 
establishing and de veloping accountable 
democratic governmental institutions. Assisting 
torture victims helps establish and reinforce a 
climate of respect for the rule of law, good 
governance and respect for human rights.”39 
 
Moreover, the United States needs to engage 
the in ternational community on many complex 
issues requiring multilateral cooperation. U.S. 
leadership to promote and protect human 
rights encourages political, military, and 
intelligence cooperation from our allies. By 
contrast, U.S. engagement in torture and a buse 
discourages cooperation from allies and 
international partners critical to furthering 
interests abroad.  
 
Prior to the Bush Administration deciding that 
the Geneva Conventions did not apply to the 
conflict in Afghanistan, Secretary of State Colin 
L. Po well  argued that the advantages of 
applying the Geneva Conventions to the conflict 
in Afghanistan far outweighed their rejection 
because declaring the conventions inapplicable 
"has a high cost in terms of negative 
international reaction, with immediate adv erse 
consequences for our conduct of foreign 
policy.”40 
 The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  He also said it would "undermine public support 
among critical allies"41 and that “Europeans and 
others will likely have legal problems with 
extradition or other forms of cooperation in law 
enforcement , including in bringing terrorists to 
justice.”42 
 
Indeed, in testimony before the Senate Armed 
Services, U.S. Navy General Counsel Alberto 
Mora  (who served in this capacity during the 
first George W. Bush Administration) recounted 
that the U.S.’s decision “to adopt cruelty has 
had devastating foreign policy consequences” 
that would “inevitably damage [U.S.] national 
security strategy and [U.S.] operational 
effectiveness in the War on Terror.”43 He added, 
“International cooperation, including in the 
military,  intelligence, and law enforcements 
arenas, diminished as foreign officials became 
concerned that assisting the U.S. in detainee 
matters could constitute aiding and abetting 
criminal conduct in their own countries.”44 
 
U.S.  NATIONAL SECURITY  
 
U.S. national security interests are also 
furthered when the United States leads on 
human rights and combatting torture by 
promoting good will and winning hearts and 
minds of local populations – efforts that are 
critical to counter -insurgency and 
counterterrorism effort s. Likewise, these efforts are essential to building and sustaining 
international support and cooperation with 
allied nations.  
 
The Senate Armed Services Committee  found 
that: “The collection of timely and accurate 
intelligence is critical to the safety o f U.S. 
personnel deployed abroad and to the security 
of the American people here at home.  The 
methods by which we elicit intelligence 
information from detainees in our custody 
affect not only the reliability of that 
information, but our broader efforts to  win 
hearts and minds and attract allies to our 
side.”45 
 
In fact, in testifying before Congress that U.S. 
mistreatment caused damaged to U.S. national 
security interest at an operational level, U.S. 
Navy General Counsel Alberto Mora  cited 
specific examples  in which allies “hesitated on 
occasion to participate in combat operations” 
and “refused on occasion to train with [the U.S.] 
in joint detainee capture and handling 
operations” because of concerns with U.S. 
treatment of detainees and detention policies.46  
He also stated that senior NATO officers in 
Afghanistan reportedly “left the room when 
issues of detainee treatment [were] raised by 
U.S. officials out of fear that they may become 
complicit in detainee abuse.”47 
 
As stated by then Senator John Kerry  in 20 08, 
“Most of us can agree that sometimes, in the 
name of national security, it is necessary to 
make difficult ethical decisions to protect the 
American people. However, the 
administration's dangerous and 
counterproductive choice to employ torture has 
sever ely weakened our ability to win the 
struggle against extremism. It has also wasted 
our greatest asset: our moral authority.”48 
 
Moreover, engaging in practices of torture and 
cruelty serves as a recruitment tool for U.S. 
enemies and discourages enemies from  
surrendering.  
 
“The use of torture presents a 
formidable obstacle to establishing 
and developing accountable 
democratic governmental 
institu tions. Assisting torture 
victims helps establish and 
reinforce a climate of respect for 
the rule of law, good governance 
and respect for human rights.”  
 
-U.S. State Department, 2002  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  The Senate Armed Services Committee  found 
that“[t]reating detainees harshly only reinforces 
that distorted view, increases resistance to 
cooperation, and creates new enemies.”49 
 
In testifying before Congress, U.S. Navy General 
Counsel  Albe rto Mora  stated, “There are 
serving U.S. flag -rank officers who maintain that 
the first and second identifiable causes of U.S. 
combat deaths in Iraq -- as judged by their 
effectiveness in recruiting insurgent fighters 
into combat -- are, respectively the s ymbols of 
Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo.”50 
 
Similarly, General Ray mond  Odierno , 
commander of U.S. troops in Iraq,  stated, “The 
graphic revelations of detainee abuse 
motivated some terrorists including foreign 
fighters from Syria, Yemen and Saudi Arabia to 
join the jihad.”51  
 
SPILL-OVER “JUSTIFICATIONS ” AND 
DANGEROUS PRECEDENT  
 
When the United States engages in torture and 
abuse in the name of national security , it 
provides justifications for other governments 
and oppressive regimes to do the same against 
innoc ent civilians, journalists, democracy 
activists, people seeking to practice their own 
religion , and even puts U.S. troops in danger . 
 
CVT has seen strikingly similar patterns 
worldwide among different leaders – left and 
right - who rationalize the use of to rture by 
dehumanizing the victim, citing national 
emergencies and security as justification, and 
assuming an ability to produce a desired 
outcome through fear and violence. When 
crises arise that prove beyond the scope of 
leaders’ imaginations and/or resou rces, 
desperate measures are often supposed 
necessary.  
 
Moreover, when the U.S. government openly 
violated its international legal obligations, it set 
a dangerous precedent not only on the issue of torture, but for the broader notion that those 
duties are optional. U.S. government policies 
and practices weakened international human 
rights instruments designed to end torture (the 
CAT and the Geneva Conventions). Flagrant 
disregard for treaties and conventions that the 
U.S. has ratified has profound implicati ons for 
the global community’s efforts to secure 
support for international norms. By flouting 
these obligations, the U nited States also 
delivered an implicit message that torture, once 
seen as the tool of despotic regimes, could be 
shaped to look like legi timate component of a 
democratic government’s national defense.  
 
 
Furthermore, the United States’ practice of 
torture places U.S. troops in danger should they 
be captured.  In remarks on the floor of the U.S. 
Senate, Senator John McCain  cautioned, “… if 
America uses torture, it could someday result in 
the torture of American combatants.”52  He 
went on to warn that the United States should 
“…be careful that we do not set a standard that 
another country could use to justify their 
mistreatment of our prisoners. ”53   
 
HEALING  FOR TORTURE SURVIVORS 
AROUND THE WORLD  
 
Whenever laws banning torture are upheld, a 
message is transmitted to repressive 
governments and victims seeking an end to 
impunity wherever it exists. Leaders and  
ordinary citizens learn that, in some  places, 
By flouting its obligations under 
international law, the United States 
delivered an implicit message that 
torture, once seen as the tool of 
despotic regimes, could be shaped to 
look like legitimate component of a 
democratic government’s national 
defense.  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  those who violate hum an rights are held 
responsible.  
 
By contrast, t he cost of impunity for survivors is 
enormous. For CVT clients , accountability for 
perpetrators is intertwined with the healing 
process and their struggle to make sense of 
their suffering. The recovery process is made 
more challenging when the person who 
committed the violence against them still walks 
free.  
 
 
Any crack in the culture of impunity can bring 
victims tremendous strength. One CVT client  
told us about her reaction when she learned of 
the arrest in Atlanta of an Ethiopian man 
accused of murder and torture during a 
dictatorship in the 1970s. Despite the fact that 
this man was not her perpetrator, she felt 
empowered, remarking, “Now I know what to 
do should I come across th e man who raped 
me.” 
 
The ripple effect is felt widely.  Any progress 
helps other victims to feel safer wherever they 
may be living.  
 
STEPS NEEDED FOR THE U.S.TO RE-
ESTABLISH ITSELF AS A  GLOBAL LEADER 
AGAINST TORTURE  
 
The United States has begun to take si gnificant 
steps in remedying its excursion int o unlawful 
policies and practices of torture and official 
cruelty.   
 In response to reports that the United States  
was using torture and cruelty on detainees, an 
unprecedented number of retired military 
leader s spoke out publicly against these 
policies , and Congress held hearings and 
attempted to repair the damage by passing the 
McCain Amendment, requiring  all Department 
of Defense personnel and facilities to use the 
guidelines set forth in the U.S. Army Field 
Manual as the minimum standards for the 
treatment of detainees.   
 
Other important steps include t he public 
release of the Senate Armed Services 
Committee ’s Inquiry into the Treatment of 
Detainees in U.S. Custody, the Office of Legal 
Counsel Memos authoriz ing torture, and the  
CIA Inspector General Report.  
 
But p erhaps the most significant step taken  by 
the United States  was on January 22, 2009 , 
when President Obama signed an Executive 
Order banning torture and cruelty and closing 
CIA black sites.  
 
 
Neverth eless, important work remains to be 
done. The U.S. national consensus against 
torture has been eroded. In a climate of 
extreme fear and deep anxiety about our 
national security, the need for, efficacy of and 
moral justifications for torture and cruelty wer e 
distorted.  Many Americans have been led to 
believe that we must abide by torture and 
cruelty to keep our families safe.  
 
Furthermore , the U.S. government has not, to 
date, conducted a thorough investigation into 
sound evidence of torture and cruelty as 
The cost of impunity for survivors is 
enormous --accountability for 
perpet rators is intertwined with the 
healing process and their struggle 
to make sense of their suffering.  
This is not a political question. We 
see both the compelling public 
policy reasons – ending impunity is 
a powerful deterrent —as well as 
the profound, far -reaching effects 
on the lives of our clients.  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  required by the CAT. Article 12 of the CAT 
states: “Each State Party shall ensure that its 
competent authorities proceed to a prompt and 
impartial investigation, wherever there is 
reasonable ground to believe that an act of 
torture has been committed in an y territory 
under its jurisdiction.”  
 
Accountability has been inaccurately framed as 
a divisive partisan battle.  Recall, h owever, that 
it was President Reagan who noted in his 
transmission of the Convention to the Senate 
that its strength was in its provi sions to 
criminally prosecute perpetrators under the 
principle of universal jurisdiction.  
 
Moreover, f rom the perspective of those who 
provide care to torture survivors, this is not a 
political question. We see both the compelling 
public policy reasons – ending im punity is a 
powerful deterrent —as well as the profound, 
far-reaching effec ts on the lives of our clients.  
 
Whenever atrocities are committed, there is 
often a desire to avoid unearthing the uncomfortable and to instead move forward. 
Yet, in doing s o, we allow the culture of 
impunity to persist and miss an opportunity to 
prevent future abuses.  
 
In order for the United States to regain its 
historical commitment to supporting the 
international ban on torture and cruelty, it must 
fully examine a nd accou nt for its recent past 
unlawful policies and practices of torture and 
official cruelty.  
 
To this end, the United States must ensure it 
does not retu rn to illegal policies of torture and 
cruelty;  it must fully investigate credible 
allegations of abuse ; it m ust prosecute those 
who authorize, order, or engage in acts of 
torture ; it must provide torture survivors an 
effective right to a remedy; and it should 
continue to rehabilitate torture survivors 
worldwide.  Until the U nited States comes to 
terms with its ow n use of torture post 9/11, it 
cannot be and will not be seen to be a credible 
force for human rights.  
  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture  RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
1. THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE  should make public its report on the past CIA 
detention and interrogation program post 9/ 11 with as few redactions as possible.  
 
On December 13, 2012, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) adopted with a bi -
partisan majority its study of the former CIA detention and interrogation program post -9/11.  The 
review began in March 2009 and according to Senator Dianne Feinstein, Chair of the Committee, “is 
a comprehensive review of the CIA’s detention program that includes details of each detainee in CIA 
custody, the conditions under which they were detained, how they were interrogated, t he 
intelligence they actually provided and the accuracy – or inaccuracy - of CIA descriptions about the 
program to the White House, Department of Justice, Congress and others.”  The 6,000 plus page 
report, containing more than 35,000 footnotes, is based on a documentary review of more than 6 
million pages of CIA and other records and includes 20 findings and conclusions.   
 
The public release of the SSCI report with as few redactions as possible will be a significant step in 
establishing the full truth of th e United States’ past policies of torture and cruelty and will openly 
examine the consequences of those actions in order to ensure the United States does not repeat the 
mistakes of the past.  
 
2. THE PRESIDENT AND CONGRESS  should establish an i ndependent, non -partisan commission to 
examine and report publicly the Unites States’  use of torture and cruel , inhuman and degrading 
treatment of detainees in the period since September 11, 2001.  
 
The United States has yet to meet its legal and moral obligations to full y investigate credible 
allegations of abuse as required under the Convention Against Torture.  The commission should 
have subpoena power and be charged with looking into the facts and circumstances of 
interrogation, rendition and detention policy, identify  lessons learned, recommend measures that 
would bring justice to victims and prevent any future abuses. Its findings should be made public.  
 
Assessing how serious errors in judgment became U.S. polic y will better position the United States in 
the future to  firmly avoid this ignoble path.  
 
3. CONGRESS should increase funding for programs providing r ehabilitation  services to survivors of 
torture in the United States and around the world.  
 
The United States can begin to recommit itself to these duties by address ing the rehabilitation needs 
of tort ure survivors around the world.  Article 14 of the CAT carves out a right to health care for 
survivors . Beyond the humanitarian mission, rehabilitation centers contribute to efforts to prevent 
torture and build democratic  societies. Rehabilitation programs provide specialized services to 
torture survivors that improve their social and economic functions while promoting self -sufficiency 
and integration.   Additionally, rehabilitation programs document evidence of torture . Their 
expertise in treating the wounds of torture enables them to testify to the scale and scope of political 
brutality.   The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture   
 
                                                           
1 Message to the Senat e Transmitting the Convention Against Torture and Inhuman Treatment or Punishment , The 
American Presidency Project, May 20, 1988 available at  http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=35858  
2 Chuck Hagel, Washington Monthly, Jan. - Mar. 2008, available at 
http ://www.washingtonmonthly.com/features/2008/0801.hagel.html . 
3 Amy Zegart, Torture Creep: Why are more Americans accepting Bush -era policies than ever before? , Foreign 
Policy, Sept. 25, 2012 available at 
http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2012/09/25/tort ure_creep?wp_login_redirect=0 . 
4 Id.  
5Torture v. Torture Euphemisms , Covering Torture, 2012, available at  http://www.coveringtorture.org/ . 
6Joint resolution regarding the implementation of the policy of the United States Government in opposition to the 
practice of torture by any foreign government, Pub. L. No. 98 -447, 98 Stat. 1721 (1984).   
7 Comm’n on Hmn. Rts. – Membership, 1947 -2005, Office of the U.N. High Comm’ner for Hmn. Rts., 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/chr/membership.htm .  
8 U.N. Eco. And  Soc. C., Report of the Working Group on a draft convention against torture and other cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Mar. 9, 1984), E/CN.4/1984/72 ¶ 24, 47 -48 available at  
http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=E/CN.4/1984/72 . 
9 See Message to the Senate, supra  note 1.  
10Letter of Submittal from George P. Shultz, Secretary of State, to President Ronald Reagan  (May 10, 1988), in S. 
Treaty Doc. No. 100 -20, at v; see also  S. Exec. Rep. No. 101 -30, at 2 -3. 
11 Exec. Rep. 101 -30, 101 st Cong. 2d Sess., 23 -24 (Aug. 30, 1990) Senate Foreign Relations Committee Report).  
12 See Message to the Senate , supra  note 1.  
13See Letter of Submittal , supra  note 10.  
14Reuters, U.S. Signs a U.N. Document That Seeks an End to Torture , N.Y. Times (Apr.  19, 1988).  
15 See Message to the Senate , supra  note 1.  
16 See Exec. Rep. 101 -30, supra  note 11  at 2.  
17 Id. Appendix A.  
18 Id. at 3.  
19 Id. 
20 See Id. Additional Views of Republican Senators on the Convention Against Torture.  
21Statement on Signing the Torture Vi ctim Protection Act of 1991 , The American Presidency, Mar. 12, 1992 
available at  http: //www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=20715 . 
22 18 U.S.C. § 2340A (1994) (Federal anti -torture statute makes it a crime for a U.S. national or foreigner who is 
presen t in the U.S. to have committed torture outside the U.S.).  
23 Memorandum of Decision Regarding the Objections to the Findings on Professional Misconduct in the Office of 
Professional Responsibility’s Report of Investigation into the Office of Legal Counsel’ s Memoranda Concerning 
Issues Relating to the Central Intelligence Agency’s Use of “Enhanced Interrogation Techniques” on Suspected 
Terrorists , Office of Professional Responsibility Report, (Jan. 5, 2010) available at  
http://graphics8.nytimes.com/packages/ pdf/politics/20100220JUSTICE/20100220JUSTICE -DAGMargolisMemo.pdf.  
24Exec. Rep. 110 -54, 110th Cong. 2d Sess., (Nov. 20, 2008) (Senate Armed Services Committee) available at 
http://www.armed -services.senate.gov/Publications/Detainee%20Report%20Final_April%202 2%202009.pdf . 
25Id. 
26Universal Declaration of Human Rights, G.A. Res. 217A (III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at art. 5 (1948).  
27 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, art. 7, Dec. 16, 1966, 6 ILM 638, 993 U.N.T.S. 3.  
28 Geneva Convention Relative to the  Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, Aug.  
12, 1949, 6 U.S.T. 3516, 75 U.N.T.S. 287, art. 3(a).  
29 See e.g. , The African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights , OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3/Rev.5 (1981), reprinted in 
21 I.L.M. 58 (1982) , American Conventi on on Human Rights, Nov. 21, 1969, 1144 U.N.T.S. 143; Convention for the 
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, Nov. 4, 1950, Europ.T.S. No. 5; 213 U.N.T.S. 221  The Center for Victims of Torture Policy Report: U.S. Bi -Partisan Leadership Against Torture                                                                                                                                                                                             
U.N.T.S. 123.  
30 Jus Cogens , Cornell University Law School: Legal Information Inst itute, Aug. 19, 2010 available at  
http://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/jus_cogens.  
31 18 U.S.C. § 2340A, supra  note 22 . 
32 18 U.S.C. § 2441(a) (1996) (War Crimes Act).  
33 42 U.S.C. § 2000dd (2005) (The Detainee Treatment Act of 2005).  
34 U.S. Const. amend. VIII.  
35 Harold Hongju Koh, Washington Monthly, Jan. – Mar. 2008 available at 
http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/features/2008/0801.koh.html . 
36 Id. 
37 Comments on Your Paper on the Geneva Conventions , Department of State Office of the Legal Advisor (Feb. 2, 
2002) avail able at http://www.nytimes.com/package s/html/politics/20040608_DOC.pdf . 
38 See e.g. Congressional Budget Justification , U.S. Department of State, 2008 available at 
http://www.state.gov/s/d/rm/rls/statecbj/index.htm.   
39 Military Assistance: International Mil itary Education and Training Foreign Military Financing and Peacekeeping 
Operations , U.S. Department of State, at 27, available at  http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/3961.pdf . 
40Draft Decision Memorandum for the President on the Applicability of th e Geneva Convention to the Conflict in 
Afghanistan, Secretary of State (Jan. 26, 2002) available at 
http: //www.torturingdemocracy.org/documents/20020126.pdf . 
41Id. 
42 Id. 
43U.S. Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Treatment of Detainees in U.S. Custody,  Hear ing, Jun. 17, 2008, 
Statement of Alberto J. Mora, at 4 available at   http://www.armed -
services.senate.gov/statemnt/2008/June/Mora%2006 -17-08.pdf .  
44 Id. at 4-5. 
45See Exec. Rep. 110 -54, supra note 24 .  
46 See Mora Statement, supra  note 4 3 at 5.  
47 Id. 
48 John Kerry , Washington Monthly, Jan. - Mar. 2008, available at 
http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/features/2008/0801.kerry.html . 
49 See Exec. Rep. 110 -54, supra note 2 4. 
50 See Mora Statement, supra  note 4 3. 
51 AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION, ET AL. v. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, ET AL. ( No. 06 -3140 ). 
52157 Cong. Rec. S2897 (statement of Sen. McCain) available at  
http://www.mccain.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=PressOffice.FloorStatements&ContentRecord_id=e4
96acf5 -a37f -1136 -f1be -f15d5e3d93e9 . 
53Id. 