 
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  1 Testimony of  
Steven C. Moore  
Senior Staff Attorney  
Native American Rights Fund  
Boulder, Colorado  
 
Before the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs  
 
Oversight Hearing on Indian Water Rights:  
Addressing the Needs of Native Communities  
Through Indian Water Rights Settlements  
 
May 20, 2015  
 
  
“In the history of the United States Government's treatment of Indian tribes, 
its failure to protect Indian water rights for use on the Reservations it set 
aside for them is one of the sorrier chapters.”    
 
National Wa ter Commission , Water Policies for the Future: Final 
Report to the Resident and to the Congress of the United States,  475 
(Govt. Prtg. Off. 1973)  at 475.  
 
 
Introduction  
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for holding this hearing and giving 
me an opportunity to testify.  I am Steven Moore, a senior attorney with the 
Native American Rights Fund, the national Indian legal defense fund 
headquartered in Boulder, Colorado.  
 
 One of the most important Native American legal issues NARF has 
address ed in th e past 45 years of our existence has been Indian tribal 
reserved water rights.  During that time, we have been involved in nine tribal 
water rights cases that have resulted in negotiated settlements approved by 
Congress.  We are currently representing five tribes on their water rights 
claims  in various stages of litigation and/or settlement  – the Klamath Tribes 
in Oregon, the Tule River Tribe in California, the Agua Caliente Band of 
Cahuilla Indians in California, the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas,  and the  Nez 
Perce Tribe in Idaho.    
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  2 Background  
 
For centuries prior to European contact, Native Americans had 
sufficient land and water to provide for their needs.  The rivers ran free of 
dams, impoundme nts and artificial waterways, allowing for ecosystem s to 
support themselves  naturally.  Many tribes, especially in the Pacific 
Northwest, lived off fish runs, harvesting them only at levels that supported 
their people while sustaining the fish populations.  Other tribes in the 
Southwest had complex irrigation and water purification systems to use the 
limited water most efficiently.  The functional water “policy ” of Native 
American tribes was to protect and preserve this sacred resource.  Tribal 
ceremonies celebrated water , and cul tural values to protect and honor water 
were practiced from generation to generation.   
 
Indian tribes possess substantial water claims to support viable 
reservation homelands and  off-reservation fishing, hunting and gathering 
rights specifically reserved by tribes as part of their 19th century treaty 
negotiations with the United States.  These reserved rights to land and other 
natural resources were part of a bargained for exchange, in which the United 
States sought and received the perpetual relinquishmen t of land to open vast 
territory for westward expansion and settlement. Indeed, tribes ceded title to  
millions  of acres in the process .  Then and now, Indian tribes  expect the 
United States will honor its promises.   
 
A cornerstone of t he promise is the federal trust re sponsibility .  The 
United States expressly acknowledges that “Indian water rights are vested 
property rights for which the United States has a trust responsibility, with the 
United States holding legal title to such water in trust for the benefit of the 
Indians.”  1990 Criteria and Procedures for the Participation of the Federal 
Government in Negotiations for the Settlement of Indian Water Rights 
Claims, 55 Fed. Reg. 9223 (March 12, 1990) (“Criteria and Procedures”) .     
 
Yet, during the same historical era as the treaty and reservation era, 
the United States also enacted laws and implement ed policies encouraging  
the settlement of arid western lands and the development of the scarce water 
resources in what became “former” Indian aboriginal territory.  Such laws 
included those permitting the homesteading of “surplus” Indian reservation 
lands, when reservations were  allotted under the authority of the General 
Allotment Act of 1884 , the Homestead Acts beginning in 1862 , and the 
Reclamation Act of 1902.  (These laws were silent on their effect on prior,  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  3 pre-existing Indian tribal rights to the use of water, rights that under federal 
cannot be abrogated without express consent of Congress.)  
 
During the early and mid -1900s , the United States entered into a 
period of mass water infrastructure development in the arid West to simulate 
the depressed economy and to accommodate populatio n growth.  Although 
these projects affected tribal water rights, they were developed with little to 
no consideration or assertion of such rights.  As a result, private water users, 
businesses, and government entities have enjoyed the benefits of water 
deve lopment while , in most instances , tribes have been left wanting.  The 
lack of development of senior tribal water rights, however, has created 
significant uncertainty in the Western system of water allocation and use.  
Because many tribes have not yet asser ted their prior and paramount , 
reserved  water rights, non -Indian irrigation and other commercial interests in 
many parts of the United States are concerned about the durability of their 
junior water rights.  
 
Moreover, in most cases large -scale water project s in the West were 
built to the detriment of tribal water rights because  they allocate the majority 
of water available to non -Indian users.  The National Water Commission in 
1973, for example , recognized that the federal government had promoted 
and subsidiz ed non -Indian water development at the expense of vested tribal 
rights.   National Water Commission , Water Policies for the Future: Final 
Report to the Resident and to the Congress of the United States,  475 (Govt. 
Prtg. Off. 1973)  at 476 -7. 
 
The Klamath Irr igation Project in Southern Oregon is a prime 
example.  Created in 1902, the project irrigates thousands of agricultural 
acres by diverting water from the Upper Klamath Lake in Southern Oregon 
that flows into the Klamath River in Northern California.  The project 
provides subsidized water to non -Indian farmers but disregards senior tribal 
water rights.  The Klamath River, through its journey from the high desert to 
the ocean, supports the Klamath, Yurok, Karuk and Hoopa Tribal fisheries.  
The project does n ot accommodate water for instream flows for tribal 
fisheries, but instead diverts water to support the irrigation project.  In 2003, 
the largest fish kill in American history, occurred on the Klamath River 
when 60,000 salmon died due to lack of adequate wa ter flows after a large 
diversion was made up river for the Irrigation Project.  The federal 
government acknowledges  the potential environmental consequences of 
these diversions but refused to alter its course despite its trust obligation to  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  4 protect Tribal  fisheries.  The Native American Rights Fund represents the 
Klamath Tribes in litigation over and potential settle ment of this situation.  
 
Thus, the United States created the conflict over the development and 
use of western water resources . These conflicting tribal and settler rights  and 
expectations must ultimately be resolved.  It is therefore the responsibility of 
the United States to facilitate and fund the resolution of such conflicts 
consistent with its trust responsibility to Indian tribes, irrespective of 
whether it is in a li tigation or settlement context.  
 
 Tribes will always view these processes as a two -edged sword.  On 
the one hand there are benefits to be gained from quantifying and decreeing 
Indian water rights – the delivery of wet water.  Yet, there are costs for 
tribes. There is always the feeling that something else of importance to 
Indian people is being taken away by the majority society  and that the work 
of Manifest Destiny continues largely unabated.      
 
Ad Hoc Group on Indian Water Rights  
 
In 1982, the Ad Hoc Group on Indian Water Rights was formed.  Its 
membership consists of the Native American Rights Fund, the Western 
Governors Association, the Western States Water Council and the Western 
Business Roundtable (formerly the Western Regional  Council).  Although 
the Ad Hoc Group’s constituents were pitted against each other in litigation 
over Indian water rights claims, the Ad Hoc Group came together because of 
our shared interest in assuring the federal government paid its fair share of 
the c osts of Indian water rights settlements that were negotiated in order to 
avoid litigation.  The federal government should pay its fair share of the 
settlement costs because it failed as trustee to protect Indian water rights in 
the West , and instead encour aged states and non -Indians to develop and use 
water, thereby becoming the primary cause of the litigation between Indians 
and non -Indians over this issue .  
  
Over the years, NARF, along with its Ad Hoc Group partners, has 
worked to educate  each Administra tion and Congress on the importance of 
having favorable federal policies on Indian water rights settlements.  These 
successful efforts have resulted in 29 Indian water rights settlements  being  
enacted into law.  In our experience,  securing the funding for the federal 
government’s fair share of the cost is the most difficult problem to overcome 
in an Indian water rights settlement.  Constrained federal budgets in recent  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  5 years have been compounded by a misundersta nding among some that 
funding these Indian wat er rights settlements is  congressionally directed 
spending. It is not. As Senators Kyle and Toomey made clear in a 2012  
colloquy on the Senate floor, it is spending to fulfill financial obligations of 
the United States.  It is imperative that e ach Administration and Congress 
work together and fund the federal government’s obligations  of each 
negotiated Indian water rights settlement  in order rectify the results of its 
failed water policies .  
 
Resolution of Indian Water Rights  Through  Litigation  
 
Historically tribal water rights claims were resolved in the court 
systems.  Federal courts have jurisdiction over tribal water rights claims 
unless the state has initiated a general stream adjudicatio n on a waterway 
utilized by a tribe.  In such cases, the state court has jurisdiction over tribal 
water rights claims pursuant to the McCarran Amendment.  Lengthy 
litigation often results in “paper water ” rights with no funding for water 
infrastructure dev elopment.  Moreover, the aggressive nature of litigation 
divides the community of water users into adversarial camps and thereby 
reinforces old political debates over water usage.  For all parties, litigation is 
expensive and can take decades.  For these r easons most tribes, states and 
private water users prefer negotiated settlements of water rights.  
 
At the present time, there are many cases in the courts , predominantly 
in the western United States , involving the adjudication of Indian reserved 
water rig hts.  A large portion of the water in the west is at stake in these 
cases – over 45 million acre -feet of water according a Western States Water 
Council survey in 1984.  
 
The purpose of these cases is to define or quantify the amount of 
water that tribes are  entitled to under their reserved water rights.  Although 
tribal claims are typically based agricultural uses of water , some claims are 
also being made for non -agricultural water uses that also fulfill the purposes 
for which the r eservations were created.  These cases are typically huge and 
complex, pitting the states and thousands of private water claimants under 
state law against the tribes and the federal government as trustee for the 
tribes.  
 
Complex water rights litigation has  cost tribes millions of dollars in 
technical and legal costs, though, with no apparent end in sight.  Several  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  6 federal cases in New Mexico have spanned five to six decades.  The Gila 
River and other tribes in Arizona have been involved in state water litig ation 
since 1974, with at least nine trips to the Arizona Supreme Court (not all 
involving Indian water issues, per se , but the tribes are parties to the 
litigation and presumably have had to actively participate).  The Wind River 
Tribes in Wyoming have su ffered a similar litigation fate, fighting in state 
court since 1977, with almost as many trips to the Wyoming Supreme Court.  
The Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes in Montana have been on a 
similar path , but very recent ly the Montana Legislature fin ally approved and 
the governor signed a comprehensive negotiated settlement .   
 
The Primacy of Indian Water Rights Under the Winters  Doctrine   
The doctrine of prior appropriation directed most allocation of water 
in the West at the beginning of the 20th century during westward expansion.  
Prior appropriation was the principle that the first parties to physically divert 
and use the water for “beneficial use” should have the first right to the water.  
Subsequent rights to the same water were only entitled to water not used by 
those with senior rights.  This principal governs state water law, and created 
a priority system for water allocation.  However, tribal water rights are not 
governed by state law.  
 
Indian water rights are based on federal law because they were 
reserved in the treaties and executive orders that created the reservations.  
The Supreme Court acknowledged federal reserved water rights for Indian 
reservations in the 1908 case, Winters v. United States , 207 U.S. 564 (1908).  
Winters  came from  a dispute between tribes on the Fort Belknap Reservation 
and upstream non -Indian water users on the Milk River in Montana.  During 
drought conditions, large diversions by the upstream users inhibited Indian 
diversions on the Reservation.  The United State s, on behalf of the tribes 
filed a lawsuit in federal court in 1905 to enjoin the upstream diversion.  On 
review, the Supreme Court held that treaties created an implied water right, a 
“Winters  right”, necessary to meet the purposes of the reservation, and  
prohibited uses of water by non -Indians that interfered with the tribes.  
Winters  accomplished this by establishing a priority date for tribal reserved 
water rights as of the date the reservation was created.  Since most Indian 
reservations were created p rior to outside settlement by non -Indians, Winters  
rights usually g ive tribes the earliest priority date and most senior rights.  
  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  7 The Supreme Court in Arizona v. California, 373 U.S. 546 (1963 ) 
established that Winters  water rights are quantified by deter mining how 
much water is necessary to irrigate the arable acreage on the reservation.  
Know n as the "PIA" standard, it assumes the federal government set aside 
Indian reservations with the singular purpose of developing agrarian 
societies.  In recent years , the courts have broadened the purposes behind 
establishing reservations.  In Colville Confederated Tribes v. Walton,  647 
F.2d 42 (9th Cir. 1981), for instance the Ninth Circuit Federal Court of 
Appeals noted the general purpose of the Reservation was to provide a 
homeland for the Indians.  It claimed this was a broad purpose and must be 
liberally construed to benefit the Indians.  The court supplemented the PIA 
standard with water for instream flows to support tribal fisheries. In United 
States v. Adair,  723 F.2d 1394 (9th Cir. 1983),  the same court rejected the 
notion of Indian reservations having one singular agrarian purpose, and also 
awarded water for agriculture and instream flows.  In Gila River , 35 F.3d 68 
(Ariz. 2001), the court rejected the singul ar purpose PIA standard to adopt 
the multi -purpose homeland standard which provides for livestock watering, 
municipal, domestic and commercial water uses.  The Court  in Arizona v. 
California , and following in Menominee Tribe v. United States,  391 U.S. 
404 (1968), also made it is clear that Indian reservations were intended to 
serve as homelands where tribes could create livable self -sustaining 
communities whether the purpose be agrarian or to support other ways of 
life.  These cases demonstrat e that each reservation can have several 
purposes for which it was reserved that require broad interpretation to meet 
tribal water needs.    
  
More recently, tribes have established that the Winters  doctrine 
extends not only to surface water but to groundwa ter.  Tribes such as the 
Gila River Tribe in Arizona, and the Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians 
in Palm Springs, California, have had to litigate their right to groundwater in 
the desert environs in which their reservations are located.  Other tribes such 
as the Lummi in Washington State and the Confederated Salish and 
Kootenai Tribes in Montana have been engaged in long struggles to secure 
rights to groundwater.   
 
Settlement of Indian Water Right s 
 
The process of settling water rights claim s allows the community of 
water users to address an array of water problems using creative solutions 
that are not available through litigation.  This flexibility provides incentives  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  8 for all water users on a waterway to be privy to the negotiations.  In mos t 
cases, the settlement of water rights claims becomes part of a larger water 
bill that includes agricultural, economic, and government water rights 
claims.  The Snake River Water Rights Act of 2004 settled water rights 
claims on the Snake River of Idaho i ncluding those of several federal 
agencies and departments, the Nez Perce Tribe, represented by the Native 
American Rights Fund, the State of Idaho, agricultural and timber producing 
interests.   The Snake River Settlement Agreement accommodated non -
Indian  Upper Snake River interests by honoring an existing water release 
agreement from the Upper Snake River, and by providing habitat protection 
and restoration in the Salmon and Clearwater basins under Section 6 of the 
Endangered Species Act.   
 
The Nez Perce  Tribe also secured a reliable water supply, instream 
flows, the transfer into trust of BLM on -reservation land, right to access 600 
hundred springs and fountains on federal land off -reservation and the 
authorization of $90 million for tribal domestic wate r and sewer, and habitat 
improvements.  Instream flows in over 200 streams and rivers were decreed 
under state law.  The Settlement benefited all parties by pro viding stability 
regarding the scope of water rights on the Snake River, and by providing 
fundin g to develop such rights.  Additionally, the parties obtained more 
benefits through land and water transfers with funding to develop such 
interests under the Settlement than would have been possible in court.  
 
Throughout the West , states, tribes and private water users are 
recognizing settlements as an opportunity to resolve long te rm water and 
related environmental problems.  No longer are these just Indian water rights 
settlements, they are basin wide agreements , driven by local circumstances 
and interests,  that resolve long  standing problems experienced by all water 
users  in a watershed .  Between 1978 and 2014, Congress enacted 29 Indian 
water rights settlement acts . Requests for federal involvement in Indian 
water rights settlements have been cons tant since 1978 and they are going to 
continue to increase.  The federal government , working with local 
communities,  must be prepared to respond with adequate resources to 
resolve once and for all the water conflicts occurring in Indian Country.    
 
Much Unfinished Work Remains     
 
The passage of time makes the resolution o f Indian water rights more 
complex and difficult.  Watersheds with un -quantified and un -decreed  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  9 Indian water rights have typically been viewed as having a “cloud” on the 
availability of the resource.  That has been the impetus, in large measure, for 
states  to commence general stream adjudications, and to haul federal and 
Indian into state court to sort out rights.  But state governments are as 
financially hard pressed, if not more so, than the federal government, and 
adjudications are very expensive.  The r esult is the protection – sometimes 
unwittingly, sometimes intentionally – of the status quo, in the face of 
unresolved Indian claims.  The giving away of more and more water in river 
systems for non -Indian purposes, either through state regulation or, equ ally 
insidiously, the non -regulation of groundwater development or small 
pond/impoundment proliferation, ultimately advances the interests of some 
of those who oppose Indian water rights.  And with each molecule of water 
that is given away to non -Indian in terests as tribes await the assistance of the 
United States to assert, litigate and /or settle their water rights, the ultimate 
resolution of competing claims to water in any watershed becomes more 
difficult.      
 
While tremendous progress has been made t o date in the settlement 
and sorting out of Indian water rights, much more work remains.  Despite 
and against all odds, Indian tribes have secured about two dozen water 
settlements over the past 35 -40 years, since federal Indian policy encouraged 
settlemen t – and the government began to invest the financial and human 
resources necessary  to achieve settlements  – as opposed to prolonged 
litigation.  Dozens more tribes are either in various stages of the negotiation 
process, or are in the queue waiting for the resources to engage in the 
process.  Sadly, in the recent 10 -15 years we have seen a general trend 
towar d the dwindling of these resources, just at a time when enhanced 
resources could have seen more settlements mature, ripen and come to 
fruition.     
 
While many large and complex settlements have been achieved over 
the past several decades, a look forward i s equally daunting.  C onsider the 
remaining possibilities:  California and its more than 100 federally 
recognized tribes; Oklahoma with its 39 tribes sharing essentially two river 
systems; the other Midwestern tribes with similar concerns to those in 
Oklah oma over groundwater over -development and water quality 
impairment; the tribes of the Dakotas and their reliance on the Missouri 
River system which, with the Mississippi, is the most heavily regulated 
commercial river in the United States; the coastal trib es in California, 
Oregon and Washington with their enormous cultural and economic interest  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  10 in salmon fisheries and related habitat; the Great Lakes Tribes with off -
reservation fishing and gathering habitat protection interests; and the tribes 
of the northe ast and southeast which share many of the concerns faced by 
their brothers and sisters in the rest of the country.  And what of the tribes 
and Native villages in Alaska, and the Native Hawai’ian community in the 
Pacific?   
 
We know for a fact that climate change will likely not spare any 
region of the country , particularly the western United States where we find 
the largest land -owning tribes with the largest need for water .  The crushing 
drought in California, and t he recent water wars between Georgia and 
Florida are but a presage of the pressures to come.  How will tribes’ interests 
play out against these larger forces?   
 
Given the finite and very limited ground and surface water supplies, 
particularly in the West, one tried and true method in past succes sful Indian 
water settlements has been the reliance on water infrastructure – primarily in 
the form of concrete – to increase the size of the pie available to the 
stakeholders to a settlement.  The several Arizona Indian water settlements 
are largely depen dent on the construction of the Central Arizona Project.  
The new Navajo -Gallup settlement depends on building a pipeline several 
hundred miles in length.  Of the remaining several hundred Indian tribes 
without quantified and decreed water rights, are we d epend ent on a new era 
of dam and other infrastructure construction?  Is that even possible , given 
the complex array of federal , state and local laws confronting new 
developments ?   
 
The PAI standard for quantifying Indian reservation water rights also 
can unfairly disadvantage tribes with reservation lands that either are not 
economically irrigable due to soil or arid climatic conditions, and, as we 
consider the claims of tribes east of the 100th Meridian, disadvantage trib es 
with reservation lands not typically viewed as requiring irrigation to make 
them agriculturally productive.         
 
Finally, climate change looms as the wildest of wild cards.  State and 
local governments are already busily engaged in studying the effe cts of 
global warming on already limited and over -stressed water supplies.  And 
planning the changes necessary to prepare for and manage/mitigate the 
effects thereof.  Tribes typically lack the resources to conduct the same level 
of planning and preparatio n, and so will be even more disadvantaged in  
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  11 litigating, negotiating and settling their water rights in this ever -shifting 
context.   
Solutions  
 
Real solutions must come from the legislative and executive branches 
of the United States  government .  Some will involve financial capital, but 
others lie in structural and organizational changes made within the federal 
government to effectuate a more just and expeditious resolution of Indian 
water claims.  Federal  mechanisms and the means to level the p laying field 
for tribes  must be put in place .  Tribes must be given access to all necessary 
data and information from which they can make informed decisions and set 
priorities about protecting and asserting their water rights.  This will enable 
them to mor e fully engage their state and local partners in the resolution of 
Indian water rights.  
 
One state -created model is the Montana Reserved Water Rights 
Compact Commission.  Since its creation in 1979, the Commission has 
completed compacts with the seven resi dent Montana  tribes.1   Are there 
useful lessons to be learned from the Montana Indian tribes’ experiences 
with the Montana Compact Commission, and ways to improve on it as a 
federal model?  At a minimum, what sets the Montana process apart is the 
express acknowledgement in state law that Indian tribes have senior Winters 
water rights.  Second, the state committed the resources to see the work 
done.  The resulting settlement compacts are not p erfect, but they reflect the 
value of political leadership and hard work to achieve lasting solutions. The 
neighboring state of Idaho has also achieved settlements with the resident 
tribes in the Snake River Basin – the Nez Perce, Shoshone -Bannock and 
Shos hone Paiute.  Idaho utilized a litigation framework rather than a 
compacting process, which resulted generally in a more adversarial and thus 
antagonistic structure, but positive settlements , while taking more time,  
resulted nonetheless.  The remaining North Idaho Adjudication is framed 
similarly.  Congress could learn from the lessons the states, particularly 
Montana.  As noted above, much work remains and it will take substantial 
leadership and resources from the Congress to achieve lasting solutions 
across Indian Country.   
 
                                                 
1 Completed tribal compacts are with: Assiniboine &  Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Reservation; Northern 
Cheyenne Tribe; Crow Tribe; Gros Ventre & Assiniboine of the Fort Belknap Reservation; the Chippewa 
Cree of t he Rocky Boy's Reservation, the Blackfeet Tribe , and the Confederated Salish and Kootenai 
Tribes.   
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  12 Reco mmendations for Fiscal Change - A Permanent Funding 
Mechanism for Indian Water Settlements  
 
It is time for a change.  The federal government must prioritize 
settling tribal water rights claims, and it must consider options to 
accommodate a growing number o f settlements.  Indian Country can no 
longer tolerate the lack of water and water infrastructure that has inhibited 
them from developing their communities.  The federal government has an 
obligation as trustee to assist in the development of tribal water ri ghts and 
Congress must look to create a permanent funding mechanism for tribal 
water settlements.   
 
The federal Reclamation Fund is an appropriate mechanism to fund 
tribal water rights settlements, as part of its mandate is to fund tribal water 
settlement s.  With more attention and development, the Reclamation Fund 
could provide the majority of funding for tribal water settlements.  Congress 
has already recognized the Reclamation Fund for these means, as the 2009 
Navajo -Gallup Settlement authorized for the  first time tapping into the Fund 
to develop a water delivery system on the Navajo Reservation.  Authorization 
to tap into additional funding from the Fund for other Indian water 
settlements should be enacted by Congress.     
 
Another possible source of fun ding is the federal Judgment Fund.  The 
resolution of Indian water rights is a fundamental  legal obligation of the 
United States, after all.  And l ike other legal obligations paid out of the 
federal Judgment Fund,2 these settlements are not earmarks, and s hould not 
be subject to the political whim of Congress.  Indian water settlements which 
achieve the support of all stakeholders in any given state or states with 
interests in a particular watershed should not be allowed to become political 
footballs.  
 
 
 
                                                 
2 In 1956, Congress established the Judgment Fund, which is a permanent, indefinite appropriation to pay 
judgments against federal agencies that are not otherwise provided for by other appropriations. In 1961, 
legislation was enacted allowing the Judg ment Fund to pay, among other things, Department of Justice 
(DOJ) settlements of ongoing or imminent lawsuits against federal agencies. The Judgment Fund is 
intended to allow for prompt payment of settlements and awards to claimants, thereby reducing the 
assessment of interest against federal agencies (where allowed by law) during the period between the 
rendering and payment of such settlements and awards. The Judgment Fund makes such payments upon 
certification that a court has handed down an award or that  a settlement has been reached. The Judgment 
Fund is currently managed by the Department of the Treasury's Financial Management Service (FMS).   
Testimony of Steven Moore, Native American Rights Fund  13 Conclusion  
 
The foregoing challenges in Indian Country all connect to water.  
Their solutions lie in water.  Water is sacred.  Tribes have proven they are 
very capable partners and players in water adjudication and settlement 
frameworks when they have financial resources to participate meaningfully.  
Most tribes and their down -stream neighbors prefer to negotiate water 
settlements since they provide the flexibility to resolve long -term water 
problems using environmental solutions that are not available in the court 
system , while saving time and money that would otherwise be  expended in 
litigation.  Settlements remove water uncertainty by defining the scope and 
priority date of each water users ’ rights without employing the expensive, 
adversarial roles of  litigation.   
 
The federal government has a legal obligation set forth in the treaties 
to protect and develop Indian water rights.  Although the federal 
government’s historical treatment of Indian water rights was less th an 
adequate, this Congress has the  opportunity to take a new direction. The 
future of Indian Nations depend s on a consistent commitment from the 
federal government to develop water supplies and infrastructure in Indian  
communities.  Many states, in recognition that their water problems are  
inextricably tied to tribal water problems have already made this guarantee.  
 
Today in this testimony we have set forth suggestions for the future 
commitment of the federal government to Indian water settlements.  Our 
four decades  experience working with  tribes and states on these issues has 
convinced us that obtaining funding is the largest impediment to resolving 
water problems in the West.  We request that Congress to remove this 
obstacle and create a permanent funding mechanism for all facets of India n 
water rights settlements.  In doing so, this Congress can join their 
constituents to help resolve water problems in the West.  
 
We thank the Committee for providing us with the opportunity to 
discuss these issues.  The Native American Rights Fund and our clients 
stand ready to work with the Senate Indian Affairs Committee to achieve 
meaningful  solutions  for bringing clean, reliable supplies of water to Indian 
Country . 
 
  
 Attachments  to Testimony  of 
Steven C. Moore 
Senior Staff Attorney 
Native American  Rights Fund 
Boulder, Colorado  
  
Before the Senate Committee  on Indian Affairs 
  
Oversight  Hearing on Indian Water Rights: 
Addressing  the Needs of Native Communities  
Through Indian Water Rights Settlements  
  
May 20, 2015 
 
  
  
 
Fact Sheet – Indian Water Rights Settlements  
Native American  Rights Fund and Western States Water Council 
  
The Importance  of Indian Water Rights Settlement  Funding 
Native American  Rights Fund and Western States Water Council 
  
1990 Interior Department  Criteria & Procedures  
  
Settlements  Approved  by Congress  
  
Current List of Federal Negotiation,  Implementation   
and Assessment  Teams  
 
 
 
 
 
FACT SHEET – INDIAN WATER RIGHTS SETTLEMENTS  
March 2014  
 
 Tribes throughout the West have water right claims that could potentially displace state water rights, 
creating uncertainty that hinders state water management.  
 
 Tribes often lack the resources to quantify their water rights, which has resulted in an absence  of 
potable water and depressed economi es for many tribal communities. Many tribes also lack the 
resources to turn quantified “paper” rights into “wet water.”   
 
 The f ederal government has a trust responsibility to protect tribal water rights and a major 
responsibility to help tribes adjudicate their rights.  
 
 Negotiated settlements are the preferred means of quantifying tribal water right claims because they 
provide greater certainty and help tribes with funding to build critical drinking water and other types 
of infrastructure , while not displacing established state uses.  
 
 Settlements save federal taxpayers millions of dollars by avoiding prolonged and costly litigation , and 
by resolving tribal breach of trust claims against the federal government.  
 
 Settlements involve a quid -pro-quo in which tribes receive federal funding in exchange for waiving 
tribal water -related claims against the U.S. As such, settlements are not earmarks and are analogous 
to, and no less serious than , the obligation of  the U.S.  to pay judgments rendered against it.   
 
 Many federal budgetary policies hinder settlement negotiation and implementation , including offset 
requirements that balance settlem ent funding with reduction s in some other discretionary program .  
 
 Congress and the Administration should fund and implement authorized settlements without 
corresponding offsets to other tribal or Department of the Interior programs.  
 
 Congress and the Admi nistration  should provide tribes with sufficient resources to participate in the 
settlement process, including providing full funding for the Department of the Interior’s Indian Water 
Rights Office and its settlement assessment, negotiation , and implementa tion teams.  
 
 Congress and the Administration should fully utilize the monies  that accrue to the Reclamation Fund 
for their intended purpose of supporting western water development, including water infrastructure 
projects that are part of authorized settlem ents. 
 
 The Council and NARF support the Rec lamation Water Settlements Fund  (RWSF) , which Congress 
enacted in 2009 to finance authorized settlements with money from the Reclamation Fund. Because 
of “pay go” requirements, the RWSF  will not receive money unti l FY 2020, leaving a significant 
funding gap.  Congress also authorized the RWSF  for only 10 years . The RWSF  should be  permanent.    
 
 The Council and NARF support S. 715, the Authorized Rural Water Projects Completion Act, which 
would use the Reclamation Fu nd to finance projects related to  authorized settlements.     
 
 
 
 
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF INDIAN WATER RIGHTS SETTLEMENT FUNDING* 
 
 For over 30 years , the Western States Water Council  and the Native American Rights 
Fund have worked together to support the negotiated settlement of Indian reserved water rights 
claims.1 While Congress has authorized 27 Indian water rights settlements, the water rights 
claims of many  more tribes remain un-quantified  and the cost and complexity of resolving these 
rights is increasing  sharply . However, o btaining federal funding  to promote and  implement the 
negotiated resolution of these claims  has proven to be  difficult . Providing the federal funding 
needed to support  settlements is a trust obligation that is critical  to the well -being of Indian 
Country , the West , and the nation  as a whole . Funding is also necessary to settle major claims 
against the United States  that would otherwise result in costly, protracted , and divisive litigation . 
 
I. THE PRIOR APPROPRIATION DOCTRINE AND INDIAN WATER RIGHT S  
 
 For well over a century, t he doctrine of pri or appropriation  has governed the allocation of 
water in most western states . Under this system, the right to divert water from a stream is based 
on the notion of “first in time, first in right,” which means that the first party to physically divert 
and us e water for “beneficial use” has priority to use the water. Thus, senior water right holders 
with earlier priority dates  (the date the water was  first put to beneficial use) can force users with 
junior priority dates to curtail or stop their use in times o f shortage.  
 
 Most non -Indian water development  in the West occurred after the federal government 
entered into treaties with Indian tribes to establish permanent homelands, or reservations, for the 
tribes. These  treaties typically did not quantify or even expressly recognize the tribes’ water 
rights . The U.S. Supreme Court addressed this issue in its 1908 decision in Winters v. United 
States ,2 holding  that tribal treaties created implied water right s to adequate water to satisfy the 
purpose of a tribe’s reservation . These federal reserved rights, or “Winters  rights ,” exist as 
federal enclaves within state legal systems and differ from  water  rights created under state laws 
because  they are not limited by  beneficial use  requirements ; are indetermin ate in quant ity until 
adjudicated;  are measured by the present and future supplies needed to fulfill the purpose of a 
reservation instead of past uses ; and have priority dates that correspond  to at least the date the 
federal government created the reservation .      
 
II. THE NEED TO RESOLVE INDIAN  WATER RIGHTS CLAIMS  
 
 Tribes often lack the funding and resources needed to adjudicate their Winters  rights .  
This has  created  a lack of water supply and related infrastructure throughout Indian Country that 
prevents tribal go vernments from protect ing the health, welfare, and safety of their communities.   
                                                
* The staff of the Western States Water Council (WSWC) and the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) prepared  
this paper in February 201 4.  Although both organizations are on record as collectively supporting Indian water 
rights settlements and settlement funding, t he views e xpressed herein are the authors ’ and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the individual members of the two organizations.    2 For example, over 40% of tribal members in the Navajo Nation haul water  for domestic use , and 
this lack of potable water has caused  various illnesses.3 Members of the Kickapoo  Tribe  of 
Kansas , 4 the Chippewa Cree of Montana, and others also haul water for basic domestic needs .   
 
 The absence of adequate and reliable potable water s upplies  has c ontributed to  
unemployment and mortality rates  on reservations  that are much  higher than those of adjacent 
non-Indian communities. In California,  the lack of an adequate water supply has prevent ed the 
Tule River Tribe from providing fire protection, housing, and economic opportunities to tribal 
members. The Tribe has unemployment and mort ality rates that are 50% higher  than Tulare 
County as a whole  and has  been unable to act on hundreds of  housing applications.5 
 
 Further, r esolving Winters  rights  claims is critical for western states , because tribal rights  
typically have priority dates th at are senior to non -Indian uses , and therefore have the potential to 
displace established state -issued rights. This is  especially problematic where tribal rights pertain 
to river systems that are fully  appropriated by non-Indian use rs. The un -quantified n ature of 
many tribal rights creates great uncertainty with regard to existing state -based uses and can 
impede  local, state, and regional economic development. G iven increasing stresses to water 
supplies  due to prolonged drought, reduced snowpacks, and othe r factors, quantifying Indian 
water rights  claim s and det ermining their impacts on state -issued rights is essential for western 
states to address  increasing  water demands  related to the West’s growing population . 
 
III. WHY SETTLEMENTS ARE PREFERRED  
 
 Settlements are the preferred manner of resolving Indian water rights claims. First, they 
give states and tribes certainty and control over the outcome of water rights  adjudications  for 
tribal claims , whereas litigated outcomes are fraught with uncertainty . Sec ond, settlements build 
positive relationships between states , tribes , and the federal government , which are essential 
because water is a shared resource that all parties must cooperatively manage after adjudication. 
Third, Indian water rights claims are ex tremely complex and settlements enable  tribes and non -
Indian neighbors to  take a comprehensive approach, allowing them to  craft mutually ben eficial  
solutions tailored to their specific needs , including the development of water infrastructure that 
increases  available water supplies for all users. Fourth, settlements can provide mechanisms that 
enable tribes to turn quantified rights  into “wet water, ” while litigation typically  provides tribes 
with “paper rights” o nly. Fifth, settlements are often less  costly  and less time-consuming than 
litigat ion, which can last for decades and can be extremely expensive for all parties .   
 
IV.  THE NEED FOR FEDERAL FUNDING  
 
The federal government holds Indian water rights in trust for the benefit of the tribes and 
is joine d as a party  in all water  rights adjudications  involving tribes . This means that the federal 
government  has a fiduciary duty to protect tribal water rights  and has a major responsibility 
(particularly the Department of the Interior) to help tribes adjudica te their rights and ensur e that 
settlements are funded and implemented.  It also means that each settlement must be authorized 
by Congress and approved by the President.    
 
 In many cases, tribes have significant breach of trust claims against the federal 
government for failing to protect their water rights. Generally, as part of a settlement, tribes will 
waive these claims and a portion of their claimed water rights in consideration for federal 
funding to build needed drinking water infrastructure, water su pply projects, and tribal fishery  3 restoration projects . Consequently, the obligation to fund settlements is analogous to, and no less 
serious than , the United States’ obligation to pay judgments rendered against it.  
 
 Nevertheless,  interpretations of the federal trust responsibility vary from one 
administration to another and require intensive discussions often on a settlement -by-settlement 
basis. Some prior administrations have taken a narrow view of this trust responsibility  and of 
settlements that benef it non -Indians , assert ing that federal  contribution s should be no more than 
the United States’  calculable legal exposure , which is difficult to determine . It has long been an 
accepted premise that the federal government should bear the primary responsibili ty for funding 
tribal settlements. Congress should consider th e federal government’s  fiduciary duty towards the 
tribes and ensure that appropriations for authorized settlement s are sufficient to ensure fair and 
honorable resolutions of tribal claims.  Such an approach not only serves the interests of the 
United States in ensuring successful resolution of tribal rights, but assists western states in 
resolving these difficult and potentially disruptive claims.       
  
 A. Funding During the Settlement Process  
 
 Tribes  need federal  funding to retain attorneys  and undertake the complex and costly 
technical studies that are a necessary prerequisite to any negotiation . Tribes also rely on federal 
negotiating teams appointed by the Department of the Interior’s India n Water Rights Office, 
which provide a unified federal voice and further s the settlement process , a matter of crucial 
importance for states as well . Denying funds for  these programs is tantamount to denying tribes 
the ability to adjudicate their water righ ts. Thus, Congress and the Administration should fully 
fund the Indian Water Rights Office and provide tribes , as well as their appointed negotiating 
teams,  with sufficient resources  to participate in the settlement process.  
 
 B. Authorizing Funding to Imp lement a Settlement  
 
 In the arid West, where water is scarce and tribal rights often  pertain to fully -appropriated 
stream systems, settlements typically  require the construction of  water storage and delivery 
projects  to allow all water users to use existi ng water supplies more advantageously. These 
projects generally do not reallocate water from existing non -Indian water users , but allow tribes 
to develop water supplies in exchange for foregone  claims to additional water. Without federal 
monetary resources  to build these projects, settlement s are simply not possible  in many cases .  
 
 While federal support is essential to settlements, a number of  western states have 
acknowledged that they should bear an appropriate share of settlement costs . To this end, 
western states have appropriated tens of millions of dollars for existing settlements and devoted 
significant in -kind resources, including the administrative resources associated with the 
negotiation process and the value of foregone  water rights .  
 
 C. Appro priating Funding For Settlements  
 
Congressionally -authorized settlements are being funded, but there is a need for 
increasing appropriations. Moreover, Congress  has adopted a moratorium on earmarks , which is 
how some characterize funding for  Indian water r ights settlements. But settlements are not 
earmarks benefiting a specific state or congressional district . Rather  they represent serious trust 
(and moral) obligations of the United States.  They involve a quid -pro-quo in which tribes receive 
federal funding  in exchange for waiving tribal water -related claims against the federal  4 government. If Congress is unable to implement  settlements as a result of earmark reform, 
litigation will be the primary means of resolving tribal water right claims. This could resul t in 
decades of associated legal expenses and court -ordered judgments against the United States that 
would likely exceed the total costs of settlement, thereby increasing costs for federal taxpayers.    
 
 In addition, c urrent budgetary policy (pay go) requires water rights settlement funding to 
be offset by a corresponding reduction in some other discretionary program . It is difficult for the 
Administration, states, and tribes to negotiate settlements knowing that funding is uncertain or 
may only occur at t he expense of some other essential tribal or Interior Department program.    
 
Congress should consider the unique legal nature of settlements , namely that the United 
States is receiving something of significant value in exchange for appropriating settlement  funds  
and fulfilling its tribal trust responsibility , thereby avoiding potentially costly litigation.  
 
 D. The Reclamation Fund  
 
 The Council and NARF have long supported  using the Reclamation Fund to fund  
authorized settlements. Congress created the Fun d as part of the Reclamation Act of 1902 to 
finance  federal water and power projects in the seventeen  western states.6 The Fund’s receipts 
are derived from water and power sales, project repayments, and receipts from public land sales 
and leases in the seventeen western states, as well as oil and mineral -leasing related royalties. 
However, the receipts that accrue to the Fund each year are only available for expenditure 
pursuant to annual appropriations acts. Over the years, rising energy prices and declini ng federal 
appropriations  from the Fund for Bureau of Reclamation purposes have resulted in an 
increasingly  large unobligated balance  that is e xpected  to total $ 14.3 billion by the end of FY 
2015.7 Contrary to Congress’ original intent, much of the unoblig ated balance  is being used to 
support other f ederal purposes  instead of western water development .   
 
  Title X of the Omnibus Public Lands Management Act of 2009 will expand the Fund’s 
authorized use s by establishing a Reclamation Water Settlements Fund ( RWSF) in the U.S. 
Treasury to finance Reclamation projects that are part of Congressionally -approved Indian water 
right settlements. The RWSF will receive up to $120 million per year from Fund  transfers , which 
are prioritize d for settlements in New Mexico,  Montana, and Arizona.8 Because  of “pay go” 
requirements,  authorized transfers to the RWSF were delayed  until FY 2020, creating  a 
significant gap in funding for projects associated with authorized settlements, the costs of which 
may increase significantly by FY 2020.  In addition, Congress only authorized the RWSF to be 
funded for 10 years , and authorized dis bursements from the RWSF only through 2034.     
 
   The Congress and the Administration should fully support the use of  the funds that accrue 
to the Recl amation Fund for their intended purpose of supporting western water development, 
including water infrastructure projects that are part of authorized Indian water rights settlements.  
One way to ensure stability in settlement implementation would be to make both the authorized 
annual transfers to the RWSF and the ability to expend monies from the RWSF permanent. Such 
funding should not be subject to further appropriation or spending offsets.  
 
V. THE CONSEQUENCE S OF NOT FUNDING SETTLEMENTS  
 
 If settlements ar e not authorized  and funded , tribes may have no choice but to litigate 
their water rights claims , which would be very  problematic . It may result in tribes obtaining  5 “paper rights ,” but without a way to turn those rights into “wet water” to sustain and deve lop 
their communities. Litigated outcomes could  also displace est ablished state -issued water rights 
that are essential to  meet non-Indian industrial, residential, and municipal needs  in the West , 
causing great economic and social turmoil . 
 
 For instance , the Navajo Nation’s settlement with New Mexico, which Congress has 
authorized, provides the Nation  with an amount of water within New Mexico’s Colorado River 
Compact  allocation . The settlement still requires court -approval and could fail for a lack of 
appro priated funds. If it fails, the Navajo Nation would have no choice but to litigate its water 
rights claims. The United States has already filed claims on behalf of the Navajo Nation that 
exceed  New Mexico ’s Colorado River a pportion ment  under the Compact . If the United States  
and the Navajo Nation were to prevail on these claims , the allocation of water between the seven 
Colorado River Basin states  could be jeopardized, disrupting  the entire South western economy.9  
 
 Montana has also reached settlement s with the Fort Belknap  and Blackfeet  Tribes  as part 
of a state-wide adjudication process aimed at resolving all water rights claims in the state .  
However, u ntil Congress authorizes these settlements, state -issued water rights in basins where 
these tribes have  claims  will remain in limbo. If Congress delays authorization , the tribes may 
litigate their claims in court, which could disrupt established non -Indian uses.   
 
In addition to the previously mentioned costs associated with litigated outcomes, 
postponing the implementation of Indian water rights settlements  will be far more expensive for  
the federal government in the long -run because growing  water demands , decreasing water 
supplies, construction cost inflation and other factors will only increase the cost s of resolving 
these claims.    
 
VI. CONCLUSION  
 
 The national obligation to Indian water rights settlements is a finite list that grows shorter 
with each settlement. Nevertheless, the cost of implementing settlements will continue to rise  the 
longer it is d elayed . Postponing this duty  only increases costs to the federal government , 
perpetuates hardships  to Indian s, and creates uncertainty for all water users,  hinder ing effective 
state and regional water planning and development.  
 
Endnotes    
                                                
1 The WSWC is a water policy advisory body affiliated with the Western Governors’ Associ ation that consists of 
representatives appointed by the governors of eighteen western states. NARF is a legal defense fund for Native 
American tribes, organizations, and individuals.  
2 207 U.S. 564 (1908).   
3 Concerning S. 1771 – Northwest New Mexico Rura l Water Projects Act : Hearing on S. 1771 Before the S. Comm. 
on Energy and Natural Resources , 110th Cong. 8 (2007) (statement of Joe Shirley, Jr., President, Navajo Nation).  
4 Testimony of John Echohawk on behalf of the Native American Rights Fund: Oversi ght Hearing on Indian Water 
Rights Settlements Before the Subcomm. on Water and Power of the H. Comm. on Natural Resources , 110th Cong . 7-
8 (2008) (statement of John Echohawk, Executive Director, NARF) [hereinafter Echohawk Testimony].  
5 In Support of S. 789, the Tule River Tribe Water Development Act: Hearing to Receive Testimony on S. 637, S. 
789, S. 1080, and S. 1453 Before the Subcomm. on Water and Power of the S. Comm. on Energy and Natural 
Resources , 111th Cong. 7 (2009) (statement of Ryan Garfield, Chairman, Tule River Tribe); Echohawk Testimony, 
supra  note 4, at 7.  
6 Reclamation Act , Pub. L. 57 -161, 32 Stat, 388 (1902).  
7 THE APPENDIX , BUDGET OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT , FISCAL YEAR 2015, 655 (March 2014),  6                                                                                                                                                        
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/budget/fy2015/assets/int.pdf .  
8 Omnibus Public Lands Management Act, Pub. L. No. 111 -11, 123 Stat. 991 (2009). Section 10501of Title X 
requires the  Secretary of the Treasury to deposit $120 million into the fund for fiscal years 2020 -2029. It prioritizes 
this funding for: (1) the Navajo -Gallup Water Supply Project and the Taos and Aamodt settlements in New Mexico; 
(2) settlement agreements between Mo ntana with the Blackfeet Tribe, the Crow Tribe, or the Gros Ventre and 
Assiniboine Tribes of the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation if a settlement(s) is subsequently approved and 
authorized by an act of Congress; and (3) a settlement agreement between Arizon a and the Navajo Nation.  
9 The Colorado River Basin states are: Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming.  
Even if a court determine d that the Compact limits the Navajo Nation ’s claims to amounts within New Mexico’s 
apportionmen t, the Nation would still have a substantial claim against the federal government for lost water rights.     We8tlaw. 
55 FR 9223-01 
55 FR 9223-01, 1990 WL 325541 (F.R.) 
(Cite as: 55 FR 9223) 
NOTICES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR Page 1 
Working Group in Indian Water Settlements; Criteria and Procedures for 
the Participation of the Federal Government in Negotiations for the 
Settlement 
of Indian Water Rights Claims 
Monday, March 12, 1990 
AGENCY: Department of the Interior. 
ACTION: Policy Statement. 
SUMMARY: It is the policy of this Administration, as set forth by President 
Bush on June 21, 1989, in his statement signing into law H.R. 932, the 1989 
Puyallup Tribe of Indians Settlement Act, that disputes regarding Indian 
water rights should be resolved through negotiated settlements rather than 
litigation. Accordingly, the Department of.the Interior adopts the following 
criteria and procedures to establish the basis for negotiation and settlement 
of claims concerning Indian water resources. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: March 12, 1990. 
ADDRESSES: Comments may be addressed to: Mr. Tim Glidden, Department of the 
Interior, MS 6217-MIB, 18th and C Streets, NW., Washington, DC 20240. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:Mr. Tim Glidden, Chairman, Working Group on 
Indian, Water Settlements, 202-343-7351. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: These criteria and procedures were developed by 
the Working Group on Indian Water Settlements from the Department of the 
Interior. 
These-criteria and procedures supersede all prior Departmental policy 
regarding Indian water settlement negotiations. The criteria provide a 
framework for negotiating settlements so that {l) The United States will be 
able to participate in water settlements consistent with the Federal 
Government's responsibilities as trustee to Indians; (2) Indians receive equivalent benefits for rights which they, and the United States as trustee, 
may release as part of a settlement; (3) Indians obtain the ability as part 
of each settlement to realize value from confirmed water rights resulting 
from settlement; and (4) The settlement contains appropriate cost-sharing by 
all parties benefiting from the settlement. 
Dated: March 6, 1990. 
Timonthy Glidden, 
Chairman, Working Group on Indian Water Settlements. 
Criteria and Procedures for Indian Water Rights Settlements 
Preamble 
Indian water rights are vested property rights for which the United States 
has a trust responsibility, with the United States holding legal title to 
such water in trust for the benefit of the Indians. 
It is the policy of this Administration, as set forth by President Bush on 
June 21, 1989, in his statement signing into law H.R. 932, the 1989 Puyallup 
Tribe of Indians Settlement Act, that disputes regarding Indian water rights 
should be resolved through negotiated settlements rather than litigation. 
Accordingly, the Department of the Interior adopts the following criteria 
and procedures to establish the basis for negotiation and settlements of 
claims concerning Indian water resources. These criteria and procedures 
supersede all prior Departmental policy regarding Indian water settlement 
negotiations. The criteria provide a framework for negotiating settlements so 
that (1) The .united States will be able to participate in water settlements 
consistent with the Federal Government's responsibilities as trustee to 
Indians; (2) Indians receive equivalent benefits for rights which they, and 
the United States as trustee, may release as part of a settlement; (3) 
Indians obtain the ability as part of each settlement to realize value from 
confirmed water rights resulting from settlement; and (4) The settlement 
contains appropriate cost-sharing by all parties benefiting from the 
settlement. 
Criteria 
1. These criteria are applicable to all negotiations involving Indian water 
rights claims settlements in which the Federal Government participates. 
Claims to be settled through negotiation may include, but are not limited 
to, claims: 
(a) By tribes and U.S. Government to quantify reserved Indian water rights. (b) By tribes against the U.S. Government. 
(c) By tribes and the U.S. Government against third parties. 
2. The Department of the Interior will support legislation authorizing 
those agreements to which is is a signatory party. 
3. Settlements should be completed in such a way that all outstanding water 
claims are resolved and finality is achieved. 
4. The total cost of a settlement to all parties should not exceed the 
value of the existing claims as calculated by the Federal Government. 
5. Federal contributions to a settlement should not exceed the sum of the 
following two elements: 
a. First, calculable legal exposure--litigation cost and judgment 
obligations if the case is lost; Federal and non-Federal exposure should be 
calculated on a present value basis taking into account the size of the 
claim, value of the water, timing of the award, likelihood of loss. 
b. Second, additional costs related to Federal trust or programmatic 
responsibilities (assuming the U.S. obligation as trustee can be compared to 
existing precedence.)--Federal contributions relating to programmatic 
responsibilities should be justified as to why such contributions cannot be 
funded through the normal budget process. 
6. Settlements should include non-Federal cost-sharing proportionate to the 
benefits received by the non-Federal parties. 
7. Settlements should be structured to promote economic efficiency on 
reservations and tribal self-sufficiency. 
8. Operating capabilities and various resources of the Federal and non­
Federal parties to the claims negotiations should be considered in 
structuring a settlement (e.g. operating criteria and water conservation in 
Federal and non-Federal projects). 
9. If Federal cash contributions are part of a settlement and once such 
contributions are certified as deposited in the appropriate tribal treasury, 
the U.S. shall not bear any obligation or liability regarding the investment, 
management, or use of such funds. 
10. Federal participation in Indian water rights negotiations should be 
conducive to long-term harmony and cooperation among all interested parties through respect for the sovereignty of the States and tribes in their 
respective jurisdictions. 
11. Settlements should generally not include: 
a. Local contributions derived from issuing bonds backed by or guaranteed 
by the Federal Government. 
b. Crediting to the non-Federal share normal project revenues that would be 
received in absence of a cost share agreement. 
c. Crediting non-Federal operation, maintenance, and rehabilitation (OM&R) 
payments to non-Federal construction cost obligations. 
d. Imposition by the Federal Government of fees or charges requiring *9224 
authorization in order to finance the non-Federal share. 
e. Federal subsidy of OM&R costs of Indian and non-Indian parties. 
f. U.S. participation in an economically unjustified irrigation investment; 
however investments for delivery of water for households, gardens, or 
domestic livestock may be exempted from this criterion. 
g. Per-Capita distribution of trust funds. 
h. Crediting to the Federal share existing annual program funding to 
tribes. 
i. Penalties for failure to meet a construction schedule. Interest should 
not accrue unless the settlement does not get budgeted for as specified in . 
item 15 below. 
j. Exemptions from Reclamation law. 
12. All tangible and intangible costs to the Federal Government and to non­
Federal parties, including the forgiveness of non-Federal reimbursement 
requirements to the Federal Government and items contributed per item 8 
above, should be included in calculating their respective contributions to 
the settlement. 
13. All financial calculations shall use a discount rate equivalent to the 
current water resources planning discount rate as published annually in the 
Federal Register. 
14. All contractual and statutory responsibilities of the Secretary that 
affect or could be affected by a specific negotiation will be reviewed. 15. Settlement agreements should include the following standard language:· 
Federal financial contributions to a settlement will normally be budgeted 
for, subject to the availability of funds, by October 1 of the year following 
the year of enactment of the authorizing legislation (e.g., for a settlement 
enacted into law in August 1990, funding to implement it would normally be 
contained in the FY 1992 Budget request and, if appropriated, be available 
for obligation on October 1, 1991). 
16. Settlements requiring the payment of a substantial Federal contribution 
should include standard language providing for the costs to be spread-out 
over more than one year. 
Procedures 
Phase I--Fact Finding 
1. The Department of the Interior (Department) will consider initiation of 
formal claims settlement negotiations when the Indian tribe and non-Federal 
parties involved have formally requested negotiations of the Secretary of the 
Interior (Secretary) . 
2. The Department will consult with the Department of Justice (Justice) 
concerning the legal considerations in forming a negotiating team. 
If Department decides to establish a team, the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) and Justice shall be notified, in writing. Justice should 
generally be a member of any negotiating team. 
a. The Department's notification should include the rationale for potential 
negotiations, i.e., pending litigation and other background information about 
the claim already available, makeup of the team (reason that Justice is not a 
member of a team, if applicable), and non-Federal participants in the 
settlement process. 
b. The date of the notification marks the beginning of the fact-finding 
period. 
3. Not later than nine months after notification, a fact-finding report 
outlining the current status of litigation and other pertinent matters will 
be submitted by the team to the Department, OMB, and Justice. The fact­
finding report should contain information that profiles the claim and 
potential negotiations. The report should include: 
a. A listing of all involved parties and their positions. b. The legal history, if any, of the claim, including such relevant matters 
as prior or potential litigation or court decisions, or rulings by the Indian 
Claims Commission. 
c. A summary and evaluation of the claims asserted for the Indians. 
d. Relevant information on the non-Federal parties and their positions to 
the claim. 
e. A geographical description of the reservation and drainage basin 
involved, including maps and diagrams. 
f. A review and analysis of pertinent existing contracts, statutes, 
regulations, and legal precedent that may have an impact on the settlement. 
g. A description and analysis of the history of the United States' trust 
activities on the Indian reservation. 
4. During Phases I, II, and III, the Government (through the negotiating 
team or otherwise) will not concede or make representatives on likely U.S. 
positions or considerations. 
Phase II--Assessment and Recommendations 
1. As soon as possible, the negotiating team, in concert with Justice, will 
conduct and present to the Department an assessment of the positions of all 
parties, and a recommended negotiating position. The purpose of the 
assessment is to (1) measure all costs presuming no settlement, and (2) 
measure complete settlement costs to all of the parties. 
should include: The assessment 
a. Costs presuming no settlement--Estimates for quantifying costs 
associated with all pending or potential litigation in question, including 
claims against the United States and claims against other non-Federal parties 
together with an assessment of the risk to all parties from any aspect of the 
claim and all pending litigation without a settlement. A best/worst/most 
likely probability analysis of the litigation outcome should be developed. 
b. An analysis of the value of the water claim for the Indians. 
c. Costs Presuming Settlement--quantification of alternative settlement 
costs to all parties. This includes an analysis showing how contributions, 
other than those strictly associated with litigation, could lead to 
settlement (e.g., facilities to use water, alternative uses of water, and 
alternative financial considerations). 2. All analysis in the assessment should be presented in present value 
terms using the planning rate used for evaluating Federal water resource 
projects. 
Phase III--Briefings and Negotiating Position 
1. The Working Group on Indian Water Settlements will present to the 
Secretary a recorrunended negotiating position. It should contain: 
a. The recorrunended negotiating position and contribution by the Federal 
Government. 
b. A strategy for funding the Federal contribution to the settlement. 
c. Any legal or financial views of Justice or OMB. 
d. Tentative position on major issues expected to arise. 
2. Following the Secretary's approval of the Government's negotiating 
position, Justice and OMB will be notified before negotiations commence. 
Phase IV--Negotiations Towards Settlement 
1. OMB and Justice will be updated periodically on the status of 
negotiations. 
2. If the propsoed cost to the U.S. of settlement increases beyond the 
amount decided in Phase III, if the negotiations are going to exceed the 
estimated time (or break down), or if Interior proposes to make signficiant 
changes in the Government negotiating position or in the U.S. contribution to 
the settlement, the original recommendation and negotiating position will be 
revised using the procedures identified above. 
*9225 3. Briefings may be given to the Congressional delegations and the 
Committees consistent with the Government's negotiating position. 
[FR Doc. 90-5532 Filed 3-9-90; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4310-RP-M 
55 FR 9223-01, 1990 WL 325541 (F.R.) 
END OF DOCUMENT 
© 2007 Thomson/West. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works. "" 
NAME I CITATION 
Ak-Chin Indian Water Rights Settlement Act 
Pub.L. 95-328, 92 Stat. 409 (1978), amended, 
Pub.L. 98-530, 98 Stat. 2698 (1984), amended, 
Pub.L. 102-497, 106 Stat. 3258 (1992), amended, 
Pub. L. 106-285, 114 Stat. 878 (2000). 
Fallon Paiute Shoshone Indian Tribes Water 
Rights Settlement Act of 1990 
Pub.L. 101-618; I 04 Stat. 3289 ( 1990). 
Fort Hall Indian Water Rights Act of 1990 
Pub.L. 101-602; 104 Stat. 3059 (1990). SETTLEMENTS APPROVED BY CONGRESS 
TRJBE(s)/STATE(s) 
Ak-Chin Indian 
Community of Papago 
Indians of the Maricopa, 
Ak-Chin Reservation 
ARIZONA 
Paiute-Shoshone Tribe of 
the Fallon Reservation and 
Colony 
NEVADA 
Shoshone-Bannock Tribes 
of the Fort Hall Indian 
Reservation 
IDAHO Updated August 2013 
SIGNIFICANT FEATURES OF 
SETTLEMENT/ 
QUANTITY (AC-FT/YR) 
First Indian water settlement; 
Federal government and Indian Community were only parties to original 
settlement; 
No Jocal cost share provision required; 
Unrestricted water marketing and use under 1992 Amend. Allows off­
reservation leasing in certain nearby counties; 
• Surface water imported from foreign source to satisfy entitlement; 
Federal government agreed to deadline for implementation; 
Federal government assumed total liability for cost of failure to deliver; 
8S,OOO afa 
Legislation in 2000 gave the tribe authority to enter into either options to 
renew a lease or renewals of a lease for no more than the original tenn of a 
lease up to 100 years long, whereas it earlier denied any post-100 year 
option. The amendment also provides that the tribe may not permanently 
a1ienate the water at issue. 
Original intent to settle tribal claims for Federally promised irrigation 
system; 
Developed into c1aims for reserved rights; 
Secretary to identify water sources subsequent to settlement; 
Environmental dilemmas in two river basins required complex and inter­
connected settlements with two tribes; 
Development Fund established to improve irrigation system and enhance 
economic development on the Reservation; 
Federally approved Tribal management plan required for administration; 
Interstate Allocation Agreement required for reservoir operations; 
Limited marketing subject to State law; 
See also, Truckee-Carson Pyramid Lake Water Rights Settlement Act; 
10,S88 afa 
Heavy reliance on unallocated Federal storage space required to satisfy 
Tribes' Winters entitlement and to mitigate impacts to local water users 
within a highly developed system; 
Water bank authorized which will allow the Tribes to lease their water rights 
to local water users off-Reservation; 
• Tribes allowed to lease all or part of water entitlement on the Reservation; 
Tribal Development established in addition to Federal funds provided to 
develop a reservation water management system; 
Instream flow protection allowed (whereas instream flow protection a 
contentious issue in the Wind River-Big Hom litigation); 
Flexible use of Tribes· water on reservation pennits traditional uses 
inc1uding agriculture, fish, and wildlife, and environment; 
Three member Intergovernmental Board established to mediate or resolve 
disputes; 
• S81,031afa TOT AL EXPENDITURES 
·Federal: 
-Total of $29.2M to Indian Community (not including $ISM in 
damages) (emphasis added); 
-estimated $SOK for feasibility study. 
-$3.4M to Indian Community for economic development. 
-$2S.3M as loan forgiveness. 
-Total of$27.2M to irrigation district; 
-$9.4M for construction & conservation; $17.8M as loan 
forgiveness 
•Federal 
-$43M for Fallon Paiute Shoshone Tribal Development Fund (i.e., 
$3M in 1992, and $8M each year thereafter until 1997) 
•Federal 
-$1 OM to Tribal Development Fund; 
-$7M to Tribes for development of a reservation water management 
system; 
-$SM appropriated to BIA for acquisition of lands and grazing rights 
adjacent to Grays Lake to enhance the operation and management of 
the FHIIP as well as providing collateral benefits for the Fish and 
Wildlife Service Refuge at Grays Lake; 
-Federal contract storage rights or studies related to settlement 
(appropriations unknown) Fort McDowell Indian Community Water Rights 
Settlement Act of 1990 
Pub.L. 101-628, I 04 Stat. 4480 ( 1990). 
Jicarilla Apache Tribe Water Settlement Act of 
1992 
Pub.L. 102-441, 106 Stat. 2237 (1992). 
Northern Cheyenne Indian Reserved Water 
Rights Settlement Act of 1992 
Pub.L. 102-374, 106 Stat. 1186 (1992). Fort McDowell Indian 
Community 
ARIZONA 
Jicarilla Apache Indian 
Tribe 
NEW MEXICO 
Northern Cheyenne Indian 
Tribe 
MONTANA Complex multi-party water purchac;cs. exchanges, and storage 
arrangements; 
Much controversy over water supply and sources; 
Secretary allowed to identify and acquire water sources subsequent to 
Settlement; 
Indian Community to receive indigenous water supplies from the Verde 
River; 
Off-reservation leasing of CAP water limited to 99 year lease with City of 
Phoenix Community Development Fund established to enhance economic 
development; 
Federal loan provided to Indian Community to construct delivery system; 
Environmental preservation and studies required prior to most water 
acquisitions; 
Instream flow protection to protect endangered species and river habitat; 
36,350 afa 
Subcontracting or marketing allowed on or off reservation; 
Lease or subcontract terms limited to 99 years; 
Subcontracts subject to state law; 
Significant Secretary approval process prior to subcontracting; 
Tribal water right can not be forfeited or relinquished for nonuse; 
Much discussion of the .. Law of the River" and prohibiting interstate 
marketing; 
Significant environmental compliance and conservation measures required; 
40,000 afa 
Tongue River Dam repair and enlargement major part of settlement; 
• Much discussion over administration and jurisdiction over tribal water right 
and Tongue River Darn Project; 
Three member Board set up to resolve disputes; 
Tribe allowed to administer water right after adopting Tribal Water Code; 
Water marketing and transfers allowed on and off the reservation; 
Most off-reservation marketing subject to State law; 
Tribal water right may be used on the reservation for any purpose and 
without regard to State law; 
Ten-year marketing moratorium with Crow Tribe for water stored in the 
Big Hom Reservoir; 
Trust Fund unrestricted except for per capita payments; 
91,330 afa 
2 • Federal 
-$23M for Community Development Fund; 
-Land and water purchases from unidentified sources including 
13,933 afa of CAP water purchased from HVID (appropriations 
unknown); 
-Environmental studies associated with land and water purchases 
(appropriations unknown); 
-25 year contract with SRP to store Kent Decree water rights 
(appropriations unknown; Community able to use some of its Kent 
Decree water depending on availability and canal conditions); 
-$13M loan to Indian Community (not considered a Federal 
contribution) (emphasis added); 
• State/Local 
-$2M for Community Development Fund; 
-$5M up-front payment for 99 year lease to city of Phoenix (not 
considered a contribution) (emphasis added) 
•Tribe 
-$I 3M in Federal loan monies to construct delivery systems 
•Federal 
-$6M to Trust Fund; 
-estimated $1,056,250 in non-reimbursable construction costs; 
-waiver of OM&R costs (amount unknown) 
•Federal 
-$21.SM to the Cheyenne Indian Reserved Water Right Trust Fund; 
-$31.SM for use in the repair and enlargement of the TRDP; 
-Environmental compliance (estimated at $2M); 
-Tribe's proportionate share of OM&R costs for water stored behind 
the Tongue River Darn (estimated at $3,000 annually until 1997 and 
$28,000 annually thereafter); -$3.5M for fish and wildlife 
enhancement on the TRDP 
·State 
-Repayment of the $11.5M loan to the Tribe; 
-$5M to TRDP for contract costs; -$4.2M to the TRDP in non-
contract costs 
•Tribe 
-OM&R costs and capital costs associated with water used or sold for 
M&l purposes from Big Hom Reservoir (amt. unknown) Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community 
Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988 
Pub.L. 100-512, 102 Stat. 2549 (1988). 
San Carlos Apache Tribe Water Rights 
Settlement Act 
Pub.L. 102-575, 106 Stat. 4740 (1992), tech. 
amend, Pub.L. 103-435, 108 Stat. 4572 (1994), 
amended, 
Pub.L. 105-18, § 5003, 111Stat.181 (1997). Salt River Pima-Maricopa 
Indian Community of the 
Salt River Reservation 
ARIZONA 
San Carlos Apache Indian 
Tribe 
ARIZONA • Complex and creative multi-party water exchanges, lease-backs, and storage 
arrangements (including effluent exchange) between two Indian 
Communities, seven Phoenix area cities, and three irrigation districts; 
• Indian Community arranged to receive indigenous water supplies from the 
Salt River, Verde River, and groundwater beneath the Reservation (e.g., 
very small amount of imported water used to satisfy entitlement); 
• Significant. "equitable" local cost sharing required by Federal government; 
• Marketing of water prohibited except for lease-exchange agreement with 
Phoenix (water uses unrestricted on reservation); 
• Very large Community Trust Fund established to develop and maintain 
facilities and enhance economic development; 
• Provision to resolve allottee water claims; 
• 122,400 afa 
• Directs the Secretary of the Interior to reallocate an additional specified 
amount of water from the Central Arizona Project for the San Carlos 
Apache Tribe; 
• Provides for the diversion of7,500 afy from the Black River; 
• Requires the Tribe or its lessee to pay any water service capital charges or 
municipal and industrial subcontract charges for any water use or lease 
from the effective date of the Act through FY 1995; 
• Directs the Secretary to designate for the benefit of the Tribe such active 
conservation capacity behind Coolidge Dam on the Gila River as the 
Secretary is not using to meet the obligations of the San Carlos Irrigation 
Project (SCIP) for irrigation storage. Limits any water stored by the Tribe 
to the dam's first spill water; 
• Establishes the San Carlos Apache Tribe Development Trust Fund within the 
Treasury to contain the funds appropriated for it, the funds provided by 
Arizona under the agreement, and the funds received from the tribal water 
leases authorized by this Act; 
• Directs the Secretary to carry out a11 necessary environmental compliance 
during the implementation phase of this settlement. Authorizes 
appropriations; 
• Directs the Secretary to establish a groundwater management plan for the 
San Carlos Apache Reservation; 
• Declares that concessions for recreation and fish and wildlife purposes on 
San Carlos Lake may be granted only by the Tribe's governing body; 
• A 1997 amendment settled a right-of-way dispute with Phelps Dodge 
Corporation and provided for a lease and exchange of 14,000 afy of Central 
Arizona Project water 
3 •Federal 
-Total of$47,470,000 to the Salt-River Community Trust Fund; 
-$10M for CAP facility construction (not considered a contribution 
since entirely allocable to P.L. 90-537, the underlying CAP 
authorization) 
• State/Local 
-$55,933,000 from local water users for contributing 32,000 afa of 
water (utilizing a value of around $1,800 per afa); 
- $9M from local cities put in escrow to acquire 22,000 afa of 
Colorado River water; 
-$3M from the State of Arizona to community Trust Fund; 
-$16M in exchange for allocated CAP water (not considered a 
contribution since it is compensation for a 99 year lease agreement) 
•Tribe 
-$2M to Community Trust Fund 
•Federal 
-$38.4M for Development Fund (94%); 
-Land and water purchases from Planet Ranch located on Bill 
Williams River in Arizona (appropriations unknown); 
-Environmental studies, compliance, and mitigation costs to BR 
associated with land and water allocations or purchases 
(appropriations unknown); 
-Construction, operation, maintenance and replacement costs for CAP 
water facilities (appropriations unknown) 
• State/Local 
-$3M for Development Fund (6%); 
-Purchase of around 58,735 afa of surface water (amount unknown) San Luis Rey Indian Water Rights Settlement La Jolla, Ricon, San • Problems with water source identification (e.g .• originally proposed water •Federal 
Act of 1988 Pasquale, Pauma, Pala from Central Valley Project amended to require "supplemental" water from -$30M for Development Fund; 
Bands of Mission Indians lining the All American Canal); -Lining of All American Canal (appropriations unknown); 
• Conservation measures required to fulfill Bands' water entitlement by lining -Use of existing delivery systems (amount unknown); 
Pub.L. I 00-675, I 02 Stat. 4000 (1988). the All American Canal in order to reduce seepage; -Groundwater recharge program (amount unknown) 
• Existing water canals and systems used to deliver "supplemental" water~ • State/Local 
CALIFORNIA • No new facility construction required to be financed by the Federal -Purchase of water that is surplus to the Bands' needs on the 
government; reservations (amount unknown)~ 
• "Equitable allocation" oflocal water supply required reallocation of San Luis -Use of existing local water delivery systems to convey Bands' share 
Rey River system evenly between Bands and non-Indian users; of local water to the reservations (amt. unknown); 
• $30M Development Fund established; -O&M and replacement of existing delivery systems for San Luis Rey 
• Indian Water Authority established as inter-tribal entity to market water and water (amount unknown); 
administer Development Fund; -Costs associated with Warner Well Field (estimated to range from 
• 16,000 afa $1.5 to $3.l&M) 
•Bands 
-O&M costs associated with delivery of supplemental water through 
existing facilities~ 
-Costs associated with Warner Well Field (estimated at over $2M 
annually) 
Seminole Indian Land Claims Settlement Act of Seminole Tribe ofFlorida • First Indian water settlement in the Eastern United States; ·None 
1987 • No prior water rights litigation preceding settlement, but the settlement did 
resolve litigation and pennit challenges on non-water related issues; 
Pub.L. 100-228, 101 Stat. 1556 (1987). FLORIDA • No Federal funding required; 
• Compact compromises between the Winters doctrine and riparian doctrine; 
• Compact gives Tribe absolute preference to ground water; 
• Tribal water right perpetual in nature and not subject to State renewal; 
• Compact allows Tribe to issue pennits and administer its water rights; 
• Compact allows Tribe significant participation in water and land related 
decisions; 
• Compact gives Tribe jurisdiction to manage its water resources; 
• Compact given force of Federal law for purposes of enforcing the tribe's 
rights and obligations in Federal District Court 
4 Southern Arizona Water Rights Settlement Act 
Pub.L. 97-293, 96 Stat. 1274 (1982), tech. amend., 
Pub.L. 102-497, 106 Stat. 3256 (1992). San Xavier and Schuk 
Toak Districts, Tohono 
O'Odham Nation 
(formerly Papago) 
ARIZONA 
Truckee-Carson-Pyramid Lake Water Rights Act I Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe 
of the Pyramid Lake 
Pub.L. I 01-618, I 04 Stat. 3294 (1990). Reservation 
NEVADA 
(CALIFORNIA) • Water provided from CAP allocation and reclaimed effluent water from 
Tucson; 
• Nation guaranteed a "firm" delivery of water even in dry seasons; 
• Federal government assumed liability for failure to deliver water and 
replacement costs; 
• Construction costs of Federal facilities required to deliver entitlement is 
entirely allocable to Pub.L. 90-537, (the underlying CAP authorization), 
notSAWRSA; 
• Limited off~reservation leasing in Tucson AMA; 
• Two independent trust funds established, a Tribal and Cooperative Fund; 
• Settlement and implementation delayed due to dispute over ownership and 
allocation of water between aJlottees and Nation; 
• 66,000 afa 
• Environmental dilemma and Endangered Species Act were major issues 
driving the settlement; 
• Key provision involving reservoir operation and administration requires 
Interstate Allocation Agreement; 
• Some unidentified water sources to be acquired subsequent to settlement; 
• Economic Development Fund established for economic development on the 
Reservation; 
• Fisheries Fund established to enhance, restore, and conserve Pyramid Lake 
fish; 
• Limited water marketing is subject to State law; 
• Municipalities to insta11 water meters for conservation purposes; 
• Environmental dilemmas in two river basins required complex and inter­
connected settlements with two tribes -See also, Fallon Paiute-Shoshone 
Settlement Act; 
• 520,000 afa 
5 ·Federal 
-Estimated $1M to establish water management plan and conduct 
certain studies; -$5.25M to "Cooperative Fund;" 
-$I SM to Nation's Trust Fund; 
~ Up to $3.5M, if needed, to cover fluctuations in construction costs 
for "on·reservation" improvements only (amount unknown); 
-Up to $3.3M in annual contingent liability for replacement water for 
damages for failure to deliver entitlement (to be paid from interest of 
"Cooperative Fund"); 
-Estimate $65M for construction of Phase B of Tucson Aqueduct; 
estimated $SOM to acquire reclaimed effluent water and increase 
capacity of the Tucson Aqueduct to deliver such water; estimated 
$19M to improve on-reservation irrigation systems; unknown amount 
for O&M; (above amounts not included since costs entirely allocable 
to P.L. 90-537, the underlying CAP authorization) 
• State/Local 
-$2.75M from the State of Arizona, $1.SM from the City of Tucson, 
and $IM from local non-Indian users to "Cooperative Fund"; 
-Forgone profits to City of Tucson from contributing 28,200 afa of 
rec1aimed effluent water at cost to FederaJ government (amount 
unknown) 
•Nation 
·estimated $IM for construction of site specific on-reservation fann 
ditches, subjugation of land, and O&M cost (to be paid from interest 
of trust fund) 
•Federal 
-$25M for Pyramid Lake Paiute Fisheries Fund; 
-$40M to the Pyramid Lake Paiute Economic Development Fund (in 
five equal annual installments from 1993 to 1997); II"< 
· Land and water purchases from unidentified sources 
(appropriations unknown); 
· Environmenta1 studies associated with land and water purchases 
(appropriations unknown) 
• State/Local 
·Local conservation acquisitions (contribution unknown) Ute Indian Rights Settlement Act of 1992 Northern Ute Indian Tribe Primary purpose of settlement was to resolve claims against the Federal •Federal 
of the Uintah & Ouray government for breach of Deferral Agreement where United States failed -Total appropriations: $198,500,000 (represents damages for breach 
to construct ultimate phase projects of the CUP and Tribe deferred use of Deferral Agreement); Pub.L. 102-575, 106 Stat. 4650 (1992). Reservation and development of tribal land and water; -$45M for Tribal farming operation; 
One of two settlements fully Federally funded (See also, Ak-Chin -$SM for Cederview Reservoir repair; 
*Utah and the Tribe are working on an Settlement); -$10M for stream improvements; 
implementation plan/compact UTAH Limited local cost share provisions commencing in the year 2042 for use or -$500,000 for Bottle Hollow Reservoir clean up; 
purchase of35,500 afa of tribal.water; -$1 OM for recreational enhancement; 
Monies appropriated to enhance Tribal fish. wildlife and environment in -$3M for municipal water system; 
lieu of constructing promised ultimate phase water projects; -$125M for Tribal Development Fund; 
Off-reservation leasing provision strips tribes· water of its reserved -estimated $2M per year for 50 years ($1 OOM) in Bonneville 
character and exposes tribal water to State law; revenues (represents future damages for use of 35,500 afa of tribal 
"Neutral" marketing provisions may allow tribe to sell water in the future water) 
depending on "Law of the River"; 
Largest Development Fund established to enhance economic development • State/Local 
and compensate for breach ofFederal agreement; - 7 percent of the then fair market value of 35,500 afa of Bonneville . Ute Water Compact has not yet been approved by either the Tribe or State; agricultural water which has been converted to M&I water beginning 
481,000 afa in the year 2042 (amount unknown) 
Yavapai-Prescott Indian Tribe Water Rights Yavapai-Prescott Indian Environmental issues, groundwater restrictions, and inability to use prior •Federal 
Settlement Act of 1994 Tribe CAP allocations from the Verde River required Tribe and municipality to -$200,000 to Water Fund for use by the Tribe to defray its costs 
relinquish CAP water for alternate sources; associated with Judicial confirmation of the settlement; 
Pub.L. No. 103-434, 108 Stat. 4526 (1994). Settlement mutually benefited the Tribe and city and required much -Such sums as may be necessary to establish, maintain and operate a 
cooperation; gauging station on Granite Creek (amount unknown) 
ARIZONA Municipality required to provide Tribe water and sewage services '"in 
perpetuity"; •State 
Tribe and city both required to relinquish, assign or sell prior CAP -$200,000 to Water Fund for use by the Tribe to defray its costs 
allocations; associated with the water service agreement 
"Water Replacement Fund" established to manage all money associated 
with the relinquishment of Tribe's and city's prior CAP allocation; 
Water Fund, or water bank. to be used by city to acquire new water sources; 
Water Fund to be used by Tribe to defray its costs associated with water 
and sewage services and to develop or maintain on-reservation water 
facilities; 
Tribe to develop a groundwater management plan in consultation with the 
State; 
A11ows marketing of effluent generated on-reservation; 
1,550 afa 
6 Chippewa Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boy's 
Reservation Indian Reserved Water Rights 
Settlement Act of 1999 
Pub.L. No. I 06-163, 113 Stat. 1778 (1999). 
Shivwits Band of the Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah 
Water Rights Settlement Act 
Pub.L. No. I 06-263, 114 Stat. 737 (2000). Chippewa Cree Indian 
Tribe 
MONTANA 
Shivwits Band of Paiute 
Indians 
UTAH Approves and ratifies the Water Rights Comp11c1 entered into on April 14. 
1997. by the Tribe and the State of Montana. Oirects thr Secretary of the 
Interior to execute and implement the Compact: 
Satisfies any entitlement to Federal Indian reserved water of any tribal 
member solely from the water secured to the Tribe by the Compact 
Authorizes the Tribe, subject to the approval of the Secretary and the State. 
to transfer any portion of the Tribal water right for use off the Reservation 
by service contract, lease. exchange, or other agreement; 
Directs the Secretary: to plan, design, and construct specified water 
development projects on the Resetvation; and at the request of the Tribe. 
to enter into an agreement with the Tribe to carry out such activity 
through the Tribe's annual funding agreement entered into under the self­
govemance program under the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
Assistance Act: 
• Establishes a trust fund to fulfill the purposes of the Act; 
Directs the Secretary to perform a feasibility study of Tiber Reservoir water 
and related resources in North Central Montana to evaluate alternatives 
for a municipal, rural, and industrial water supply for the Reservation 
Grants the Band the right in perpetuity to divert, pump, impound, use, and 
reuse a total of 4,000 afy from the Virgin River 
and Santa Clara River systems to be taken as follows: 1,900 acre-feet 
from the Santa Clara Project and 2,000 acre-feet from the St. George 
Water Reuse Project -with first priority to the reuse water provided from 
the St. George Project; and I 00 acre-feet from groundwater on the 
Shivwits Reservation; 
Permits the Band to use water from the springs and runoff on the 
Reservation. Declares that the amount used from such sources will be 
reported annually to the Utah State Engineer by the Band and requires the 
amount to be counted against the annual Water Right; 
Provides that the Shivwits Water Right shall not be subject to loss by 
abandonment, forfeiture, or nonuse. Authorizes the Band to use or lease 
the Water Right for: (!) any purpose permitted by tribal or Federal law 
anywhere on the Reservation; and (2) any beneficial use off the 
Reservation 
7 •Federal 
-FY 1999 feasibility study appropriations= $IM, FY 2000= $3M; 
-$21 M for the Chippewa Cree Fund; 
-$!3M for on-reservation development; 
-$IM for administration costs 
•State 
-Contribution of$150,000 to be used for water quality discharge 
monitoring we11s and monitoring program, diversion structure on Big 
Sandy Creek, a conveyance structure on Box Elder Creek, and the 
purchase of contract water from Lower Beaver Creek Reservoir 
-Subject to the availability of funds, the State shall provide services 
valued at $400,000 for administration required by the Compact and 
for water quality sampling required by the Compact 
•Federal 
-$20 M for establishment of Shivwits Band Trust Fund -to be used 
for infrastructure costs of obligations imposed on the Santa Clara 
Projec~ and the St. George Reuse Project to deliver required water to 
the Band. Colorado Ute Settlement Act Southern Ute and Ute Amends the Colorado Ute Indian Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988 to •Federal 
Amendments of2000 Mountain Ute Tribes, and authorize the Secretary of the Interior to complete construction of, and -$8 M annually from 2002 to 2006 to establish the Southern Ute 
Navajo Nation utilize a reservoir and infrastructure to operate facilities to divert and store Tribal Resource Fund, and the Ute Mountain Ute Tribal Resource 
water from the Animas River to provide a municipal and industrial water Fund Pub.L. No. I 06-554, 114 Stat. 2763 (2000). supply to the San Juan Water Commission, Animas-La Plata Conservancy 
COLORADO District, State of Colorado, La Plata Conservancy District of New Mexico, 
Southern Ute and Ute Mountain Ute tribes, and Navajo Nation; 
Construction costs required to deliver each tribe's water allocation shall be 
nonreimbursable; . Authorizes the Secretary to construct a water line to augment the existing 
system that conveys municipal water supplies to the Navajo Indian 
Reservation at or near Shiprock, New Mexico. Makes construction costs 
for the water line nonreimbursable; 
Authorizes appropriations to the Southern Ute and Ute Mountain Ute Tribal 
Resource Funds; 
Establishes the Colorado Ute Settlement Fund in the Treasury and 
authorizes appropriations to the Fund to complete the construction of 
Project facilities and the Navajo Nation water line; 
Requires the construction of facilities, and allocation of water supply to the 
Indian tribes, provision of funds 
Zuni Indian Tribe Water Rights Settlement Act Zuni Indian Tribe Provides the resources to acquire water from willing sellers for the tribe in . Federal government is to appropriate $19.25 M to the Zuni Indian 
of2003 Arizona in the Little Colorado River Basin; Tribe Water Rights Development Fund; 
ARIZONA Grandfathers existing water uses and waives claims against many future . The Secretary is to allocate $3.5 M for fiscal year 2004, to be used for 
water uses~ the acquisition of water rights and associated lands, and other 
Pub.L. No. 108-34 (2003). Provides funding necessary to enable the Zuni Tribe to acquire water rights activities carried out, by the Zuni Tribe to facilitate the enforceability 
from willing sellers in lieu of having a Federal reserved rights to surface of the Settlement Agreement, including the acquisition of at least 
water or groundwater; 2,350 afy of water rights; 
The Tribe is required to make payments in lieu of all current State, county, The Zuni Heaven Reservation restoration is to be accomplished by 
and local ad valorem taxes that would otherwise apply if those lands were using $5.25 Min 2004, 2005, and 2006, for a total of$I5.75 M . ' 
not held in trust; 
Funding to restore, rehabilitate. and maintain the Zuni Heaven Reservation, 
including the Sacred Lake, wetlands, and riparian areas; 
Requires the Secretary of the Interior to take legal title of specified lands in 
the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian into trust for the benefit of the 
Zuni tribe. Those lands have no Federally reserved water right; 
The U.S. holds all Zuni owned state water rights in trust for the Tribe; 
Prohibits the United States, except in certain instances, from removing 
jurisdiction to Federal courts for disputes over intergovernmental 
agreements entered into under these trust land agreements 
Arizona Water Settlements Act of 2004 Gila River Indian . Finalizes settlement reached in 1982; . Budgets $250 M to the Future Indian Water Settlement Subaccount of 
Community, . Resolves a long-standing dispute between Arizona and the Federal the Lower Colorado Basin Development fund, to be used for Indian 
government over nearly $2 B in repayments for CAP construction; water rights settlements in Arizona approved by Congress after the 
Pub.L. No. 108-451; 118 Stat. 3478 (2004) Tohono Oodham Nation . Reallocates 102,000 afa of CAP water to Gila River Indian Community date of enactment of the Arizona Water Settlements Act; 
(consisting of the Pima Tribe and the Maricopa Tribe); . Federal government will deposit $53 M in the Gila River Indian 
ARIZONA . Reallocates 28,200 afa of CAP water to Tohono O'odham Nation; Community Water OM&R Trust Fund; . Reallocates 67,300 afa of CAP water to "Arizona Indian Tribes;" . Federal government to pay $52.3 M for the rehabilitation of the San . Includes a groundwater component whereby the Tohono 01odham Nation Carlos Irrigation Project; 
can pump up to 13.200 afa . Federal Government to pay $66 M to the New Mexico Unit Fund 
8 Snake River Water Rights Act of2004 Nez Perce Tribe . Purpose of the Act is "to achieve a fair, equitable. and final settlement of . Federal government is to appropriate $60.1 M to the Nez Perce Water 
all claims of the Nez Perce Tribe ... to the water of the Snake River and Fisheries Fund over the span of fiscal years 2007 to 2013; 
Basin within Idaho; .. . Federal government is to appropriate $23 M to the Nez Perce Tribe Pub.L. No. 108-447; 118 Stat 2809, 3432-41 (2004) IDAHO . Provides a consumptive use water right of 50.000 afy with a priority date of Domestic Water Supply Fund between fiscal years 2007 and 2011; 
1855; . Federal government is to appropriate $38 M to the Salmon and . The consumptive use water right is not subject to loss by abandonment, Clearwater River Basins Habitat Fund between fiscal years 2007 and 
forfeiture, or nonuse; 2011. It is worth noting that this fund is separate and distinct from . The Secretary of the Interior is to transfer land to the Bureau oflndian the Nez Perce Water and Fisheries fund 
Affairs in trust for the Tribe with a value not to exceed $7 M; . Includes significant appropriations and other measures for salmon and 
steelhead restoration efforts 
Soboba Band of Luiseiio Indians Settlement Act Soboba Band of Luiseiio . Finalizes settlement reached in 2006 between the Soboba Band ofLuisefio . Federal 
Indians Indians and three California water districts; -$5.SM to the Soboba Band of Luisei\o Indians Water . Creates a 50 year plan in which the Tribe and the water districts agree to Development Fund for each of FY 2010 and 2011 to pay or Pub.L. No. 110-297; 122 Stat. 2975 (2008) certain concessions to create a safe yield for the San Jacinto River Basin; reimburse costs associated with constructing, operating, and 
CALIFORNIA . Gives the Tribe the "prior and paramount right, superior to an others" to maintaining water and sewage infrastructure, and other water-
pump 9,000 afa from the Basin; related projects; . Provides that the Tribe will limit the exercise of its Tribal Water Right to -$SM to the San Jacinto Basin Restoration Fund for each ofFY 
4,100 afa for 50 years; 2010 and 2011 to reimburse the costs associated with . Awards the Tribe 127.7 acres of land owned by the water districts; constructing, operating, and maintaining the Federal portion of the . Requires the water districts to construct, operate, and maintain a project basin recharge project. 
that will recharge the Basin with 7,500 afy of imported water through 
2035; . Local . Requires water districts and other ground water producers to implement a -Water districts to provide the Tribe with $17M in funds that the 
Water Management Plan (WMP) to "address the current Basin overdraft, Tribe wi11 manage in its sole discretion; 
and recognize and take into account the Tribal Water Right;" -$1M credit deducted from water and sewage financial . Permits the Tribe to lease water to other users in the WMP area participation fees charged to the Tribe by one of the water districts 
9 Northwestern New Mexico Rural Water Projects Navajo Nation . Establishes the Reclamation Water Settlements Fund: $1.2 B ($120 M to be . Federal 
Act (Navajo-Gallup Water Supply deposited annually from FY 2020 through 2029) for use by the Secretary -$6M to the Navajo Nation Water Resources Development Trust 
Project/Navajo Nation Water Rights) NEW MEXICO of the Interior to fund Indian water rights settlements with priority for Fund for each of fiscal years 2010-2014; 
Navajo-Gallup ($500 M); Aamodt & Taos (NM) ($250M); Blackfeet, -$4M to the Navajo Nation Water Resources Development Trust 
Crow, Fort Belknap (MT) ($350 M); Navajo Colorado River (AZ) Fund for each of fiscal years 2015 through 2019; 
Pub.L. No. 111-11; 123 Stat 1367 (2009) ($100M); -$870M for the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project for the . Authorizes the construction and operation of the Navajo-Gallup Water period offiscal years 2009 through 2024; 
Supply Project (37, 764 afy) for municipal, industrial, commercial, and -$30M for conjunctive use ground water wells for the period of 
domestic uses on the Navajo Nation in northwestern New Mexico and fiscal years 2009 through 2019; 
northwestern Arizona, the City of Gallup, New Mexico, and the Jicarilla -Not more than $7.7M for the rehabilitation of the Fruitland 
Apache Nation; Indian Irrigation Project for fiscal years 2009 through 2016; . Authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to execute Settlement Agreement, -Not more than $15.4M for the rehabilitation of the Hogback-
which confirms Navajo water rights to divert/deplete 606,660/325,670 Cudei Irrigation Project for fiscal years 2009 through 2019; 
afy as follows: (I) Navajo Indian Irrigation Project -508,0001270,000 - $ 11 M for non-Indian irrigation projects for the period of fiscal 
afy; (2) Hogback Irrigation Project -48,550121,280 afy; (3) Fruitland years 2009 through 2019 
Irrigation Project- 18,180n,970 afy; (4) Navajo-Gallup -22,650/20,780 
afy; (5) Animas-LaPlata Project -4,68012,340 afy; (6) Misc. municipal . State 
uses-2,600/1,300 afy; (7) Tributary groundwater -2,000/2,000 afy; and -Contribute a share of the construction costs of the Navajo-
(8) additional historic and existing rights to be determined by Gallup Water Supply Project of not less than $50M, except that the 
hydrosurvey; state shall receive credit for funds contributed to construct water . Recognizes rights of the Navajo Nation to: (I) divert supplemental carriage conveyance facilities; 
water; (2) develop additional ground water on Navajo lands; (3) retain -50% cost share of rehabilitation of non-Indian ditches 
water rights acquired under state law; (4) maintain additional rights to de 
minimus residential domestic stock uses not served by public supply . Local 
systems; (5) have a contractual right to storage to supply Navajo uses -City of Gallup and Jicarilla Apache Nation to reimburse United 
under the Animas-La Plata Project; and (6) re-use tail water or waste States up to 35% of allocated share of capital costs for Navajo-
water under certain conditions; Gallup Water Supply Project . Individual Nation members that have been allotted land by the United 
States are not bound by the Settlement and may have additional claims; . Secretary of the Interior has not signed the Settlement Agreement executed 
by the Navajo Nation and the State of New Mexico in 2005 
Shoshone-Paiute Tribes of Duck Valley Water Shoshone Tribe . Finalizes settlement between the Shoshone-Paiute Tribes of the Duck . Federal 
Rights Settlement Act Paiute Tribe Valley Reservation, Nevada, and upstream water users; -$9M to the Shoshone-Paiute Tribes Water Rights Development . Provides the Tribes with a water right that includes a Federal reserved Fund for each of fiscal years 2010-2014; 
right to: (I) 111,476 afy of surface water from the East Fork Owyhee -$3M to the Shoshone-Paiute Tribes Operation and Maintenance 
Pub.L. No. 111-I I; 123 Stat 1405 (2009) NEVADA River Basin; and (2) the entire flow of all springs and creeks originating Fund for each of fiscal years 2010-2014 
within the Reservation; . Recognizes and protects the Tribes' claim to 2,606 acre-feet of ground . State 
water per year "as part of its water righ~" -Services for the "implementation and administration" of the . Entitles Tribes to all water in the Wild Horse Reservoir subject to certain settlement, including the services of a water commissioner; 
exceptions. and provides that the Tribes shall operate the Reservoir in -Funding and maintenance for streamgages and a stage 
accordance with a plan of operations develop and agreed upon with the recording station 
United States; . Creates conditions under which upstream users can: (I) divert sufficient 
surface water to irrigate 5,039 acres; and (2) require the Tribes to release 
up to 265 afy from the Wild Horse Reservoir; . Tribes may use and store all surface water not used by upstream users; . Surface water right that upstream users abandon or forfeit shall become 
part of the Tribes' water right; . Tribes shall enact a water code to administer tribal water rights; . Department of Interior has not signed the Settlement 
10 Crow Tribe Water Rights Settlement Act of2010 Crow Tribe . Provides funding to improve irrigation projects, industrial and municipal •Federal: 
water system upgrades, and ensure safe drinking water for the Tribe; -$461 M overall; 
MONTANA . Establishes a base for the Tribe to build energy development projects; -$13 l.8M for Crow Irrigation Project; Pub.L. 111-291, 124 Stat. 3064 (2010) . Creates a Crow Tribal Water Right with the following components: -$246.4M for MR&! System; 
-Bighorn River: 650,000 afy consisting of: (I) 500,000 afy of -$4.8M for Tribal Compact Administration; 
natural flow from the river including ground water for existing and -$20M for Energy Development Projects; 
future Tribal uses; and (2) 150,000 afy of storage from Bighorn Lake for -$47M for MR&! System OM&R; 
new Tribal development, of which only 50,000 afy can be used off- -$!OM for Crow Irrigation Project OM&R 
Reservation. Another 150,000 afy is allocated to supplement the natural 
flow right but is not available for other uses; •State: 
-Drainages other than the Bighorn River: Provides that the Tribe may -$I 5M for use and benefit of the Tribe; use all available surface water, ground water, and storage water on the -The state will also pass through all state production taxes on Crow Reservation not needed to satisfy current water uses; coal development -Ceded Strip: 47,000 afy from any water source on lands or interests on 
the ceded strip which Congress restored to the Tribe, or on any lands 
acquired and held in trust for the Tribe. If the water source is the 
Bighorn River, the amount developed will be deducted from the on-
Reservation water allocated to the Tribe from the river; 
-Other: Water rights the Tribe acquires as appurtenances to land 
become part of the Tribal Water Right . Closes certain basins and sub-basins to new water appropriations under 
State law; generally allows small domestic and stock uses, as well as 
changes and water rights transfers. to continue; . Tribe will administer Tribal Water Right and State will administer water 
rights recognized under state law; . Tribe and Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation 
will review all Tribal development to detennine if it will impact current 
water users; . Any unresolved disputes will be referred to the Crow-Montana Compact 
Board 
11 White Mountain Apache Tribe Water Rights White Mountain Apache . Confirms 2009 White Mountain Apache Tribe (WMA T) Water Rights • Federal: 
Quantification Act of 2010 Tribe Quantification Agreement; -$126.2 M mandatory appropriation for dam, treatment plant, . Confirms Tribe's 1871 priority right to divert 74,000 afa from Salt River; pumping stations, 60 mile pipeline for reservation wide drinking . Confirms Tribe's right to additionally divert at least 25,000 afa from Salt water system; 
Pub.L. 111-291, 124 Stat. 3064 (2010) ARIZONA River through exchange of CAP water for total of 99,00o+ afa; -$24 M mandatory appropriation for Cost Overrun Fund for drinking . Authorizes leasing of up to 25,000 afa CAP Water annually for I 00 years; water system; . Requires Secretary to construct reservation wide drinking water project; -$50 M mandatory appropriation for WMAT Operation, Maintenance . Confirms Tribe's right to build two reservoirs totaling 18,000 acre-feet and Repair Trust Fund for the drinking water system; 
storage; -$2.5 M mandatory appropriation to operate and maintain drinking . Restores Secretarial Power Site Reserves to Tribe; water system until title to system is transferred by Secretary to . Establishes 12 mile groundwater protection buffer zone along Tribe's WMAT; 
northern boundary with National Forest; -$113.5M authorized for WMAT Settlement Fund, includes $35M . Confinns Tribe's administrative authority over water use within [$24M Mandatory Appropriation and $11 M authorized] for Cost 
Reservation; Overrun Fund; . Requires transfer of title to drinking water system to Tribe after three years -Unknown cost for United States to annually firm 3, 750 afa of 
of operation; WMAT CAP Water to M&l priority water for 100 years; . Requires United States and State of Arizona to annually firm for Tribe -Funding is indexed in accordance with engineering indices for 
7,500 acre-feet ofWMAT CAP water (3,750 afa each) to M&l priority construction costs 
water for I 00 years; . Allocates 25,000 afa CAP Water to Tribe in perpetuity • State/Local: 
-$2M from State for reservation drinking water system; 
-$20.7M to annually firm 3,750 afa ofWMAT CAP Water to M&l 
priority water for I 00 years 
Aamodt Litigation Settlement Act Nambe, Pojoaque, San . One of the longest running Federal cases in the U.S.; . Federal: 
Ildefonso, and Tesuque . Pueblos will not make priority calls against non-Pueblo groundwater users -$174.3M total; 
so long as non-Pueblo users agree to eventually obtain water from a non- -$106.4M construction of the Regional Water System and Pub.L. 111-291, 124 Stat. 3064 (2010) Pueblos Pueblo water utility system when available; environmental compliance activities; ,, . If non-Pueblo groundwater use exceeds specified levels, they must reduce -37.5M to help pay Pueblos' share of the cost to operating, 
NEW MEXICO use to stay free from priority administration; maintaining, and replacing Pueblo Water Facilities and the Regional . Provides protection for existing non-Pueblo surface users against future Water System $15Mfor Aamodt Settlement Fund; 
water development by the Pueblos; -$5.4M for acquisition of water rights for the benefit of the . Codifies water-sharing arrangements between Indian and neighboring Pueblos; 
communities; -$5M to pay for the acquisition of Nambe's reserved right for the . To alleviate pressure on the underlying aquifer, the settlement requires the use of all four Pueblos; 
design and construction of a Regional Water System which will import -$5M to pay for the pre-completion operation, maintenance and 
acquired and San Juan Chama Project water from the Rio Grande for use replacement costs associated with Pueblo Water Facilities of the 
by both Pueblo and non-Pueblo parties; Regional Water System . Total allotment of6,096 afa to the Pueblos (this includes water for existing 
and future basin use, as well as supplemental, acquired, and reserved . State/Local: 
Water) from a combination of the Pojoaque Basin and Regional Water $116.9M total 
System 
12 Taos Pueblo Indian Water Rights Settlement Act Taos Pueblo 
Pub.L. I I 1-291, 124 Stat. 3064 (2010) 
NEW MEXICO 
Abbreviations: 
-afa: 
-afy: 
-CAP: 
-M&I: 
-OM&R: acre-feet per annum 
acre-feet per year 
Central Arizona Project 
Municipal and Industrial 
Ongoing Maintenance and Repair . 
. . 
. 
. Funds to be used to: (I) acquire additional water rights; (2) plan, develop, • Federal: 
and improve water production, farmlands, and water infrastructure; (3) -$124M total, consisting of: (I) $88M to construct and maintain 
restore and preserve the Buffalo Pasture, a natural wetland which has water infrastructure; and (2) $36M towards non-Pueblo projects 
cultural and religious significance to the Pueblo; benefited by the agreement, with Federal government providing 
Authorize the Pueblo to market 2,215 acre-feet from the San Juan-Chama 75% cost-sharing 
Project water rights upon the Secretary of Interior's approval; 
Authorizes right to divert and consume surface waters from the Taos . State/Local: 
Valley Stream System to irrigate 5,712.78 acres with an aboriginal -$20M contributed overall, including: (I) $12M for planning, 
priority date; design and construction; and (2) $8M for long term costs related to 
Pueblo agrees to limit irrigation to the 2,322 acres currently irrigated, and non-Pueblo projects benefited by the agreement 
to extend irrigation only after acquiring and retiring offsetting water 
right; 
Gives Pueblo a right to divert and consume 1,600 acre-feet of 
groundwater for municipal, domestic and industrial uses 
);:'i 
13  
 Negotiation 	Teams	
	 Negotiation 	Tribe	 Members 	 Agency	
1	Abousleman 	 Pueblos	of	Jemez,	
Pueblo	of	Santa	Ana,	
Pueblo	of	Zia	John	Peterson*	 BOR‐Denver	
	New	Mexico	 Cynthia	Abeyta	 FWS‐Albuquerque	
		 Leann	Summers	 COE‐Albuquerque	
		 	 		
2	Blackfeet 	 Blackfeet 	Tribe	(Rocky	
Mountain) 	Doug	Oellermann*	 BOR‐Billings	
	Montana 	 John	Anevski	 BIA‐Billings	
		 Robbin	Wagner	 FWS‐Bozeman	
		 	 Kelly	Titensor	 BOR‐Wash	DC	
		 	 Brad	Bridgewater	 DOJ‐Denver	
		 	 John	Chaffin	 SOL‐Billings	
		 	 Jane	Cottrell	 USFS‐Missoula	
		 	 Jody	Miller	 BLM‐Missoula	
		 	 Bill	Hansen	 NPS‐Ft.	Collins	
		 	 		
3	Fallbrook 	 Cahuilla 	Band	of	
Mission	Indians,	
Pechanga 	Band	of	
Luiseno	Mission	
Indians,	Ramona 	Band	Doug	Garcia*	 BIA‐Sacramento	
	California 	 Patrick	Barry	 DOJ‐Wash	DC	
		 William	Steele	 BOR‐Temecula	CA	
		 Christopher	Watson	 SOL‐Wash	DC	
		 Jon	Avery	 FWS‐Calsbad	CA	
		 		
4	Flathead 	 Confederated 	Salish	&	
Kootenai 	Tribes	of	the	
Flathead 	Reservation 	Duane	Mecham*	 SOL‐Portland	
	Montana 	 Megan	Estep	 FWS‐Denver	
		 David	Harder	 DOJ‐Denver	
		 Gwen	Christensen	 BOR‐Yakima	
		 	 		
5	Fort	Belknap 	 Gros	Ventre	and	
Assiniboine 	Tribes	John	Chaffin	 SOL‐Billings	
	Montana 	 Mark	Albers	 BLM‐Malta	
		 Robbin	Wagner	 FWS‐Bozeman	
		 Douglas	Davis	 BOR‐Billings	
		 	 Brad	Bridgewater	 DOJ‐Denver	
		 	 John	Anevski*	 BIA‐Billings	
		 	 		
6	Kerr	McGee	
New	Mexico	Pueblos	of	Acoma	and	
Laguna	and	Navajo	
Nation	
	
	Greg	Mehojah*	
Brian	Parry	Brad	Bridgewater	SOL‐Albuquerque	
BOR‐Salt	Lake	DOJ‐Denver	
		 		
		 		
		 		
		 		 
 7	Hualapai 	
Arizona	Hualapai 	Tribe	 Michael	Gheleta	
Ruth	Thayer	John	Buehler	Bill	Hansen	
Cathy	Wilson	
John	Nystedt	Mark	D’Aversa	Vanessa	Boyd‐Willard		SOL‐Phoenix	
BOR‐Boulder	City	USFS‐Flagstaff	NPS‐Fort	Collins	
BIA‐Phoenix	
FWS‐Flagstaff	BLM‐Phoenix	DOJ‐Denver	
8	Little	Colorado 	Navajo	Nation,	Hopi	
Tribe,	San	Juan	
Southern 	Paiute	Tribe	Vacant	 BOR‐Phoenix	
	Arizona	 Lesley	Fitzpatrick	 FWS‐Phoenix	
		 Richard	Holbrook	 OSM‐Denver	
		 Chris	Banet	 BIA‐Albuquerque	
		 Vanessa	Boyd‐Willard	 DOJ‐Denver	
		 William	Wells	 BLM‐Phoenix	
		 	 Vanessa	Ray‐Hodge	 SOL‐Wash	DC	
		 	 Ruth	Thayer***	 BOR‐NV	
		 	 Mike	Williams	 USFS‐AZ	
		 	 		
9	Lummi	 Lummi	Tribe	and	
Nooksack 	Tribe	Nolan	Shishido*	 SOL‐Portland	
	Washington 	 John	Peterson	 BOR‐Denver	
		 		
10	Tohono	
O'odham 	Tohono	O'odham 	
Nation	Cathy	Wilson*	
Katherine	Verburg	BIA‐Phoenix	
SOL‐AZ	
		
Vanessa	Ray‐Hodge	 SOL‐AZ	
	Arizona	 Patrick	Barry	 DOJ‐Wash	DC	
		 	 Doug	Duncan	 FWS‐AZ	
		 	 Ruth	Thayer	 BOR‐Boulder	City	
		 	 		
11	Tonto	Apache	Tonto	Apache	Tribe	Leslie	Myers	*	 BOR‐Phoenix	
		 	 Cathy	Wilson	 BIA‐Phoenix	
		 	 Raymond	Roessel	 BIA‐Phoenix	
		 	 Katherine	Verburg	 SOL	
		 	 Mike	Martinez	 FWS	
		 	 Patrick	Barry	 DOJ	
		 	 		
12	Tule	River	 Tule	River	Indian	
Tribe	David	Gore*	
Amy	Aufdemberge	BOR‐Sacramento	
SOL‐Sacramento	
	California 	 Patricia	Rivera	 BOR‐Sacramento	
		 	 Charles	Jachens	 BIA‐Sacramento	
		 	 		
13	Upper	Gila	
River/San 	
Carlos	
	
Arizona	San	Carlos	Apache	
Tribe	and	the	Gila	
River	Indian	
Community 	Lawrence	Marquez*	
Cathy	Wilson	Patrick	Barry	Jason	M.	Douglas	
Katherine	Verburg	BOR‐Phoenix	
BIA‐Phoenix	DOJ‐Wash	DC	FWS‐Tucson	
SOL‐Phoenix	
		 	 		
14	Umatilla 	 Confederated 	Tribes	of	Duane	Mecham*	 SOL‐Portland	 
 Oregon	 the	Umatilla 	Indian	
Reservation 	Kevin	Martin	
Guss	Guarino	USFS‐Oregon	
DOJ‐Colorado	
		 	 Tim	Personius	 BOR‐Boise	
		 	 Terrance	Conlon	 USGS	
			 Mike	Carrier	 FWS	
			 	 	
15	Walker	River	
Nevada	Walker	River	Paiute	
Indian	Tribe,	
Bridgeport 	Indian	
Colony,	Yerington 	
Paiute	Tribe	Cathy	Wilson**	
Robert	M.	Lewis	Kenneth	Parr	BIA‐Phoenix	
COE‐Portland	BOR‐Nevada	
		 	 		
16	Yavapai‐
Apache	
Arizona	Yavapai‐Apache	Nation	Lawrence	Marquez*	
Jean	Calhoun	Raymond	Roessel	John	Buehler	
Patrick	Barry	
Bill	Hansen	Katherine	Verburg	Vanessa	Ray‐Hodge	BOR‐Phoenix	
FWS‐Tucson	BIA‐Phoenix	USFS‐Flagstaff	
DOJ‐Wash	DC	
NPS‐Colorado	SOL‐Phoenix	SOL‐Phoenix	
		 	 		
17	Zuni/Ramah 	
Navajo	Pueblo	of	Zuni,	and	
Ramah	Navajo	Nation	Greg	Mehojah*	
Ruth	Thayer	SOL‐Albuquerque	
BOR‐Nevada	
	New	Mexico		 Brad	Bridgewater	 DOJ‐Denver	
		 	 Melissa	Mata	
Debby	Lucero	FWS‐Albuquerque	
BLM‐New	Mexico	
		 	 		
	
18	
	
				
	
		
Navajo	Utah	
Utah	
				
	
		
Navajo	Tribe	
						
Wayne	Pullan*	
Vanessa	Ray‐Hodge	Guss	Guarino	Megan	Estep	Sharon	Pinto	Bill	Hansen		
BOR‐Utah	
SOL‐Wash	DC	DOJ‐Denver	FWS‐Denver	BIA‐New	Mexico	NPS‐Colorado	
	
	
				
			
		 	 		
		 	 		
		 	 		
	
		 
 Implementation 	Teams	
	 Team	 Tribe		 Members 	 Agency		
1	 Aamodt		
	New	Mexico	Nambé,	
Pojoaque, 	San
Ildefonso, 	and	
Tesuque 	
Pueblos	Chris	Banet*	
Guss	Guarino	Art	Valverde	Greg	Mahojah	BIA‐Albuquerque	
DOJ‐Denver	BOR‐Albuquerque	SOL‐Albuquerqu	
		 		
		 	 	 	
2	 Animas	La	
Plata	
	Colorado 	Ute	Mountain 	
Ute	&	
Southern 	Ute	John	Bezdek*	
Chris	Banet	Catherine	Rugen	Ryan	Christianson	David	Campbell	SOL‐Wash	DC	
BIA‐Albuquerque	OST‐Albuquerque	BOR‐Durango	FWS‐Albuquerque	
		 	 		
3	 Crow	
	Montana 	Crow	Tribe		Douglas	Davis*	
Robbin	Wagner	John	Chaffin	David	Harder	Jerry	Case	John	Anevski	
	BOR‐Billings	
FWS‐Bozeman	SOL‐Billings	DOJ‐Denver	NPS‐Ft	Smith	BIA‐Billings	
	
4		
Duck	Valley		
Shoshone ‐
Paiute	Tribes	
of	the	Duck	
Valley	
Reservation 		
Cathy	Wilson	Adrienne	Marks	Jeff	Foss	Vanessa	Boyd‐Willard	
Grant	Vaughn	
	
	BIA‐Phoenix	BOR‐Wash	DC	FWS‐Boise	DOJ‐Denver	
SOL‐Salt	Lake	
5	 Fallon		 Paiute‐
Shoshone 	
Tribe	of	the	
Fallon	
Reservation 	
and	Colony	Cathy	Wilson*	
Terri	Edwards	BIA‐Phoenix	
BOR‐Carson		
	 Nevada	 		
		 		
		 		
		 	 	
6	 Fort	Hall	
	
Idaho	Shoshone ‐
Bannock 	
Tribes	
of	the	Fort	
Hall	Indian	
Reservation 	Duane	Mecham*	
Matt	Howard	
David	Redhorse	SOL‐Portland	
BOR‐Boise	
BIA‐Portland		
		 		
		 		
7	 Fort	McDowell 	Fort	
McDowell 	
Indian	
Community 	Lawrence	Marquez*	
Duane	Mecham	BOR‐Phoenix	
SOL‐Portland	
	 Arizona	 Raymond	Roessel		 BIA‐Phoenix	
		 		
		 		
		 	 		
		 	 		 
 8	 Gila	River	
	Arizona	Gila	River	
Indian	
Community 		Lawrence	Marquez*	
Jonathan	Cody	Jason	Douglas	Patrick	Barry	
Katherine	Verburg	
	BOR‐Phoenix	
BIA‐Phoenix	FWS‐Tucson	DOJ‐Wash	DC	
SOL‐Phoenix	
9	 Navajo‐San	
Juan	
	New	Mexico	Navjo	Nation	Chris	Banet		
Patrick	Page	Gus	Guarino	David	Campbell	
Robert	Hall	
Dave	Trueman		BIA‐Albuquerque	
BOR‐Farmington	DOJ‐Denver	FWS‐Albuquerque	
SOL‐Albuquerque	
BOR‐Salt	Lake	
10	Nez	Perce	
Idaho	Nez	Perce	
Tribe		Duane	Mecham*	
Jerry	Gregg	David	Redhorse	SOL‐Portland	
BOR‐Boise	BIA‐Portland	
		 	 		
11	Pyramid 	Lake	Pyramid 	Lake	
Paiute	Tribe	
of	the	
Pyramid 	Lake	Terri	Edwards		 BOR‐Carson	City	
	 Nevada	 Cathy	Wilson		 BIA‐Phoenix	
		 Grant	Vaughn	 SOL‐Salt	Lake	City	
		 		
		 	 		
12
	Rocky	Boys	
Montana 	Chippewa 	
Cree	Douglas	Davis*	
John	Anevski	Robbin	Wagner	John	Chaffin		BOR‐Billings	
BIA‐Billings	FWS‐Bozeman	SOL‐Billings	
13	San	Carlos	
	Arizona	San	Carlos	
Apache	
Indian	Tribe	Vacant	
Cathy	Wilson	Vanessa	Ray‐Hodge	Jason	Douglas	BOR‐Phoenix		
BIA‐Phoenix	SOL‐Salt	Lake	FWS‐Tucson	
		 	 		
14	San	Luis	Rey		 La	Jolla,	
Ricon,	San	
Pasquale, 	
Pauma,	Pala	
Bands	of	
Mission	
Indians	Robert	Laidlaw*	
Bill	Steele	
Amy	Dutschke	
Chris	Watson	Judy	Rabinowitz	Matt	Landon	BLM‐Sacramento	
BOR‐Temecula	
BIA‐Sacramento	
SOL‐Wash	DC	DOJ‐Sacramento	USGS‐San	Diego	
	 California 	 		
		 		
15	SAWRSA 	 San	Xavier	
and	Schuk	
Toak	
Districts, 	
Tohono	
O’Odham 	
Nation	Lawrence	Marquez *	 BOR‐Phoenix		
	 Arizona	 Katherine	Verburg 	 SOL‐AZ	
		 Donna	Peterson		 BIA‐Nashville	
		 Jason	Douglas	 FWS‐Tucson		
		 		
		 		
	
				 		 
 16	Shivwits 		 Shivwits 	Band	
of	Paiute	
Indians	Cathy	Wilson*	 BIA‐Phoenix		
	 Utah	 		
		 		
17	Taos	
	New	Mexico	Taos	Pueblo	John	Peterson*	
George	Dennis	Brad	Bridgewater	Chris	Banet	Greg	Mahojah	Terina	Perez	BOR‐Denver	
FWS‐Albuquerque	DOJ‐Denver	BIA‐Albuquerque	SOL‐Albuquerque	BOR‐Albuquerque	
		 	 		
18	Uintah	&	
Ouray	Utes		
	Utah	Ute	Indian	
Tribe	of	the	
Uintah	&	
Ouray	
Reservation 	Reed	Murray*	
Johanna	Blackhair	
Grant	Vaughn	Wayne	Pullan	Scott	Bergstrom	Patrick	Barry		ASWS‐Utah	
BIA‐Utah	
SOL‐Salt	Lake	BOR‐Utah	SOL‐Wash	DC	DOJ‐Wash	DC		
		 	 		
19	White	
Mountain 	
Apache	White	
Mountain 	
Apache	Tribe	
	Patrick	Barry*	
Cathy	Wilson	Patrick	Barry*	Katherine	Verburg	Vanessa	Ray‐Hodge	
	SOL‐Phoenix	
BIA‐Phoenix		BOR‐Phoenix	SOL‐Phoenix	SOL‐Phoenix	
	 Arizona
	 		
		 	 		
20	Zuni		Heaven	
	
Arizona		 Chris	Banet*	
Grant	Vaughn	
Lesley	Fitzpatrick	
Leslie	Meyers	Vanessa	Boyd‐Willard	Adrienne	Marks	BIA‐Albuquerque	
SOL‐Utah	
FWS‐Phoenix	
BOR‐Phoenix	DOJ‐Denver	BOR‐Wash	DC	
		 	 Grant	Vaughn		 SOL‐Utah	
 
   
 Assessment 	Teams	
	
		
	Havasupai 	
Tribe	
Arizona	Havasupai 	Tribe	 Michael	Gheleta	
Ruth	Thayer	John	Buehler	
Bill	Hansen	
Cathy	Wilson	John	Nystedt	Mark	D’Aversa	Vanessa	Boyd‐Willard		SOL‐Phoenix	
BOR‐Boulder	City	USFS‐Flagstaff	
NPS‐Fort	Collins	
BIA‐Phoenix	FWS‐Flagstaff	BLM‐Phoenix	DOJ‐Denver	
 