 
1 
 Press Release : Court issues decision on Subsistence  
 
Re: State v. Norton , 3:05-cv-00006 -HRH consolidated with  
Katie John v. United States of America , 3:05 -cv-00158 -HRH  
 
On July 3, 2013, a panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court’s 
decisions upholding the 1999 Final Rules promul gated by the Secretary of the Interior and the 
Secretary of Agriculture to implement part of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation 
Act concerning subsistence fishing and hunting rights.  
As threshold issues, the panel held that the Secretaries app ropriately used notice -and-comment 
rulemaking, rather than adjudication, to identify whose waters are “public lands” for the purpose 
of determining the scope of the Act’s rural subsistence policy; and that in construing the term 
“public lands,” the Secreta ries were entitled to “some deference.” The panel concluded that, in 
the 1999 Rules, the Secretaries applied Katie John I and the federal reserved water rights 
doctrine in a principled manner. The panel held that it was reasonable for the Secretaries to 
decide that: the “public lands” subject to the Act’s rural subsistence priority included the waters 
within and adjacent to federal reservations; and reserved water rights for Alaska Native 
Settlement allotments were best determined on a case -by-case basis.  
 
Background  
 
In 2005, the State of Alaska filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia 
challenging a federal agency final rule implementing the mandate in a prior  Alaska Native 
subsistence case  which established that the United St ates must protect subsistence uses of 
fisheries in navigable waters where the United States po ssesses a reserved water right.  See, 
Alaska v. Babbitt , 72 F.3d 698 (9th C ir. 1995) (“Katie John I”).   The State challenged  the Federal 
agencies' implementation  of the mandate by arguing that the reserved waters doctrine requires a 
quantification of waters necessary to fulfill specific purposes. Katie John moved for limited 
intervention for purposes of filing a motion to dismiss for failure to join an indispensab le part y. 
The United States also sought transfer of the case to the U.S. District Court for the District of 
Alaska and transfer was granted.   The case was then consolidated with John v. Norton  (below).   
The issues in the two cases were bifurcated for briefing with the State's claims addressed first. In 
2007 the court upheld the agency ’s rule making process identifying navigable waters in Alaska 
that fall within federal jurisdiction for purposes of federal subsistence priority.  
 
To counter the State’s c hallenge , Katie John, Tanana, Charles Erhart and  the Alaska Inter -Tribal 
Council filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the District of Alaska to challe nge the 
Federal Agencies' final rule as being too restrictive in its scope. Katie John alleged t hat the Native American Rights Fund  
745 W.  4th Avenue, Suite 502 , Anchorage, AK 99501  (907) 276 -0680  FAX (907) 276 -2466 ATTORNEYS  
Heather R. Kendall -Miller  
Natalie A. Landreth  
Erin C. Dougherty  
Matthew Newman  
 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
John E. Echohawk  
 
MAIN OFFICE  
1506 Broadway  
Boulder, CO 80302 -6926  
(303) 447 -8760  
FAX (303) 443 -7776  
 
WASHINGTON OFFICE  
1712 N Street N.W.  
Washington, D.C. 20036 -2976  
(202) 785 -4166  
FAX (202) 822 -0068  
 
WEBSITE ADDRESS  
www.narf.org  
  
2 
 Federal agencies should have included Alaska Native allotments as public lands and that the 
federal government's interest in water extends upstream and downstream from Conservation 
Units established under the Alaska National Interest Lands Conserva tion Act. The State of 
Alaska intervened and challenged the regulations as illegally extending federal jurisdiction to 
state waters. In 200 9 the Court upheld the agencies ’ final rule as reasona ble. While rejecting 
Katie John ’s claim that the agency had a d uty to identify all of its federally -reserved water rights 
in upstream and downstream waters, the court stated that the agency could do so at some future 
time if necessary to fulfill the purposes of the reserve. The case was appealed to the U.S. Court 
of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit where oral argument was held on July 25, 2011.   One of the 
panelists, Judge Betty Fletcher, passed away in August 2012, and her docket was assigned to 
Judge Canby.    
Ninth Circuit Decision  
As to the State’s sp ecific challenges the Court determined : 
 
a)  Adjacent waters : The State argued that the rules should not apply to waters that are adjacent 
to the boundaries of federal conservations system units.  These boundary  streams include long 
river segments, such as the portions of t he Copper River technically outside the Park and 
Preserve boundaries. The court agreed with AFN the United  States and Katie John that such 
waters were subject to the reserved rights doctrine and thus subject to the subsistence priority.   
 
b)  Sixmile Lake : This lake is adjacent  to the Lake Cla rk National Park and Preserve. The State 
argued that  because the Lake’s shoreline is non -federal, non -public land  owned primarily by the 
Native Village Corporation for Nondalton, the lake could not be considered as adjacent to the 
Park. The court deferred to the fed eral determination  that the boundary of the Park was adjacent 
to the shore of Sixmile Lake and thus the lake is covered by the subsistence priority.  
 
c)  Seven Juneau -area streams : The State argued that t hese streams near Juneau were either 
outside of the Tongass National Forest, or were surrounded by private and state  inholdings and 
thus could not be considered as subject to federal reserved water rights. The court concluded the 
U.S properly considered t he rivers to be within the Tongass.  The court also agreed with the U.S., 
AFN and Katie John that as a general matter the waters within the Tongass, but surrounded by 
private lands, should be considered  public and lands subject to  federal reserved water r ights.  
 
d)  Water flowing through inholdings : The court rejected the State's general arguments that 
waters that ran between State and private inholdings within conservation  system units could not 
be subject to federal reserved water rights.  The court also agreed with the U.S., AFN and Katie 
John that waters within federal conservation system  units surrounded by private lands should be 
considered public lands subject to  federal reserved water rights.  
 
e)  Coastal waters and the “headland -to headland method ”:  The State argued that the federal 
government's subsistence rules unlawfully included waters at the mouths of  rivers.  A prime 
example was the Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge where the river meets the sea.  The  
3 
 federal government determined the outer  boundary of the river  to determine federal reserved 
rights by drawing a boundary across the water from the outer bank of the Refuge land across to 
an opposite point on the other bank where the  river meets the water.  The court agreed that this 
was a reaso nable way to determine where the federal subsistence priority applies and rejected the 
State's arguments.    
 
f)  Upstream and downstream waters : Katie John argued that because some  adjacent waters were 
included, the federal priority should also apply to wa ters farther  upstream  and downstream of the 
various Conservation System U nits.  The court agreed that this was a reasonable way to apply 
the reserved water rights doctrine, but that it  was up to the federal agencies to make that 
determination in the first instance.  Importantly, the court recognized that the expansion 
advanced by Katie John might be  appropriate in a particular situation.   
 
g)  Selected -but-not-yet-conveyed lands :  The court rejected the State's argument that land 
selected by the state or a  Native Corporation, but not yet conveyed from the  United States, was 
not federal land for purposes of the subsistence priority.  
 
Summary  
The decision is an important affirmance of the fishing priority in those federal waters identified 
by the agency rule -making .  
  
The State will  have the option of seeking rehearing in front of the 9th circuit, or asking the 
Supreme Court to review the decision.  
 
Any questions can be directed to attorney Heather Kendall -Miller at (907) 276 -0680 . 
       