 
 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  
 Contact:  James  Dold  
 Human Rights for Kids  
 Phone: (202) 907 -4826  
 Email: jdold@humanrightsforkids.org  
 
Legislation Introduced to Protect Children’s Rights  
 
January 28 , 2019 -- Hawaii state representative John Mizuno has introduced legislation to protect the rights of 
children who come into contact with the criminal justice system.  
 
International human rights norms, adolescent brain and behavioral development science, and evo lving legal 
standards by the U.S. Supreme Court continue to change the way the nation  treats children in the justice system. 
In its  2011  landmark decision J.D.B. v. North Carolina , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the age of a child 
defendant is relevant when determining whether or not law enforcement must administer Miranda warnings to a 
child in police custody. A year later, t he court ruled  in Miller v. Alabama  that “youth diminishes the peno logical 
justifications for imposing the harshest sentences on j uvenile offenders, even when they commit terrible crimes.”  
 
“One of the most important duties we have as lawmakers is to protect and advance the human rights of our 
children,” said Hawaii Representative John Mizuno. “Nowhere is this more needed than in our  criminal justice 
system where too often we treat children as if they were adults. Current policies allow children to be interrogated 
and sentenced with no regard for their child status. This is contrary to the spirit of Aloha which is codified in State 
Statute , our Hawaiian values , and to basic human rights. That is why I have introduced HB 217  and HB 218  to 
ensure greater fairness and equity when our children come into contact with the criminal justice system. These 
bills will ensure that children consult with an attorney before they waive their Constitutional right to counsel and 
that if convicted, judge s have greater discretion to depart from harsh sentences in appropriate cases involving 
child defendants. We must do better by our children, even when they make mistakes. These bills are a recognition 
and a promise to do just that.”  
 
Recently, legislatures  in Nevada  (2017)  and the District of Columbia  (2016)  have passed new laws limiting  the 
application of mandatory sentences to child defendants and State Supreme Courts in Iowa and Washington state 
have issued similar rulings. Last year, California became t he first state to require children under the age of 16 to 
consult with an attorney before he or she is interrogated by police or before they waive their right to legal counsel.  
 
“In every aspect of our society we must ask if we are doing everything we can to ensure that our children  can 
grow up to pursue their dreams and reach their full potential,” said James Dold, President of Human Rights for 
Kids. “This includes children in the justice system too, most of whom have unaddressed early childhood traumas 
and unmitigated adverse childhood experiences . When children make mistakes we have a responsibility to protect 
their rights and do all that we can to pr ovide them with treatment and reintegrate them back into society. We are 
grateful to Representative Mizuno  and applaud his  leadership and dedication to children’s rights .”     
 
Human Rights for Kids is a non-profit organization dedicated to the promotion and protection of the human rights 
of children. We use an integrated, multi -faceted approach which consists of research & public education, coalition 
building & grassroots mobilization, and policy advocacy  & strategic litigation to advance critical human rights on 
behalf of children in the United States and around the world. We work to protect children from harm; reform  
justice systems to ensure society  focus es on rehabilitating children who come into confl ict with the law; protect  
immigrant, non -native children from harm a nd discrimination; promote  access to quality educa tion for all 
children; and promote  healthy communities for children to ensure access to housing and health care.  
 
 
 
### 