 
 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  
 Contact:  James  Dold  
 Human Rights for Kids  
 Phone: (202) 907 -4826  
 Email: jdold@humanrightsforkids.org  
 
Victims of Child Sex Trafficking &  Sexual Abuse to Be Protected 
From Unjust Sentences Under Proposed Legislation  
 
February 7 , 2019 -- Hawaii State R epresentative John Mizuno has introduced  first-of-its-kind legislation 
to protect  victims of child sex trafficking and sexual abuse who commit crimes against their traffickers 
and abusers.  
 
Recent high profile cases like that of Cyntoia Brown , Alexis Martin , and Sara Kruzan  have shined a 
light on the treatment of child sex trafficking  victims who kill their traffickers .  
 
"For me, this bill is a recognition that the harm inflicted upon me as a child was a moral wrong and that 
society is working to rectify that wrong , said Sara Kruzan, who was sentenced to life without parole for 
killin g the man who had raped and trafficked her from the time she was  11 year s old . If as a 16 year old 
child I was treated with the empathy, compassion and human kindness envisioned by Representative 
Mizuno's bill I would not have endured nearly 20 years of unjust incarce ration. This bill is about igniting 
hope in others and making a clear statement that our justice system will no longer allow such injustices 
to be imposed on child victims of sex abuse and sex trafficking."  
 
Self-defense laws don’t always apply in such cas es because the acts  involve premeditation. This has 
been a sticking point in the law that HB 932  would address so that judges have more options and greater 
flexibility when handling cases where child sex trafficking victims have hurt or killed their abuser s. 
 
“What has happened to young girls like Ms. Kruzan and Ms. Brown is nothing short of a tragic 
injustice,” said Hawaii State Representative John Mizuno. “Children who commit crimes against those 
who have sexually abused or trafficked them deserve our understanding, compassion , and love, not to be 
locked away in cages. I am proud to sponsor the first bill in the nation that would protect victi ms like 
Cyntoia and Sara, and look forward to this bill becoming law.”  
 
Under HB 932 , judges will be given greater flexibility when  handling cases that involve child victims 
who have committed crimes against those who have trafficked or sexually assaulted them. The 
legislation allows judges to depart from any mandatory minimum sentence, suspend any portion of their 
sentence, or transf er the child to the jurisdiction of the juvenile or family court where the child will be 
provided with treatment and services. Judges are encouraged to follow the latter option in such cases.  
 
“It is unconscionable to think that in 2019 child sex traffick ing and sexual abuse victims are being 
sentenced to decades in prison for, what is in essence, acting in self -defense,” said James Dold, the 
Founder of Human Rights for Kids , a non -profit organization that advocates on behalf of children’s 
rights. “Girls o r boys who are raped, abused, or traff icked  should never be sent to prison for committing 
crimes against their abusers. The continued practice of locking these children away is a human rights 
abuse and it needs to end now. We hope the people of Hawaii will  join us in standing alongside Ms. 
Kruzan and Representative Mizuno to demand that it end.”  
 
Human Rights for Kids  is a non-profit organization dedicated to the promotion and protection of the 
human rights of children. We use an integrated, multi -faceted approach which consists of research & 
public education, coalition building & grassroots mobilization, and policy advocacy & strategic 
litigation to advance critical human rights on behalf of children in the Un ited States and around the 
world. We work to protect children from harm; reform  justice systems to ensure society  focus es on 
rehabilitating children who come into conflict with the law; protect  immigrant, non -native children from 
harm a nd discrimination; p romote  access to quality educa tion for all children; and promote  healthy 
communities for children to ensure access to housing and health care.  
 
 
### 