                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  
November 19, 2018   
PRESS CONTACT  
 ncaipress@ncai.org  
general.aaia@indian -affairs.org   
 
 
National Native Organizations NCAI and AAIA File Brief  
Opposing President Trump’s Attempt to Decim ate Bears Ears National Monument  
 
NCAI and AAIA Highlight the Dangers that President Trump’s Action Poses to L andmarks, 
Structures, and Objects of Cultural , Historic , and Religious  Significance to All of Indian Country  
 
Today, the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) and the Association on American Indian 
Affairs (AAIA) filed a  “friend of the Court”  brief  supporting the ongoing legal challenge to the 
Administration’s  attempt to diminish most of the Bear s Ears National Monument . Five Tribal 
Nation s – the Hopi Tribe, Navajo Nation, Ute Indian Tribe, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, and Zuni Tribe  
– filed the lawsuit l ast year, arguing that  the Administration’s  action  violates the Antiquities Act 
of 1906.  
 
The NCAI -AAIA  brief  provide s a national perspective on the importance of Bears Ears and the 
perils of the Administration’s  unprecedented move. In particular, they identify  specific  
landmarks, structures, and objects of cultural, historic, and religious importance to tribal nations  
not otherwise represented in the case, including  many Pueblos of New Mexico.  According to NCAI 
and AAIA, all these sites and artifacts  – many of which are  considered sacred  – face significant 
risk of being forever damaged, lost, or destroyed if the Administr ation’s action is allowed to 
stand.  
  
NCAI and AAIA also emphasize the unique role Tribal nations  played in creating the Bears Ears 
National Monument. According to their brief, “Bears Ears is the first national monument 
protected at the request of Tribes and the first to be collectively managed by …representatives 
from multiple Tribes.”  The Administrati on, however, has attempted to strip away tribal 
involvement in the management of Bears Ears at the same time the protections themselves are 
eliminated.  
    
“NCAI ’s brief brings tog ether knowledge and perspectives f rom a wide varie ty of tribes  – to help 
the Court understand how im portant Bears Ears is to thousands of  Indian  citizen s,” NCAI General 
Counsel De rrick Beetso explained . “We especially appreciate the contributions of the All Pueblo 
Council of Governors  – who represent the 20 Pueblo s of New Mexico a nd Texas  – in helping us 
put together critical new information for the Court’s consideration.”  
 
“One of AAIA’s primary initiatives is to advocate for the protection of sacred lands and Native 
American cultural resources,” according to AAIA Executive Director Shannon  Keller  O’Loughlin.  
“Without the designation of Bears Ears as a National Monument  where  Tribal management  is a 
cornerstone to the Monument’s protection , our sacred Bears Ears will be lost to development  – 
and so will our faith in the government -to-government relationship  between Tribal nations and 
the U.S. government .”  
 
About the National Congress of American Indians:  
Founded in 1944, the National Congress of American Indians is the oldest, largest and most 
representative America n Indian and Alaska Native organization in the country. NCAI advocates on behalf 
of tribal governments and communities, promoting strong tribal -federal government -to-government 
policies, and promoting a better understanding among the general public regardi ng American Indian and 
Alaska Native governments, people and rights. For more information, visit www.ncai.org .  
 
About the Association on American Indian Affairs:  
AAIA is the oldest non -profit serving Indian Country protecting sovereignty, preserving culture, educating 
youth and building capacity. The Association was formed in 1922 to change the destructive path of federal 
policy from assimilation, termination and allotment, to sovereignty, self -determination and self -
sufficiency. Throughout its 96 -year history, the Association has provided national advocacy on watershed 
issues that support sovereignty and culture, w hile working at the grassroots level with Tribes to support 
the implementation of programs that improve lives on the ground. For more information, visit 
www.indian -affairs.org . 