DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
  
ASSOCIATION ON AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS   
Protecting Sovereignty ◦ Preserving Culture   
Educating Youth  ◦ Building Capacity  
SINCE 1922  
 
Written Testimony of Shannon Keller O’Loughlin  
Executive Director & Attorney for  the Association on American Indian Affairs  
 
Submitted to the  
United States House of Representatives Natural Resources Committee  
Subcommittee for Indigenous Peoples of the United States  
 
February 2 4, 2020  
 
 
On behalf of the Association on American Indian Affairs (“Association”), please accept 
this written testimony for the House Natural Resources Committee’s Subcommittee on 
Indigenous Peoples of the United States’ February 26, 2020 hearing: “Destroying Sacred  Sites and 
Erasing Tribal Culture: The Trump Administration’s Construction of the Border Wall.”  
 
The Association is the oldest non -profit serving Indian Country protecting sovereignty, 
preserving culture, educating youth and building Tribal capacity.1 The Association was formed 
in 1922 to change the destructive path of federal policy from assimilation, termination and 
allotment, to sovereignty, self -determination and self -sufficiency. Throughout its 98-year history, 
the Association has provided national a dvocacy on watershed issues that support sovereignty 
and culture, while working at a grassroots level with Tribes to support the implementation of 
programs that affect real lives on the ground.  
 
 
1 The Association was created by  an amalgamation of several non -profit Indian organizations that emerged 
in the early 1920s. The Eastern Association on Indian Affairs and the New Mexican Association on 
American Indian Affairs were the first of the predecessor groups to formally organize in 1922. The EAIA 
and NMAAI were made up of affluent non -Natives, most of whom owned land in Santa Fe and wanted to 
protect  Pueblo culture.  The American Indian Defense Association , headed by John Collier , formed to fight 
against  the Bursum Bill and the Lea vitt Bill, both bills seeking to end Pueblo ties to their lands, and outlaw 
cultural practices . These groups merged in the 1930s and eventually consolidated under the name the  
Association on American Indian Affairs.  Today, the Association has an all -Native  Board of Directors and 
Executive Director.  
DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
 The Association’s vision: to create a world where diverse Nat ive American cultures and values 
are lived, protected and respected , has demanded that  the Association dedicate significant resources 
to protecting Native American  cultural and religious practices connected to important land areas  
across the United States.  These special land areas are often called “sacred sites, ” but are used by 
Tribes and their citizens in a variety of ways  – and always as place s that must be prote cted and 
secured  in consultation with Tribal governments .  
 
Since its founding, the Association has provided legal and other advocacy assistance to 
protect sacred sites. In the 1920s, it fought to end the takings of Pueblo lands in New Mexico , 
worked to ad vocate against the building of dams  on Tribal lands , and fought against  laws that 
outlawed the practice of Tribal cultures and use of lands for those  purposes . For twenty years, 
the Association has provided legal assistance to Tribes seeking to protect Medicine Wheel in 
Wyoming. As the result of these efforts,  Medicine Wheel is a National Historic Landmark and an 
Historic Preservation Plan was developed to ensure its continued protection. The Association has 
also helped Tribes fi ght the development of lands that would adversely impact sacred sites, such 
as the San Francisco Peaks, Bear Lodge, Bear Butte, Medicine Lake , Pyramid Lake , Taos Blue Lake  
and many others. We stand alongside  with  the Water Protectors at Standing Rock and e lsewhere, 
as well as  with efforts to protect all of  Bears Ears National Monument , and with the Tohono 
O’odham Nation today in their advocacy to protect burial and sacred areas  that have been  or are 
threatened to be destroyed d ue to unilateral acts taken to  build the border wall .  
 
Tribal sacred sites have never had the same protections as non -Indian cemeteries, war 
memorials, churches and other western institutions – though Tribal cultural and sacred sites serve 
the same purposes  as those western institutions . Even with current laws, as explained below, 
Tribal sacred sites are often seen  as an impediment to developers and government  agencies  
because there is no holistic national  policy that acknowledges the significance of maintai ning  
these special places . The use by the current administration of the Real ID Act of 2005  to build the 
border wall  to protect against terrorism eliminates any and all protection , right of Tribal 
consultation  and public involvement  and leaves no  right of action  to challenge  agency 
determinations .  
 
Below, we have described: the importance of sacred sites to diverse Native American  
religious practice s and the federal government’s role in the sacred site protection; how the Trump 
administration’s ongoing construction of the border wall represents an imminent threat to sacred 
sites; and the existing federal laws that may be used to protect them.  
 
I. The Intersection of Indian Religion, Land, and the Federal Government   
 
Place -based religious practice is common  of all religions  and for religious followers across 
the world. For many, pilgrimage to sites like the Wailing Wall, Mecca, or Mt. Sinai is a r eligious 
mandate. These experiences also provide stability, connection, and reassurance in a chaotic and 
uncontrollable world. These sites  provide healing , community , empowerment  and unity . Yet, the 
importance of sacred sites among Native American  cultural and religious practices  has not been DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
 treated as legitimate and worth protecting compared to other world  cultural and religious 
practices . The primary reason for this is that the tenets and practice of Native American cultures 
and religions are inextricably tied to the land  and Tribes have been rem oved from their places of 
worship .  
 
Although typically hidden from plain view, sacred sites and ceremonial grounds abound 
across the United States. Some are within the exterior boundaries of Tribal  reservations, but most  
are located on federal, state, and privately owned lands. “Earth is a l iving, conscious being that 
must be treated with respect and care”2—a failure to recognize this results in sickness, 
destruction, and death for all mankind. Accordingly, ceremon ies must be performed at certain 
location s, unmolested and free from the obser vance of outsiders. The medicine gathered to bless 
and protect those participating in ceremonies must be taken from the earth in a specific manner, 
from predetermined places, and must be completely free from pollutants or genetic alteration. 
These beliefs and practices are not relics of the past  and have continued, even when the federal 
government ha s outlawed such practices  and has not yet established strong legislation to protect  
Tribes in their cultural and religious freedoms .  
 
 Early United States poli tical leaders and federal officials understood the important role 
that sacred sites played in Indian life: they incorporated Indian separation from sacred sites, and 
therefore the destruction of traditional Indian religious practice, into federal Indian po licy. The 
United States’ official policy to Christianize Indians synchronized with the passage of laws that 
removed Indians from their homelands and confined them to reservations. During that time, 
federal officials also promulgated regulations like the In dian Religious Crimes Code and the 
Rules for Indian Courts, which criminalized traditional dances, feasts, medicine men, and barred 
many Indians from leaving reservations without superintendence.3 At best, the punishment for 
visiting a sacred site or prac ticing one’s traditional religion was imprisonment.  At worst, it was 
slaughter.  Moreover,  the U.S. allowed  its officials and others to enter Tribal lands  to desecrate  
burial and ceremonial places, steal Ancestral remains  and their burial belongings, and take 
important cultural patrimony and sacred objects .   
 
 Despite more than a century of religious persecution, Indian communities have continue d 
ceremonial life at sacred sites today, and the ability to do so stems from t he perseverance of Tribes 
and their citizens,  and the federal government’s recognition of its moral and legal responsibility 
to protect sacred sites  and American Indian religious freedoms . Beginning in 1978, Congress took 
notice of the United States’ conti nued attack on Indian religious freedom and conducted an 
“extensive investigation” that detailed how “Indian religious practices were often unnecessarily 
disrupted by state and federal laws and activities.”4  This led to the American Indian Religious 
Freedom Act (AIRFA), a joint resolution that declared a policy “to protect and preserve for Native 
 
2 Rebecca Tsosie , Tribal Environmental Policy in an Era of Self -Determination: The Role of Ethics, Economics, and 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge , 21 VERMONT L. REV. 225, 274 (1996).  
3 Lee Irwin, Freedom. Law, and Prophecy: A Brief History of Native American Religious Resistance , 21 Am. 
Indian Quarterly , 35 (1997).  
4 STEPHEN L. PEVAR , THE RIGHTS OF INDIANS AND TRIBES  225 (2012).  DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
 Americans their inherent right of freedom of belief, and exercise of traditional religions . . . 
including but not limited to sacred sites . . . .”5  
 
Since AIR FA, the federal government has taken a multitude of actions demonstrating that 
its federal trust responsibility includes the consideration and protection of sacred sites in federal 
decision -making. Congress has passed numerous, bipartisan laws requiring fe deral agencies to 
consult with Indian Tribes before they undertake any action that may threaten a sacred site or 
other Indian interests.6 Presidents have issued executive orders prohibiting federal actions that 
destroy sacred sites and mandating that Indians be given access to sacred sites.7 Likewise, federal 
agencies have worked together to develop a memorandum of understanding, reports, and action 
plans regarding the protection of sacred sites.8 The Ninth Circuit has also recognized that the 
federal trust responsibility includes consultation with Indian Tribes when federal actions threaten 
sacred sites.9 Thus, the federal government has  unquestionably assumed the moral and legal 
responsibility to protect sacred sites and any departure from this policy flies in the face of 
established political norms , and civil and human rights .  
 
II. The Destruction of Sacred Sites  
 
Regrettably, although President Trump has explicitly stated that he “remains committed” 
to “protecting prayer in public schools”10 and to providing federal funding to religious groups,  
his administration has given virtually no weight to concerns that Indian communitie s have with 
regard to their sacred sites. For example, the administration has taken action to reduce the size of 
the Bears Ears National Monument over Tribal objections, as well as push through the Dakota 
Access Pipeline  and other pipelines across the coun try. Similarly, there has been a disregard of 
 
5 42 U.S.C. S 1996 (1978).  
6 See infra Section III.  
7 Exec. Order 13007: Indian Sacred Sites, 61 Fed. Reg. 26771 (1996); Exec. Order 13175: Consultation and 
Coordination with Tribal Governments, 65 Fed. Reg. 67249 (2001).  
8 DEP’T OF DEFENSE ET AL ., MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING REGARDING INTERAGENCY COORDINATION 
AND COLLABORATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF INDIAN SACRED SITES (2012);  DEP’T OF DEFENSE ET AL ., ACTION 
PLAN TO IMPLEMENT THE MOU  REGARDING INTERAGENCY COORDINATION AND COLLABORATION FOR THE 
PROTECTION OF INDIAN SACRED SITES (2013);  DEP’T OF DEFENSE ET AL ., PROGRESS REPORT ON THE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING REGARDING INTERAGENCY COORDINATION AND 
COLLABORATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF INDIAN SACRED SITES (2014);  DEP’T OF DEFENSE ET AL ., POLICY 
STATEMENT ON THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION ABO UT INDIAN SACRED SITES (2015);  DEP’T OF DEFENSE 
ET AL ., MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING REGARDING INTERAGENCY COORDINATION AND COLLABORATION 
FOR THE PROTECTION OF INDIAN SACRED SITES: POLICY REVIEW REPORT (2013).  
9 Pit River Tribe v. Bureau of Land Management,  469 F.3d 768, 788 (9th Cir.2006), on remand , 2008 WL 
5381779 (E.D. Cal. 2008).  
10 WHITEHOUSE .GOV, President Donald J. Trump is Safeguarding the Right to Religious Freedom for Students and 
Organizations  (Jan. 16, 2020), https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/president -donald -j-trump -
safeguarding -right -religious -freedom -students -organizations.  
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/president -donald -j-trump -safeguarding -right -
religious -freedom -students -organizations/  DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
 Tribal concerns with regard to immigration and border security policies. Border patrol officials 
have “forcibly ripped apart” a sacred deer mask when an Indian Tribal member crossed the 
southern border to parti cipate in a traditional religious ceremony, desecrating it and rendering it 
completely unusable for future ceremonies.11 Federal officials have also harassed Tribal citizens  
who have treaty and statutory rights to freely cross the southern border to partic ipate in religious 
ceremonies.12 And, in January 2020, sacred sites were destroyed as part of border wall 
construction, including the blasting of Monument Hill —sacred land for the Tohono O’odham 
Nation located in the Organ Pipe Cactus Monument.13 These act ions are unlawful and morally 
wrong, violating the federal trust responsibility to Indian Tribes, and federal policies reflecting 
that obligation that have been incorporated into numerous federal statutes (see discussion 
immediately below).  
 
In contrast, after Secretary Bernhardt toured Chaco Canyon in New Mexico, where he 
hiked with Tribal leaders, he put in place a temporary development ban pending further 
discussions.  If more officials visited more of these sites, and consulted more closely with Tribal  
officials , we believe and hope that they would seek to protect them, rather than consider them 
inconvenient or insignificant impediments to other goals.  
 
III. Existing Federal Laws and Policies Provide for the Protection of Indian Sacred Sites 
and Should not be Disregarded  
 
Reflecting respect for Tribal values and Tribal culture, over the years the Congress and 
the Executive Branch have enacted and implemented a range of federal statutes requiring the 
federal government to engage in consultation with Indian Tribes when undertaking actions that 
may harm sacred sites and to either desist or mitigate those actions. Those laws, described below, 
should not now be abandoned; rather, they should be expanded upon.  
 
National Historic Preservation Act  
The National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) was signed into law in 1966.  The purpose 
of the act is to “foster conditions under which our modern society and our historic property can 
exist in productive harmony and fulfill the social, economic, and other req uirements of present 
and future generations.”14 Accordingly, the federal government must “contribute to the 
preservation of both federally owned and nonfederally owned historic property”15 and must 
consider historic properties in agency decision -making. De monstrating Congress’s commitment 
 
11 TRIBAL BORDER ALLIANCE , Tribal Border Alliance Proposal  (last visited Feb. 22, 2020), 
https://www.tribalborderalliance.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/03/Tribal -Border -Alliance -Proposal -on-
Letterhead -compressed.pdf.  
12 Id.  
13 Paulina Firozi, Sacred Native American burial sites are being blown up for Trump’s border wall, lawmaker says , 
WASH. POST (Feb. 9, 2020), https://www.washingtonpost.com/immigration/2020/02/09/border -wall -native -
american -burial -sites.  
14 54 U.S.C. § 300101(1).  
15 54 U.S.C. § 300101(4).  DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
 to the protection of sacred objects and sacred sites, NHPA’s 1992 amendments provide that sites 
with religious and cultural significance to Indian Tribes could be eligible for listing on the 
National Register of Historic P laces. Further, under Section 106 of the Act, federal agencies must 
consult with Indian Tribes when taking into account the effects that a federal action may have on 
an historic property that is listed or eligible for listing on the National Register.16  
 
National Environmental Policy Act  
In 1970, Congress enacted the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) to “encourage 
productive and enjoyable harmony between man and his environment [and to] promote efforts 
which will prevent or eliminate damage to the environment.”17 NEPA, and its current regulations, 
ensure that federal agencies incorporate the appropriate level of environmental review when 
considering proposed actions. NEPA is often the only statute that allows Tribes to meaningfully 
participate i n the federal decision -making process because it acts as a mechanism for sacred site 
protection and helps Tribes enforce their off -reservation treaty rights like hunting, fishing, and 
gathering —all activities essential to traditional Indian religious pract ice. 
 
Archaeological Resources Protection Act   
Enacted in 1979, the Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA) protects 
archaeological resources on federal and Indian lands.18 Indian lands are lands held in trust for 
Tribes by the federal government or  lands that are subject to restrictions against alienation.19 
Archaeological resources include material remains of past human life or activities that are of 
archaeological interest and are at least 100 years old.20 To comply with ARPA, parties must receive  
a federal permit prior to excavation, and federal agencies must provide notice to Tribes prior to 
the issuance of a permit that may adversely affect a sacred site.  
 
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act   
The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) was enacted on 
November 16,  1990  (and will be 30 years old this year)  and protects cultural items like Indian 
Ancestral remains  and their burial belongings , sacred object s, and items of cu ltural patrimony.21  
The purpose of the law is twofold. First, it is meant to ensure that agencies and institutions 
receiving federal funds inventory and provide written accounts of cultural items. In addition, 
federal agencies  and institutions  must consul t with Tribes to repatriat e cultural items. Second, 
the law is meant to provide significant protection for Native American burial sites. The Act 
prohibits the removal of cultural items from Tribal or federal land without proper permitting.22 
 
16 54 U.S.C. § 300308.  
17 42 U.S.C. § 4321.  
18 16 U.S.C. §§ 470aa –470mm.   
19 Id. at §  470(bb)(4).  
20 Id. § 470bb(1).   
21  25 U.S.C. §§ 3001 –3013, 18 U.S.C. § 1170 . 
22 25 U.S.C. §  3002(c); see also id. § 3002(a).  DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
 Additionally, it prohibits selling, purchasing, and transportation for sale of cultural items 
obtained in violation of NAGPRA.23   
 
Religious Freedom Restoration Act   
In 1993, Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act  (RFRA) , which provides 
that the federal government cannot substantially burden religious exercise without a compelling 
interest.24 It is distinguishable from the aforementioned statutes because it grants a private right 
of action against the federal government for religious freedom viola tions and places the burden 
of proof on the government to demonstrate that it has a compelling interest in doing so. While 
RFRA does not explicitly mention Indians or sacred sites, the protection of Indian religious 
practice is at its core. Congress enacte d RFRA in response to the 1990 Supreme Court  case,  
Employment Division v. Smith , where two Native American Church practitioners filed a First 
Amendment free exercise claim against Oregon’s unemployment office after they were denied 
unemployment benefits ba sed on their sacramental use of peyote.25 The Court held that neutral 
laws of general applicability that do not expressly target religious practice were constitutional. 
The decision shocked lower courts and legal scholars, and provoked significant protest from 
religious rights groups and civil liberties organizations.   
 
EO 13007: Indian Sacred Sites  
Issued in 1996, Executive Order 13007: Indian Sacred Sites mandates that federal land 
management agencies must “accommodate access to and ceremonial use of Ind ian sacred sites 
by Indian religious practitioners” and must avoid adversely affecting the physical integrity of 
such sacred sites.”26 Under the order, sacred sites are identified by Tribes and federal agencies 
must actively provide notice to Tribes of any  actions that may adversely affect a sacred site and 
consult with them to resolve the issue. It also established a system for holding federal agencies 
accountable for their actions.27 It requires the head of each executive branch agency that has the 
respon sibility for managing lands to report to the President.28 These reports must address changes 
necessary to accommodate access to and ceremonial use of Indian sacred sites, those changes 
necessary to avoid adversely affecting the physical integrity of Indian sacred sites, and 
procedures implemented or proposed to facilitate consultation with Indian Tribes.  
 
EO 13175: Consultation and Coordination with Tribal Governments  
 Issued in 2000, Executive Order 13175 , Consultation and Coordination with Tribal 
Governments, articulated the administration’s establishment of “ regular and meaningful 
consultation and collaboration with Tribal officials in the development of Federal policies that 
 
23 18 U.S.C. § 1170.  
24 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb -1. 
25 Employment Div. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 (1990).   
26 Exec. Order 13007: Indian Sacred Sites, 61 Fed. Reg. 26771 § 1(a) (1996); Exec. Order 13175: Consultation 
and Coordination with Tribal Governments, 65 Fed. Reg. 67249 (2001).  
27 Id. at § 2(a).  
28 Id. at § 2(b).  DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
 have tribal implications . . . .”29  Policies with Tribal implications are defined as “regulations, 
legislative comments or proposed leg islation, or other policy statements or actions that have 
substantial direct effects on one or more Indian tribes . . . .”30 Under the order, federal agencies 
must respect Tribal sovereignty and grant Tribes “the maximum administrative discretion 
possible. ”31  
 
IV. Conclusion  
 
 Felix S. Cohen, known as the father of federal Indian law,  served the Association as its 
General Counsel in the 1940 -50s. He is well know n for the following quote from 1953:  
 
“It is a pity that so many Americans today think of the Indian as a romantic or 
comic figure in American history without contemporary significance. In fact, the 
Indian plays much the same role in our society that the Jews played in Germany. 
Like the miner’s canary, the Indian marks the shift from fresh air to p oison gas in 
our political atmosphere; and our treatment of Indians, even more than our 
treatment of other minorities, reflects the rise and fall in our democratic faith.”  
 
The Association fully supports Congress in its effort to  correct  the direction of our 
democratic faith  and investigate Indian sacred site destruction and religious freedom violations 
with respect to the construction of the border wall. Our expertise in successfully advocating for 
sacred site protection has taught us that this is an ongoi ng issue with the current administration 
and that federal agencies and officers must fully realize their moral and legal responsibility to 
protect sacred sites  and consult with sovereign Tribal governments . Thank you for the 
opportunity to submit this testimony.  
 
29 Exec. Order 13175: Consultation and Coordination with Tribal Governments, 65 Fed. Reg. 67249 (2001).  
30 Id. at § 1(a).  
31 Id. at § 3(a), (b).   