"How Come You Allow Little Girls to Get Married?": Child Marriage in Yemen | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDecember 7, 2011"How Come You Allow Little Girls to Get Married?"Child Marriage in YemenAvailable InEnglishالعربية“How Come You Allow Little Girls to Get Married?”Child Marriage in YemenSummaryKeyRecommendationsTo theGovernment of YemenToInternational DonorsMethodologyI.BackgroundThe Statusof Women and GirlsWomen’sPolitical and Economic ParticipationViolenceagainst Women and GirlsLiteracy andAccess to EducationII. ChildMarriage and Government Failure to Protect Girls and WomenChildMarriage Around the WorldChildMarriage in YemenGovernmentFailure to Protect Children from Child MarriageMinimum Agefor Marriage and Current Legal DevelopmentsBirth andMarriage RegistrationsDefinitionof a ChildIII. ChildMarriage: A Violation of Girls’ and Women’s RightsFull andFree Consent to MarriageSexual andReproductive Health, Maternal and Child MortalitySexualViolence, Domestic Abuse, and AbandonmentOther Physicaland Psychological Health ConsequencesAccess toEducationIV. InternationalLegal Obligations on Child MarriageChildMarriage as Harmful and DiscriminatoryThe Right toFull and Free Consent into MarriageThe Right toChoose a SpouseEstablishinga Consistent Definition of a ChildTheObligation to Set a Minimum Age for Marriage and Enforce RegistrationThe Right ofChildren to Express Their Views FreelyThe Right toNon-DiscriminationThe Right toHealth and Access to Health InformationThe Right toEducationThe Right tobe Free from Physical, Mental, and Sexual ViolenceV. RecommendationsTo theParliament of YemenTo theMinistry of Religious EndowmentsTo theMinistry of HealthThe Ministryof EducationTo theMinistry of JusticeTo theMinistry of InteriorTo CivilSociety OrganizationsToInternational DonorsAcknowledgementsSummaryFourteen-year-old Reem, from Sanaa, was 11 years old whenher father married her to her cousin, a man almost 21 years her senior. Oneday, Reem’s father dressed her in a niqab (the Islamic veil thatcovers the face, exposing only the eyes), and took her by car to Radda, 150kilometers southeast of Sanaa, to meet her soon-to-be husband. AgainstReem’s will, a quick religious marriage ensued. Three days after she wasmarried, her husband raped her. Reem attempted suicide by cutting her wristswith a razor. Her husband took her back to her father in Sanaa, and Reem thenran away to her mother (her parents are divorced). Reem’s mother escortedher to court in an attempt to get a divorce. The judge told her, “Wedon’t divorce little girls.” Reem replied, “But how come you allowlittle girls to get married?”The political turmoil that has swept Yemen since early 2011has overshadowed the plight of child brides such as Reem, as thousands ofprotesters took to the streets to demand the end of President Ali AbdullahSaleh’s 33-year rule, and security forces responded with excessive anddeadly force. But, while the focus of attention both inside and outside ofYemen is understandably the political future of the country, followingPresident Saleh’s agreement in November to cede power before elections inFebruary, child marriages and other discrimination against women and girls inYemen continue unabated. And while the president’s resignation topped thelist of most protestors’ demand, many young demonstrators especially arecalling for a wide range of reforms, including measures to guarantee equalitybetween women and men, and an end to child marriage.The world took notice of these gender-related abuses whenTawakkol Karman, a Yemeni woman activist, was in October named a co-recipientof the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize. Karman has spearheaded the anti-Saleh protests,and she also is a women’s rights activist and a vocal proponent ofsetting a minimum age for child marriage. Honoring Karman serves as a reminderthat respect for women’s rights must not be ignored, including the rightsof girls and women to be free from child and forced marriages and other formsof discrimination.Yemen, the poorest country in the Middle East, is beset byhigh unemployment, widespread corruption and rampant human rights abuses. These abuses include child marriages, which are widespread.According to a nationally representative survey conducted by the Yemenigovernment and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in 2006, 14 percent of girls in Yemen are married before reaching age 15, and52 percent are married before 18. A 2005 study by Sanaa University noted that,in some rural areas, girls as young as eight are married.In 1999 Yemen’s parliament, citingreligious grounds, abolished article 15 of Yemen’s Personal Status Law,which set the minimum age for marriage for boys and girls at 15. Yemencurrently has no minimum age for marriage. Boys or girls can be married at anyage, but in practice it is girls who are most often married young, often tomuch older men. The only protection offered under article 15 of the PersonalStatus Law is the prohibition on sexual intercourse until girls reach puberty.However, as in the case of Reem and others documented by Human Rights Watchillustrates this prohibition in fact does not guarantee protection. Sometimesgirls may be forced into sex and subjected to marital rape before puberty.The consequences of child marriage can bedevastating and long lasting. Research on child marriage conducted by expertsand organizations show that most girls who marry young are removed from school,cutting short the education and skills needed to provide for themselves andtheir families. Many become pregnant and have children soon after marriage. Asgirls with little education and power in their marriage, they have littlechance of controlling how many children they have, or when they have them. Thisincreases their risk of reproductive health problems. They are often confinedto the home and not permitted to work outside. Their low social status makesthem more vulnerable to abuse.Reproductive health studies show that youngwomen face greater risks in pregnancy than older women, includinglife-threatening obstructed labor due to adolescents’ smaller pelvises.Yemen has one of the highest rates of maternal mortality in the region. Theshortage of prenatal and postnatal healthcare services, especially inYemen’s rural areas, place girls’ and women’s lives at risk.An overwhelming majority of Yemeni women still deliver at home, often withoutthe assistance of a skilled birth attendant who could handle childbirthemergencies.  Girls who marry young often have insufficient information onfamily planning or none at all. As young wives they find it difficult to assertthemselves against older husbands to negotiate family planning.Child marriage can also expose young girlsand women to gender-based violence, including domestic abuse and sexualviolence. A 2002 official survey on domestic violence in Yemen showed that 17.3percent of respondents had experienced sexual violence, 54 percent sufferedphysical abuse, and 50 percent verbal threats. Domestic abuse—physicaland emotional assault within the home—often isolates girls from theirfamily and friends, preventing them from developing a support network to helpthem address the abuse. In 2005 the World Health Organization (WHO) conducted amulti-country study on domestic violence in different regions of the world thatshowed that women between 15 and 19 years old who are married run a greaterrisk of being exposed to sexual violence,  including forced sex or maritalrape.A government study in collaboration withUNICEF on access to education for Yemeni girls shows that opportunities foreducation are restricted for many reasons. Many parents force girls to leaveschool when they reach puberty, or even earlier in rural areas where 80 percentof Yemen’s population lives, to help with household and farm chores andbecause of a lack of female teachers and separate school infrastructure forgirls. But parents also take girls out of school early to prepare them formarriage. Once married, very few girls continue or complete their education.Girls without a formal education have fewer opportunities to work andfinancially provide for themselves and their families.Yemen is unlikely to meet a number of its MillenniumDevelopment Goals, a set of objectives agreed to by most United Nations (UN)member states to alleviate poverty and promote development by 2015. The United NationsDevelopment Program (UNDP) cites child marriage as a factor that contributes toYemen’s lack of progress in meeting at least two goals: gender equalityand reduced maternal mortality.Yemen is party to a number of international treaties andconventions that explicitly prohibit child marriage and commit states partiesto take measures to eliminate the practice. These include the Convention on theRights of Child, the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms ofDiscrimination against Women, the Convention on Consent to Marriage, MinimumAge for Marriage and Registration of Marriage, the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights, and the International Covenant on Economic, Socialand Cultural Rights.Many officials in Yemen’s parliamentagree that a ban on child marriage is fundamental to safeguarding the rights ofyoung girls. However, a small but powerful group of conservativeparliamentarians oppose setting a minimum age for marriage, arguing that doingso would lead to “the spreading of immorality”, undermine“family values,” and would be contrary to Sharia, Islamic law. In2009 a majority of parliamentarians voted to set the minimum age for marriageat 17. However, the conservative opposition used a parliamentary procedure tostall the draft law indefinitely. The political crisis in Yemen has paralyzedparliamentary action on this and many other legislative reforms. However, thenext government should not use the crisis as an excuse to further delayprotecting girls from the institutionalised abuse of legal child marriages.HumanRights Watch calls on the Yemeni government to support women’s andgirls’ rights to non-discrimination to end child marriage. The governmentshould adopt and enforce a law setting a minimum age for marriage. It shouldwork to change the cultural acceptance of child marriage, and promote educationfor girls and women. It should also take measures to prevent and redressdomestic and sexual violence, and ensure that women and girls have access toadequate reproductive health services. International stakeholders should boostgirls’ and women’s access to education, to reproductive health information and services, and to protectionfrom domestic violence.Key RecommendationsTothe Government of YemenSet the minimum age for marriage at 18 in accordance withthe definition of a child in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.Raise awareness with religious leaders about the harmfulhealth consequences of child marriage on the lives of girls and women.Increase and improve access to reproductive healthservices and information for all girls and women, including access toemergency obstetric care and family planning.Develop retention strategies to ensure that girls whoenroll in school are able to remain in school, such as financialincentives for families to keep girls in school and to subsidize the costsof uniforms and textbooks.Raise awareness about the obligation to register birthsand marriages through the media.ToInternational DonorsAdvocate for programs that seek to address barriers togirls’ education, such as subsidies for school-related costs and theprovision of safe transportation for girls to schools in ruralcommunities.Fund programs offering services to victims of domesticabuse and especially services tailored for young abuse victims.Support capacity-building initiatives for personnel at theMinistries of Interior, Justice, and Health on the registration allbirths, deaths, marriages, and divorce.MethodologyThis report is based on field research conducted inYemen’s capital, Sanaa, between August and September 2010, as well astelephone interviews throughout 2011. In all, the researcher conducted 54interviews. Thirty-one interviews were with girls and women who were married aschildren, under the age of eighteen. Out of concern for the women’s andgirls’ privacy and security, Human Rights Watch interviewed them only at theoffices of  local nongovernmental organizations and a healthcare clinicexclusively for women. The other interviews were with a health practitioner, aschool principal, members of nongovernmental organizations, and staff membersat the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education. Human Rights Watch hasconducted a thorough review of literature on child marriage in Yemen and othercountries that show similar negative consequences on the lives of girls andwomen.Due to security concerns relating to political instabilityin some regions of Yemen during the time of our research, our research waslimited to the capital; however some of the women we interviewed were from‘Amran, Hudaida, and Hadhramawt governorates. Yemen has 21 governorates,and the majority of its population lives in rural areas. All interviews withgirls and women were conducted in Arabic.We have changed the names and withheld other key identifyingdetails of girls and women in order to protect their identities, with theexception of one girl, Reem Al-Numeri. Reem’s marriage, which finallyended in divorce in 2010, has been frequently featured in international media.All participants consented to being interviewed after HumanRights Watch informed them of the purpose of the interview and the way in whichtheir stories would be used and reported. Participants were informed that theycould stop the interview at any time or decline to answer specific questions.Consent to interview girls under age 18 was granted by a parent, almost alwaysthe mother. In some of these interviews, the mother, a female family member, ora social worker was present during the interview. Those who travelled to meetwith us were compensated for their travel expenses, but not for providing uswith information.I.BackgroundYemen is a country of more than 23 million people on theArabian Peninsula. The World Bank estimated Yemen’s annual per capitagross domestic product at US$1,060 in 2009.[1]In 2011, Yemen ranked 154th out of 187 countries on the Human Development Indexof the United Nations Development Program.[2]More than three quarters of Yemen’s population live in rural areas.The majority of Yemenis are Sunni Muslims, living mostly insouthern and central Yemen, but Zaidis (a branch of Shi’a Islam) make upa large minority living mostly in the north. Islam is the state religion.[3] There arealso small communities of Yemeni Baha’is, Christians, and Jews.[4]Politically and socially conservative North Yemen andMarxist South Yemen were divided prior to 1990, at which point they formallyunified. President Ali Abdullah Saleh came to power in North Yemen in 1978, andcontinued as president of the Republic of Yemen after unification.[5] Saleh isone of the world’s longest-ruling leaders. A civil war that broke outbetween forces of the former north and south from May to July 1994 ended withthe victory of the north. Despite the turmoil, the development of democraticinstitutions, civil society, and the rule of law continued in the 1990s.[6]Yemen adopted a new constitution following unification. The1991 constitution recognized that citizens “are equal in public rightsand duties,” and prohibited “discrimination between them based on sex,color, ethnic origin, language, occupation, social status, or religion.”[7]Further changes were made to the constitution after the 1994war. Sharia became the source of all legislation, not just a “main”source as before.[8]While article 40 of Yemen’s Constitution still provides for equal rightsbetween men and women, article 31 undermines this premise. Article 31 reads:Women are the sisters of men. They have rights and duties,which are guaranteed and assigned by Sharia and stipulated by law.[9]Since 2007, southern separatists have conducted sit-ins,marches, and demonstrations to protest against their treatment at the hands ofthe northern-dominated central government.[10]The separatist movement continues to protest the lack of employmentopportunities, corruption, and inequitable shares of oil revenues for southernprovinces. It has demanded secession and the restoration of an independentsouthern Yemeni state.[11]In the north, a truce in February 2010 ended most of thearmed conflict that had raged in the governorate of Sa’da, along SaudiArabia’s border, since 2004. A group known as the Huthis, named after theleader of the initial rebellion, Husain al-Huthi, has fought Yemeni governmentforces and pro-government tribal fighters.[12]Occasional skirmishes have continued.[13]In January 2011, inspired by pro-democracy demonstrations inTunisia, Egypt, and other countries in the region, Yemenis began protestsdemanding President Saleh’s resignation after 33 years in power. Startingin February, state security forces and armed plainclothes assailants, oftenacting in concert, responded to the largely peaceful protests with excessiveand deadly force, killing at least 250 demonstrators and bystanders, andwounding thousands.Women played an important role in anti-Saleh protests,despite beatings, harassment, and, in some cases, the condemnation ofrelatives. President Saleh in April 2011 admonished women demonstrators, saying“divine law does not allow” public intermingling of the sexes.[14] Womenresponded with further protests. In October 2011, Tawakkol Karman, a prominentwoman journalist and human rights activist who has played a pivotal role in theprotests, won the Nobel Peace Prize along with two women leaders from Liberia. In recent years, Karman has defied conservativesin her political party Islah, or the Islamists Congregation for Reform, bycalling for a minimum age for child marriage.InNovember 2011 Saleh signed a Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) brokered agreementto cede power to vice president Abdo Rabu Mansour Hadi in exchange for immunityfrom prosecution. Under the accord, Saleh was to relinquish all power beforeearly elections, scheduled for February 2012.TheStatus of Women and GirlsYemen is a largely traditional clan-based society wherepatriarchal attitudes still prevail. Conservative social attitudes toward womenand girls are reflected in legal discrimination.Article 40 of Yemen’s Personal Status Law statesthat a woman must obey her husband in all matters, including not leaving homewithout his permission and keeping up with domestic chores.[15] Article 152 notes thata woman may lose her right to maintenance if her husband divorces her for thefollowing reasons: if she refuses to move into the marital home without alegitimate reason, if she leaves the marital home without a legitimate reason,if she works outside the home without previously requesting her husband’spermission, and if she refuses to travel with him without a legitimate reason.[16]The provisions in Yemen’s Personal Status Law onmarriage and divorce create particular hardships for women and girls. Accordingto article 12, a man may marry up to four women provided that he is able totreat and financially provide for his wives equally, that the wife hasknowledge of other marriages, and that the husband notifies his wife or wivesthat he will take another wife.[17]A man may divorce his wife by pronouncing his repudiation three times.[18] A womanmay ask for separation from her husband on certain conditions, for example ifthe husband fails to provide financially for his family even though he iscapable of doing so; if he abandons his wife for more than one year with nocompensation, or for more than two years with compensation; if he is imprisonedfor more than three years; or if he marries more than one woman and is unableto provide financially for his wives.[19]The wife must provide proof of these allegations before being granted adivorce. A wife who wishes to divorce her husband for other reasons may filefor khul’a, or no-fault divorce, under which she is required topay back her dowry and forego claims to maintenance.[20] Given women’seconomic dependence on their husbands, this requirement makes it difficult forwomen to seek and obtain a divorce.[21]Women’s Politicaland Economic ParticipationWomen in South Yemen won the right to vote and stand forelection in 1970, while women in North Yemen only won this right in 1983.[22] In 2006,42 percent of registered voters were women, but only a small number ran for orheld office.[23]Since unification, women have held no more than two out of the 301 seats inYemen’s House of Representatives, or parliament. Only two women have beenappointed to Yemen’s Consultative Council, the upper house of parliament,since its establishment in 2001.[24]Women’s representation in local councils was 0.5 percent in 2006.[25]Women aged 15 to 64 make up only 20 percent of theworkforce, according to 2009 World Bank figures.[26] According to a2005/2006 Yemeni government survey, the most recent data available, 35.6percent of women work in the agricultural sector, and women make up 15.5percent of workers in the education sector.[27]However, more than 70 per cent of women’s work in agriculture isconducted as unpaid family labor.[28]The agricultural sector accounts for 14-19 percent of thegross domestic product.[29]A 2003 Yemeni family health survey showed that one-third of the womensurveyed about entering the labor force made a joint decision with theirhusbands to work, 16 percent said it was their own decision, and 44 percent saidit was their husband’s decision.[30]A survey conducted in 2000 by the Social Development Fundand the World Bank on small and medium enterprises in Yemen showed that only 3percent of such businesses were owned by women.[31] Out of 5,238households surveyed, 31 percent of women worked in beauty care; 30percent inthe education field; 10 percent in the textile industry, and 7percent inhealthcare.[32]Violence against Womenand GirlsWomen and girls in Yemen experience gender-based violence,in particular domestic abuse, sexual violence and harassment, and femalegenital mutilation.[33]A 2002 survey of 120 women living in Sanaa found that46percent of women in the sample experienced physical abuse while 13.3 percentreported that they had been sexually harassed.[34]More than 28 percent of respondents said that their husbands had confined themin their homes at some point in their life.[35]Additionally, 74 percent of the women surveyed also experienced verbal abuse bytheir husbands.[36]A2003 government survey on violence against women in urban and rural areas,which covered more than 13,000 households, found that 59 percent of rural womenand 71 percent of women living in urban areas said they were physically beatenby their husbands because of family problems. Eleven percent of rural women and6 percent of urban women said they were beaten for not obeying their husbands,23 percent of rural and 16 percent of urban women were beaten by their husbandsfor no reason, and 7 percent of women in both categories said they were beatenfor reasons other than those listed above.[37]According to a report submitted by Yemeni NGOs to the CEDAW(Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women)committee —the UN expert group that monitors implementation of CEDAW)— in 2007, “domestic violence in cases related to honor is [a]concealed phenomenon in Yemen.”[38]The report noted that families handled such cases internally and littleinformation reached police stations.[39]The murder of women by family members was often not officially reported or wasrecorded as natural deaths.[40]In rural areas, a death certificate citing the cause of death is not alwaysnecessary for burial.[41]The prevalence of female genital mutilation is much higherin the coastal and southern regions (with the exception of Aden) of Yemen thanin other areas. A national survey conducted by the Yemeni government in 2003found that 33.1 percent of girls and women between 15 and 49 in urban areas,and 40.7 percent in rural areas had their genitalia cut, mostly in their first fewmonths of life.[42]Literacy and Access to EducationYemen has one of the highest illiteracy rates in the MiddleEast and North Africa. A survey commissioned by the United Nations Educational,Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) found that as of 2007, the adultliteracy rate for Yemenis aged 15 and over was 59 percent: 77 percent for malesand 40 percent for females. There was a gap of over 30 percent betweenYemen’s literacy rate and that of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,and Oman, where the literacy rates were 85 percent, 90 percent, and 84 percent,respectively.[43]The youth literacy rate for those between 15 and 24 was significantly higherthan the adult literacy rate, estimated at 80 percent. But the gap between theliteracy rates for male youths aged 15 to 24 and for female youths in the sameage bracket remained wide (93 percent for the former and 67 percent for thelatter).[44]The improvement in literacy rates for youths may be due tothe fact that in 2001 education in Yemen became compulsory for both boys andgirls between the ages of six and fifteen.[45]But despite this progress, approximately 900,000 primary school age childrenwere out of school in 2005. Almost 70 percent of these were girls, and 88percent of them lived in rural areas.[46]According to UNESCO’s 2010 global monitoring report on education, the netprimary school enrollment rate for boys in 2005was 85 percent, but only 65percent for girls.[47]The discrepancies between the enrollment rates of girls and boys widens insecondary grades.[48]Numerous explanations have been put forward for the wide gapin enrolment rates for boys and girls. Some families withdraw girls from schoolto marry, to help with household chores, or to care for smaller children. Additionally,many families in rural areas insist on having separate classrooms for boys andgirls, and female teachers for girls, in order to keep their girls in school. Somefamilies in rural areas wish for their girls to remain in school after theyreach puberty so long as female teachers are available to teach them. Manyfamilies feel that having female teachers will ensure that girls have a safeenvironment, and  also value female teachers as a role model sinceteaching is a respected profession.[49]The ratio of female to male teachers in elementary education is 12: 100 inrural areas. In secondary schools, the ratio is 8-11 females to 100 maleteachers.[50]UNICEFhas also found that girls’ education is impeded by families’ lackof awareness about the importance of education, especially for girls.[51]A school principal from Hudaida told Human Rights Watch:Most girls are taken out of school afterfourth or fifth grade [around nine or ten years], just when they becomeadolescents and begin puberty. The girls return to the home, they cook, fetchwater and wood, or are married off if there is an opportunity.[52]Kawkab, who cut short her secondary education when she was married,told Human Rights Watch:I used to like school, especiallyEnglish. I wanted to teach English, but my family made me enter the house andthe kitchen.[53]Twenty-one-year-old Arwa finished elementary school, but herfamily did not allow her to go to secondary school. Instead, she cared for heryounger siblings. She said:I used to like going to school...I was sad when my motherforced me to leave. I wanted to be a doctor.[54]Some parents regard girls’ education as a waste oftime and money, believing that a girl’s place and future is in the home.In 2006, the Ministry of Education abolished the annual school fee for primaryeducation of 640 riyals (approximately US$3) to encourage more girls to enrollin school, especially in rural areas.[55]Other fees for mandatory uniforms and school activities still exist, impactinggirls’ access to education.[56]Ahmad Ayadil, a school principal, remarked, “Girls areintelligent and more receptive to education [than boys], but they’re notgiven a chance.”[57]II. Child Marriageand Government Failure to Protect Girls and WomenChild Marriage Around the WorldWorldwide, more than 51 million girls between the ages of 15and 19 are married. This figure is based on demographic health surveysconducted in various countries around the world that document marriages ofpersons above 15 years. The total figure for child marriage is certainly higherbecause these official statistics do not survey married girls who are under 15.[58] ThePopulation Council, an international organization that conducts research onHIV/AIDS, gender, and poverty and youth in order to improve reproductive healthservices, noted that according to the 2006 Demographic Health Surveys, one inseven girls worldwide would marry before her 15th birthday.[59]The majority of these young girls live in parts ofsub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, often in places characterized by persistentpoverty and low levels of economic development.[60] Child marriage isespecially common in countries where the majority of the population live onless than US$2 per day, and in countries with a low gross domestic product(GDP) per capita.[61]Research conducted by international organizations found that child marriage wasalso common in societies in which families premised their “honor”on daughters’ virginity before marriage, leading to early marriages ofdaughters to prevent premarital sex.[62]Child Marriage in YemenChild marriage is a common practice in Yemen in both ruraland urban areas. Girls may be married as early as 12 or 13, especially if thegirl is wedded to a close relative. In rural areas, such as Hadhramawt andHudaida, girls may be married as young as eight, and in Mukalla around 10. Theage of marriage in urban areas is slightly higher.[63] Of the 31 girls andwomen Human Rights Watch interviewed in Sanaa, all but one were married betweenthe ages of 12 and 17, with the majority married before age 15.In 2005, Yemen ranked 14th (tied with Liberia) on a list of20 worldwide “hot spots” for child marriage compiled by theInternational Center for Research on Women, with 48.4 percent of girls marriedbefore reaching the age of 18.[64]According to the Yemeni government and UNICEF 2006 Multiple Indicator ClusterSurvey, a nationally representative survey of 3,586 households, almost 52percent of Yemeni girls were married before the age of 18 and14 percent weremarried before the age of 15.[65]Our research and that of many other experts andorganizations underscores that child marriage deprives girls of their childhoodand adolescence by burdening them with marriage, childbirth, and other adultresponsibilities. It curtails their personal freedom and denies them theopportunity to develop a full sense of identity. It risks harming theirphysical health, including their reproductive and sexual health, and increasestheir risk of physical and emotional abuse at the hands of husbands andin-laws. Lastly, it often denies them the opportunity to access education,leaving them economically vulnerable, unable to earn a living.[66] The negativeconsequences of child marriage are not limited to the girls’ childhood but,as this report shows, can persist throughout their adult lives too.A 2005 study on child marriage in Yemen explained that thereare four principle factors that place girls at risk of child marriage in Yemenand in similar countries where child marriage is common. First, many very poorfamilies view young girls as a financial burden, prompting them to marry theirdaughters off to alleviate that burden. Second, some families also see theirdaughters as an economic asset because of the payment of a dowry, in the formof money or gifts offered to the bride by the groom prior to marriage.[67] Accordingto article 33 of Yemen’s Personal Status Law, a dowry is a woman’spossession and she can do whatever she pleases with it.[68] However, article 34notes that a woman’s guardian may ask to accelerate or delay her dowrypayment so long as she is in agreement.[69]Marrying an older man often means a higher dowry, especially if the girl isyoung. Some families believe that marrying their daughters is a means ofproviding her with a more secure future. Parents who are unable to financiallyprovide for their children believe that by marrying them they give theirdaughters a chance for a better life and better prospects for the future.Third, in traditional societies like Yemen, marriage canalso be regarded by the family as a means of protecting girls from pre-maritalsex, which would undermine family honor.[70]And lastly, sometimes girls themselves see marriage as theironly option, especially those who leave school at an early age. Fifteen-year-oldSawsan from Hudaida told us:I only went to school until I was tenyears old. I used to like to read and write. My [future] husband wanted me [formarriage] and everyone agreed in the family, so I agreed. I wanted to getmarried because it’s better than nothing.[71]Girls who were not married at an early ageoften found it difficult to get married when they were older.[72]Fawzia told Human Rights Watch:People here say that if a girldoesn’t get married by 20, she loses her chance at marriage.[73]GovernmentFailure to Protect Children from Child MarriageThe government of Yemen has failed to protect children fromchild marriage by not setting and enforcing a clear minimum age for marriage,and by failing to provide women and girls with protection from, forcedmarriages and marital abuse, or to provide them with opportunities for redress.In fact, the government made matters worse by repealing the previous legal ageof 15 for marriage in 1999, making it legal for a child of any age to bemarried.Birth and marriage registrations are essential components ofcombating child marriage, as they provide proof of the age of the child at thetime of marriage. Registration of births and marriages in Yemen is compulsory,but rarely enforced.[74]Another problem is that conflicting ages of majority inYemen’s Personal Status Law and civil law render the definition of achild in Yemen inconsistent (see below), making it difficult to legally protectchildren’s human rights as stipulated by international human rights law.Minimum Age for Marriage and CurrentLegal DevelopmentsPrior to unification in 1990, North Yemen’s PersonalStatus Law set the minimum age for marriage at 15.In the south, it was 16. In1994, 15 became the age of marriage for all of Yemen.In 1999, further changes to the Personal Status Lawoccurred. A provision allowing forcibly married girls to divorce whilemaintaining their right to maintenance was repealed.[75] Another amendmentostensibly protected married girls from being forced into sex by stipulatingthat the husband cannot have sexual intercourse with his bride “until shehas reached puberty, even if she exceeds 15 years of age.”[76]However,the law only takes a girl’s physical ability to have sex into account,rather than her physical, mental, and emotional maturity to handle a sexualrelationship, childbirth, and child-rearing. In practice Yemeni girls are oftenmarried immediately after puberty, whether this occurs at 11, 12, or older. Insome cases documented by Human Rights Watch, girls were married before theirfirst menstrual period.Since 2000, the Women’s National Committee (WNC), agovernment body tasked with recommending policies and strategies for thedevelopment of women’s health and education,  has sought tore-introduce a minimum age for marriage, without success.[77]In 2008 Nujood Ali, who was married at the age of nine to aman in his thirties, became the youngest known divorcee in Yemen, at the ageof10.[78]Herhusband repeatedly beat and raped her, until one day she decided to go to acourthouse to speak to a judge. With the assistance of a lawyer, Shada Nasser,Nujood was granted a divorce, but had to repay her husband US$200. Her husbandwas not penalized for abusing or raping her.[79]Nujood’s case highlighted the sexual abuse and domestic violence somemarried Yemeni girls experience. After Nujood broke her silence about hermarriage, more young girls came forward demanding a divorce from their husbandsfor similar reasons. In addition, nongovernmental organizations and local mediaalso began to highlight cases of violence against young married girls.Nujood’s story captured international attention and prompted the WNC topresent amendments to Yemen’s Supreme Council for Women’s Affairsin 2008, which is headed by the Prime Minister. The Supreme Council attemptedto introduce a draft bill to set an age for marriage, but the Sharialegislative committee in parliament rejected such a proposal. The WNC advocatedfor amendments specifying 18 as the minimum age for marriage.According to Hooria Mashoor, former deputy director of the WNC, “extremegroups in society and in parliament that are against amending the law”prevented the amendments from being tabled for parliamentary debate.[80]In February 2009, the WNC again presented draft legislationon child marriage, specifying a minimum age for marriage at 18, to the SupremeCouncil for Women’s Affairs, which then submitted it to the Council ofMinisters. The Council of Ministers, which serves as the supreme executive andadministrative authority of the state, agreed on the WNC draft legislation andsubmitted it to the Ministry of Justice, which then submitted it to parliament.[81]On February 11, 2009, a majority in parliament agreed to setthe minimum age of marriage at 17, instead of the proposed 18.[82] The parliamentarians alsodrafted an exception allowing girls under 17 to marry if a judge deemed it tobe in the best interest of the child. Any adult who violated the law would bepenalized with a jail sentence of up to a year, or a fine of up to 100,000riyals (approximately US$469), and any person who witnessed the marriage ofchildren, female or male, under the indicated age, would also be penalized witha jail sentence of no more than six months and a fine of no more than 50,000riyals (approximately US$234).[83]Twenty-three parliamentarians from the powerful oppositionparty Islah and from the ruling General People’s Congress (GPC) opposedthe amended article on the grounds that setting a minimum agefor marriage was against their interpretation of Islamic principles.[84]A majority of parliamentarians voted in favor of setting theage of marriage at 17, but proponents failed to muster a majority forprovisions dealing with the punishment of parents or guardians who give theirdaughters into marriage before the prescribed age. A few daysafter the vote, parliamentarians opposing the reform requested further reviewby the Sharia Legislative Committee, which reviews drafts laws to ensureagreement with Sharia law, recommending that no age for marriage shouldbe set.[85]In March 2010, parliamentarians again tabled the draft billfor debate. The same conservative members of parliament voiced sharp criticism,and the draft bill was again referred to the Sharia Legislative Committee.[86] On April10, 2010, the Sharia Legislative Committee issued a 14 page document citingreligious reasons for not setting an age of marriage. The document stated thatarticle 15 is in contradiction to the Quran, Sunnah, the Constitution, and theinterest of the child.[87]This maneuver effectively killed the bill for this session of parliament.On March 21, 2010 a number of clerics issued a fatwa (alegal pronouncement in Islam, issued by a religious law specialist on aspecific issue), which stated that defining an age for marriage is contrary toSharia and that “God had legitimized marriage to safeguard births andtheir protection.”[88]The fatwa included evidence of instances where prominent women in Islamwere married at a young age, specifically Aisha, one of the ProphetMuhammad’s wives. Those opposing the law on minimum age for marriageclaim she married at the age of nine, but other Muslim scholars put her age atmarriage closer to 20. The dispute results from different interpretations ofthe sayings of the Prophet Muhammad (Hadith) and his companions, whichIslamic law takes to be normative.Two days after the fatwa appeared women opposing aminimum age of marriage demonstrated in front of parliament. They werecountered by demonstrators in favor of a minimum age. Many of those who opposedthe bill were from al-Iman (Faith) University, financed and run by Sheikh AbdulMajidal-Zindani. Al-Zindani is one of the founding members ofIslah. The Islah party was formed in 1990 by members of the GPC and by theYemeni Muslim Brotherhood. The GPC and Islah share tribal influence andpersonal connections to businesses, and are both rivals of the Yemeni SocialistParty, from the former south. Today, Islah is the leading opposition group inYemen, and its party ideology has shifted from one focusing on religious andmoral issues to one much more accepting of a democratic system, and secularpolitical parties. Rifts within the party have brought about two competingcamps: one which is moderate, and another which is Salafi, or hard-lineIslamist.[89] Al-Zindani has strong views on the exclusion of women from seniorgovernmental positions, and other issues pertaining to women, including childmarriage.[90]His argument against a law banning child marriage is that it is un-Islamic anda threat to the culture and society of Yemen.[91]In October 2010 parliamentary proponents and opponentsclashed verbally and physically over the draft law during a parliamentarysession.[92]This time the debate was about whether or not to punish guardians who marrytheir daughters before puberty.[93]Many countries in the Middle East and North Africa regionare predominantly Muslim, and a majority of these countries recognize Sharia asa source of law. Almost all have set a minimum age for marriage for both boysand girls. For instance, in Iraq and Egypt the age is 18 for both sexes. In2008, Egypt raised the age for girls from 16 to 18.[94]Birthand Marriage RegistrationsBirth and marriage registrations are essential components ofcombating child marriage as they assist in proving the age of the spouses atthe time of marriage. Mandatory marriage registration, which is the case inYemen, can help prevent unlawful child marriages. In 2006 only 22 percent ofbirths were registered, despite compulsory registration.[95]The Yemen StatisticsYearbook for 2009, compiled by the Central Statistical Organization, showedthat for 20 governorates, 9,120 marriages were recorded in 2001, 10,934 for2002, and only 600 marriages for 2003.[96]Consideringthat Yemen has a population of 23 million, it is obvious that the number of actualmarriages far exceed those recorded.According to the presidential decree on civil status andcivil registration, amended in 2003, all births must be registered with theMinistry of Health within 60 days. Similarly, all marriage contracts must be registeredat the Ministry of Justice within 15 days. The registrations are then sent tothe Department of Civil Status at the Ministry of Interior.[97] Article 14 of the PersonalStatus Law also requires that the person who draws up a marriage contract, thehusband, and the wife’s guardian register the marriage certificate withthe specialized entity within one month. The certificate must include necessaryinformation, such as the ages of bride and groom, their national identificationnumbers, if available, and the amount of dowry offered to the bride.[98]But births and marriages are rarely registered, and thereare no penalties imposed on those who do not comply with the law.[99] Thisinadequate enforcement of legal provisions coupled with lack of awareness aboutthe importance of registering births and marriages has resulted in difficultiesin gathering accurate data on Yemen’s population, and determining theages of children.Definitionof a ChildA precise legal definition of a child is essential to ensurea coherent application of laws protecting children. In Yemeni law, there is nosingle legal definition of a child. Article 2 of the Law on the Rights of theChild defines a child as “every human being below the age of 18 yearsunless majority is attained earlier.”[100]According to Yemen’s Personal Status Law, the age of maturity (sin alrushud) for boys is set at ten, or the attainment of puberty, whichever isearlier, and for girls, at nine years, or the attainment of puberty, and in allcases, any person over 15 years is considered to have reached age of maturity.[101] However,Yemen’s civil law (Qanun al-Madani) sets the age of maturity atthe age of 15 years, with no exceptions.[102]Without a coherent definition of a child throughout Yemeni law, children maynot fully enjoy the protection of their rights under international law.III. ChildMarriage: A Violation of Girls’ andWomen’s RightsChild marriages result in serious violations of the rightsof girls with long-lasting consequences. Girls and women who are forced intomarriage are deprived of the right to decide whether or not to marry, whom tomarry, when to marry, and whether and when to have children.Child marriages also contribute to violations ofgirls’ and women’s other rights, including the rights to health,education, employment, and the right to live free from violence anddiscrimination.Full and Free Consent to MarriageThe right of men and women to enter into marriage only withtheir full and free consent is well established in international human rightslaw.[103]Articles 16 of CEDAW and the Universal Declaration for Human Rights (UDHR),article 23 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),and the UN Convention on Consent to Marriage recognize people’s right tomarry when both spouses are able to consent to a marriage.[104]These treatiesconsider children as incapable of consenting to marriage because they areunable to fully understand the concept of marriage and a sexual relationshipwithin marriage and its consequences.[105]Asexual relationship within marriage can be especially dangerous in places likeYemen where the law does not recognize marital rape as a criminal offense andthus facilitates sexual abuse.Older children have the right to participate in decisionsabout their lives and may have the capacity to grasp the implications ofmarriage.[106]InYemen, however, a girl’s consent to marriage is frequently neither soughtnor considered. Article 23 of the Personal Status Law provides that apreviously married woman or a widow, in other words a non-virgin, must consentto marriage, however, according to the law, a virgin’s silence signifiesher consent.[107]Yemen’sPersonal Status Law allows girls to be married at any age and furtherdiscriminates against girls and women by not requiring their full and freeconsent for marriage. The decision to marry is often made by the girl’sor woman’s guardian, as some of the cases described below indicate.In cases when girls do agree to marry, they may not be awareof the implications of marriage or able to make an informed decision.Eighteen-year-old Su’ad was married when she was 14. She told HumanRights Watch:I only finished second grade. Ididn’t like school and quit, so my mother told me to sit in the kitchen.My uncle asked me if I want to marry this person and I said ‘yes,’but I didn’t know what marriage was. I met my husband for the first timeon our wedding night.[108]Reflecting back onher marriage at age 13 or 14 shortly after her first menstrual period, Bushra,who is now 26 years old, told Human Rights Watch:I was young to get married... I wanted to get married then...[but] my mind was too little.[109]The question of whether a girl is capable of providing herfull and free consent to marriage becomes more complex as she grows older. However,even older girls are not always able to make an informed decision aboutmarriage. Salma was 17 years old with only one year of secondary school leftwhen she decided to marry a man she did not know. When weasked her why she decided to marry when she was so close to finishing school,she told Human Rights Watch: “I didn’t know my husband beforehand.He came and I said ‘yes’.” Her mother who was present duringSalma’s interview told us, “She wasn’t really prepared [toget married], and now she’s one month pregnant.[110]Even when girls are mature enough to understand and consentto marriage, they are not always asked whether they want to get married, andthey may have no say in choosing their future spouse. They may not even knowthe person they are to marry, and only meet their spouse for the first time ontheir wedding night. Their families—fathers or other malerelatives—choose their future husbands for them. Arwawas married when she was 15 years old. Now 21, she told Human RightsWatch:I didn’t want to get married becauseI loved someone else.[111]More than half of the women and girls interviewed by HumanRights Watch said they had no choice in choosing their spouse.[112] Sultana was marriedat 16, in 2009. She told us:I finished seventh grade, and left[school] because of marriage....I didn’t want to get married, but myfather forced me to. He told me that education won’t do anything for me.He said ‘get married and live in splendor’....I didn’t knowmy husband beforehand. My father told me that I have to agree [to getmarried]... I had no choice.[113]Similarly, 25-year-old Amal, who was marriedwhen she was 15, explained:The girl is put under an imposition, andthere’s no benefit in making trouble.[114]Sometimes, thegirl’s marriage contract is concluded without her knowledge. Anotherwoman, Kawkab, told Human Rights Watch that she was married at 16, explaining:I didn’t want to get married...butthe decision was stringent....My father and father-in-law went to court, and myfather came back to the house and told me “You’re married.” Iwas surprised, I knew that I would be married one day, but I didn’t knowthat this would be the day.[115]Sexualand Reproductive Health, Maternal and Child MortalityIn traditional societies where child marriage is common,including Yemen, girls and women are expected to become pregnant soon aftermarriage. There are serious risks to the health and lives of young mothers andtheir children associated with early pregnancy and childbirth. These increasedrisks are not only related to age, but also to girls’ low levels ofeducation, low social status, lack of access to health related information, andhealth services.[116]Worldwide, it is estimated that complications from pregnancyare the leading cause of death for young women between 15 and 19. Studies showthat girls in their teens are twice as likely to die from pregnancy andchildbirth related causes,[117]Young girls between the ages of 10 and 14 are five times more likely to dieduring delivery than mothers who are between 20 and 24.[118]Yemen has one of the highest rates of maternal mortality inthe Middle East and North Africa region, estimated at 210 deaths per 100,000live births.[119]Maternal mortality in Yemen is the cause of approximately 39 percent of alldeaths for women of reproductive age, and child marriage is an importantfactor.[120]Governmentdata indicate that 74.2 percent of all maternal deaths occur in cases of girlsor women who were married before they reached 20 years old.[121] Most deaths occur inrural areas, where girls are more likely to be married at a younger age andwhere 80 percent of Yemen’s population lives.[122] It is estimated that18 percent of maternal deaths in Yemen occur during pregnancy and 82 percentduring delivery.[123]Sixty four percent of maternal deaths occur at home, and without the presenceof a skilled birth attendant.[124]The majority of pregnant women in Yemen (almost 80 percent) deliver at home.[125]Home deliveries in rural areas are especially risky, where long distancesbetween homes and health facilities make it difficult for women to accessemergency obstetric care. Even when emergency care is available, it is oftennot timely or adequate as most health facilities have a shortage of staff andsupplies.[126]Nine percent of maternal deaths occur en route to a hospital, and 24 percentoccur at a health facility. It is estimated that 38 percent of women in labor arriveat a hospital in critical or morbid condition.[127]Studies on other countries show that women who marry earlyhave the highest proportion of unfavorable pregnancy outcomes at all stagesthroughout their childbearing years.[128]One study indicated women who married before age 16 carried twicethe risk of spontaneous abortion (miscarriage) and approximately four times thecombined risk of fetal death and infant mortality.[129]Amal, who is 25 years old and from Haima, was married whenshe was 15 and had her only daughter when she was 17. She told Human RightsWatch that she’s been pregnant six times. She miscarried three times, andhad two abortions. “One baby died inside of me when itwas six months old,” she said. “The other baby ... they took himout of my stomach and he was already dead.”[130]Seventeen-year-old Sultana was married at16 and was pregnant when we met her.She said:I miscarried once when I was two monthspregnant, then I got pregnant again after four months, and I miscarried when Iwas five months. This is my third pregnancy...  A woman here is only forreproduction.[131]According to the organization Save theChildren young girls who marry early are more likely to have frequent, andoften closely spaced, pregnancies. Household responsibilities, and otherfactors that may cause stress and anxiety, may further aggravate the negativeoutcome of pregnancies.[132]Girls who are undernourished may be at an increased risk ofanemia resulting from deficiencies of vital nutrients such as iron, vitamin A,or folic acid.[133]It is often difficult for young girls whose lives are to a large extentcontrolled by their husbands and unsympathetic in-laws to advocate for adequatefood and nutrition for themselves. If they become pregnant while still in theiradolescence, lack of adequate nutrition places babies at risk of low birthweight.[134]The low status of young mothers, gender-based violence, and discriminationagainst them in the home may limit their access to reproductive and sexualhealth services and information, even in cases of emergency.[135]The low social status of young marriedgirls and their lack of empowerment in the household severely limit theirability to make decisions about their own health and the health of theirchildren.[136]Najladid not know exactly how old she is, but she said that she was married soonafter completing her second year in secondary school, which would have made herabout 15 or 16 at the time of her marriage. She has been married for sevenyears and has two children who were likely born before she was 18 years old.She explained how she was denied medical treatment by her in-laws.I was pregnant with the second child whenmy firstborn was only five months old. For five days, I bled severely and Ithought it was just my period. My mother-in-law knew what was happening to me,but she wouldn’t tell me anything. They [my in-laws] wouldn’t letme go to the hospital and wouldn’t tell my husband what was going on withme. When I became very dizzy, they finally took me to the hospital, but at thehospital they didn’t stop the bleeding and didn’t give me anytreatment. I had to lie on my back for six months during my [second] pregnancyand I needed 500 cc of blood. The doctor told me it’s because I marriedearly.[137]Women requiring emergency obstetric care may be deniedadmission to the hospital if they lack the authorization of their maleguardians, most often their husbands. Yemen’s Ministry of Health hasfound that advance permission from the husband to access health care at amedical center is one of the major obstacles to treatment, including emergencytreatment.[138]These authorizations are a common practice although not a legal requirement inYemen.[139]Early pregnancy and childbirth also have adverseconsequences for infants. Babies born to young mothers run a 30-percentincreased risk of dying during their first year of life.[140] Babies may have a lowbirth weight as a consequence of their mother’s poor nutritional statuswhile pregnant, and babies with low birth weight are 5 to 30 times more likelyto die than babies of normal weight. Young mothers are lesslikely to get prenatal care and often do not have enough information aboutproper nutrition while pregnant to nurture themselves and babies.[141]Many girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch, especiallyyounger ones, had little or no knowledge about sexual intercourse before theywere married. Neither their mothers, older sisters, nor other female relativestold them what to expect on their wedding night. Sultana, who was married at16, said, “My brother and sister told me some thingsabout the wedding night, but not everything.”[142] Husnia,married at 16, told Human Rights Watch:I didn’t know anything aboutmarriage or pregnancy.[143]In Yemen, like in many societies around theworld where family honor is predicated on the “honor” of daughters,girls are expected to be virgins when they marry. Often, therefore, discussionsabout sex are taboo, and girls have limited or no knowledge about familyplanning, including the use of contraceptives.[144]Human Rights Watch asked Fatima, who wasmarried at 12, about her use of contraceptives, and she replied:I slept with my husband, but I don’ttake birth control pills. I don’t know what they are.”[145]In Yemen only 28 percent of married womenbetween the ages of 15 and 49 stated that they use some form of contraception,making this rate one of the lowest in the Middle East and North Africa.[146]In 2003, the most recent year for which such information is available, 39percent of Yemeni women who did not wish to become pregnant did not use anyform of contraception.[147]In some cases, women may be prevented by their husbands from using any form ofcontraception, and from obtaining information on contraception, the spacing ofchildren, or other reproductive health issues.[148]Sexual Violence, Domestic Abuse,and AbandonmentThe World Health Organization (WHO) found in a multi-countrysurvey on violence against women that married girls between 15 and 19 are morelikely to experience domestic violence than older married women.[149]Some of the girls and women interviewed by Human RightsWatch said that they were verbally or physically assaulted by their husbands,in-laws, and other members of the husband’s household. Married girls andwomen in Yemen often live with their husband, his parents, male siblings andtheir wives, children, and unwed sisters. Power and authority in the householdis usually held by men and older women, and this can place new brides,especially if they are young, at greater risk of abuse and violence.[150]Rhadia was married at 16, and has livedwith her husband and in-laws for over eight years. She told Human Rights Watchthat only her children keep her in a marriage that has made her life“full of sadness and bitterness.” She told us that she is abused byher husband and in-laws:He upsets me a lot, and he beats me. Oneday he beat me because of his mother. She tells him that I don’t doanything at home. I had problems [with my husband and in-laws] when I first hadmy son, but I can’t leave now because of my children...They [my familyand in-laws] ruined me. They ruined my life.[151]Twenty-three year-old Huda, from Ma’reb, was marriedwhen she was 14. She said:I refused to get married ... I used toescape from the house and return to my family. I didn’t want to staythere [at her husband’s home]. They [her in-laws] used to give me a hardtime. I would do all the housework.[152]Su’ad, who is 18 and lives with herin-laws, said:I was young and went to a big house.I didn’t know how to cook or do anything. They [husband’s family]would yell at me....One day my sister-in-law hit me because I was yelling ather children to get up.[153]Afrah is 16 years old and had been marriedfor five months when she spoke to Human Rights Watch. Her husband is 18 yearsold. She said:My mother-in-law gives us problems. Fromthe first day, there were problems. She says that I took her son away from her.His mother chose me ...  and now she doesn’t want me anymore. Shewants us to divorce. I’m three months pregnant. I don’t know ifthey [my husband and in-laws] will take him [the baby] from me.... His motherencouraged him to leave me and to marry again. He’s fine with it.It’s normal for him because he’s young and has a lot of time. Hedoesn’t know the difference between right and wrong. They want us to geta divorce and I don’t know how I will live later with my baby.[154]Fourteen-year-old Fatima was married to a man in his latetwenties who lived in the same house with her husband’s mother, brothers,and sister. She told us:I used to argue with my mother-in-lawbecause she says I can’t do anything. He [her husband] hit me once withhis hand on the left side of my face and on the right side of my face andruptured my ear. He used to hit me all over my body, he used to kick me withhis feet and call me all sorts of names. I used to remain silent, but wouldcomplain to my mother. She would tell me to remain tolerant, all girls gothrough the same, this is nothing new. Since he hit me, I want to divorce him.[155]The lack of a support system may exacerbate thevulnerability of married girls.Sometimes girls who aremarried young, and those who are forced into marriage, cannot find support andassistance in their own families. Girls may run away from their husbands andattempt to go back to their own families’ homes, expectingto receive help, but are often told to endure their tribulations becauseall married women must tolerate their husbands, their in-laws, and theirchildren.Thuraya is 27 years old. She was married when she was about16 or 17 years old. She told Human Rights Watch:I would go back to my father’s houseand my family would tell me that these are normal problems. They would say thata woman has to have patience and would return me to my husband’s home asif I was wrong, and I would think that maybe I was wrong after all. I would bequiet ... just to avoid problems.[156]WHO also found that married girls and young women withlow levels of education are at a greater risk of physical and sexual violencefrom their spouses than older and more educated women.[157] Research suggeststhat spousal age difference also contributes to risk factors associated withviolence and abuse, including marital rape.[158]Reem, 14, was married at age 11 to a man 21 years hersenior, had not had her first menstrual period when she was married. Reem didnot want to have sex with her husband, but he raped her. She said, “Hewanted to sleep with me by force.”[159]As in most countries in the Middle East and North Africa,rape within marriage is not legally recognized as a crime in Yemen.[160]  Coercedor non-consensual sex can have particularly long-lasting physical and mentalhealth consequences for young girls because they are still at a formative stageof social and psychological development, shaping their identities andperspectives. Mental health implications may include a sense of worthlessness,depression, and suicidal thoughts.[161]Reem slit her wrists in an attempt to commit suicide. Shesaid:They [her husband and in-laws] used to beat me. I took a mousse[razor] and cut my wrists. I bled and became weak, and then fell to thefloor.[162]Marital rape may result in unintended and unwantedpregnancy, sexually-transmitted infections, injuries, and even death. In March2010, Elham Mahdi Al-Assi, aged 12, died of internal bleeding three days aftershe was married. Elham was married to a man twice her age. Medical reportsindicate that Elham died from severe bleeding caused by tears to her genitaland anal area from sexual activity. According to the Associated Press,Elham’s mother said that her daughter complained to her that her husbandtied her up and raped her.[163]According to a United Nations 2010 assessment on violence against women inYemen, hospitals receive many girls who have been subjected to severe injuriesresulting from forced sex, but hospitals rarely report these incidents to localauthorities.[164]Other Physical and Psychological HealthConsequencesEverything in my body aches, everythingfrom head to toe. I have headaches, my stomach hurts,my back, and my knees, and I have infections.—Zahra, 26 and a mother of five; married when she was13 or 14, Sanaa, September 6, 2010[165]Child marriage can have severe consequences for the physicaland psychological health of girls, particularly younger girls, and theseconsequences may impact women throughout their life. Girls and women are oftenconfined to the home and are expected to take on household work and care fortheir families, including their in-laws. Girls may be isolated from friends andfamily, may rarely have anyone to share their concerns with, and may find themselvesregularly surrounded by people who ignore or condone their suffering.[166]Ramzia, 39, and originally fromMa’reb, was married when she was 15 years old. She has eight sons agedbetween two to 22. She told Human Rights Watch:My life has been about raising [children],pregnancies, cooking and cleaning. When night time comes, it’s almostlike I’m dead.[167]Fathiya is 30 years old and the mother of seven children.She told Human Rights Watch:I was 12 years old when I got married. Iwas a child. They oppressed me by marrying me. All that I’m good for isto be a mother and a home maker.... I’m illiterate. They didn’tteach us anything. If they did, at least I would have benefitted fromsomething. I didn’t know anything about marriage, how to be a mother...Iwasn’t thinking about anything. I get upset at myself. I get upset at myfather. I get upset from my husband. I have constant headaches and Idon’t feel like even speaking. I feel like someone is choking me.There’s so much heaviness on my chest. [168]Accessto EducationThe majority of the women we interviewed could not read orwrite. Some had never attended school while others left school after two orthree years of basic education. Almost all of those who had attended schoolwere forced to leave their education to get married. Radhia,who was married at 16, told Human Rights Watch:My family took me out of school, and myhusband said that he doesn’t need me in school.[169]It is rare for girls who marry to return toschool.[170]Afrah was 16 years old and had been married for five months when she spoke toHuman Rights Watch. She said:I completed the first year of intermediateschool, and I left to get married. I wanted to continue school, so I wanted toget engaged for three years. But I was only engaged for eight months and myfather insisted that I get married. I wanted to go to college, to become alawyer, but there’s no chance now because I’m going to have a baby.[171]Most of those women and girls interviewed by Human RightsWatch who attended school enjoyed learning and expressed regrets for missingthe opportunity to complete their education. Research also shows that theremoval of girls from school often denies them the opportunity to develop theirintellect and their own independent identities.[172] Magda, 21, was marriedwhen she was 14. She said:I reached sixth grade, and left school toget married. Now, when I see my daughter, I say to myself who’s going toteach her because I can’t. I understood it now when I got older [thevalue of education].[173]Demographic and fertility studies have shown that the numberof years a girl attends school is directly linked to the postponement ofmarriage, and therefore the postponement of childbearing.[174]Educationenables girls to acquire better skills and enter the labour force. They becomemore financially independent and better able to choose to delay marriage.Additionally, postponing marriage increases the likelihood that women havechildren later when they have a better chance of surviving pregnancy and areable to better care for children. Studies have also shown that girls whocontinue their education are more likely to invest in the education of theirchildren.[175]The organization Save the Children has found that higher levels of educationalso contribute to an increased use of contraception and reduced rate of infantmortality.[176]Maha, who is originally from Taizz, is in her twenties. Allof her siblings, including four sisters and two brothers, went to school. Shegot married when she was 16, but waited to have her first child until shecompleted secondary school. Her husband encouraged her to continue with hereducation after childbirth and she still hopes to finish her studies and becomea pharmacist. She said her education put her in a much better position tounderstand her reproductive health and nutrition for her infant. When we askedabout her access to healthcare information when she was pregnant, she told us,“The nurse told me about breastfeeding and nutrition,and I used to read a lot.”[177]IV. International Legal Obligations onChild MarriageYemen is a party to the key international treaties thatprotect women’s and girls’ human rights. In 1984 Yemen ratified theConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women(CEDAW)[178]and in 1987 the Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage andRegistration of Marriage,[179]the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),[180]and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights(ICESCR).[181]In 1991, Yemen ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).[182]ChildMarriage as Harmful and DiscriminatoryChild marriage is recognized under international law as ahuman rights violation. Since the vast majority of those subjected to childmarriage are girls, it is considered a form of gender-based discrimination, andit violates other human rights principles.The Convention on the Rights of the Child does notexplicitly address child marriage. However, child marriage is viewed asincompatible with a number of the articles in the convention. These include theage at which a person is considered a child, the right to non-discrimination,the protection of best interest of the child, the rights to life, survival, anddevelopment, the right to be protected from all forms of violence and sexualabuse, the rights to health, education, and the right of the child to expresshis or her views.[183]CEDAW states explicitly in article 16 that the marriage or betrothal of childshould have no legal effect.[184]On a regional level, the African Union has included a prohibition on childmarriage in its human rights instruments.[185]The Committee on the Rights of the Child, or CRC committee,the treaty body tasked with monitoring the implementation of the CRC, hascommented frequently on child marriage and has expressed its concern about thepersistence of child marriages around the world, including Yemen. [186]The CRC committee and the CEDAW committee have urged governments, includingYemen, to take immediate steps to eradicate the practice.[187] In July 2008, theCEDAW committee expressed its “extreme” concern about the 1999amendment to article 15 of Yemen’s Personal Status Law, abolishing theminimum age of 15 for marriage, and noted that this represents a “clearsetback for women’s rights … and a serious violation of the Stateparty’s obligations under the Convention.”[188] It continued:…the Committee remains deeply concerned at the‘legality’ of such early marriages of girl children, some as youngas eight years of age, which amounts to violence against them, creates aserious health risk for those girls and also prevents them from completing theireducation.[189]The Right to Full and Free Consent intoMarriageThe Universal Declaration of Human Rights stipulates thatmarriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of theintending parties. The ICCPR and the ICESCR also recognize the right tomarriage based on “full and free consent” of the spouses.[190]Article 16 of CEDAW includes the equal right of men and women to enter intomarriage, and the Convention on the Consent to Marriage further specifies thateach spouse must give his or her consent “in person...as prescribed bylaw.”[191]The UN Human Rights Committee, which monitors theimplementation of the ICCPR, clarified in general comment no. 19 that themarriageable age for both men and women shall be based on the ability of bothspouses to give their full and free consent.[192]Inits General Comment no. 28 it affirms states’ obligation to treat men andwomen equally with regard to marriage.[193]CEDAWGeneral Comment no. 21 on the right to marriage reiterates men andwomen’s equal right to enter into marriage, conditioned on their free andfull consent.[194]The Right to Choose a SpouseArticle 16(b) of CEDAW notes the right of men and women tofreely choose a spouse.[195]TheCEDAW committee’s General Recommendation no. 21 requires states partiesto take “all appropriate measures” to guarantee that men and womencan freely choose a spouse.[196]Similarly,General Comment no. 16 of the Committee on Economic, Social and CulturalRights, which oversees implementation of the ICESCR, sets out states partiesobligations to “ensure that men and women have an equal right to chooseif, whom and when to marry.”[197]TheUN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women also notes theimportance of free choice of spouse.[198]Establishing a ConsistentDefinition of a ChildThe CRC defines a child as anyone below the age of 18 years.[199]The CRC committee has repeatedly addressed the need for countries to establisha definition of a child in all domestic legislation that is consistent with theprovisions of the CRC.[200]Forexample, in 2009, the CRC committee recommended that Pakistan harmonize itslegislation with regards to the definition of a child and raise age of marriagefor girls to 18.[201]TheCRC, most recently in 2005, expressed concerns about the lack of a consistent definitionof a child in Yemen, especially between the age of majority and the age ofmaturity.[202]TheObligation to Set a Minimum Age for MarriageandEnforce RegistrationSeveral international and regional conventions haveaddressed the need for countries to set a minimum age for marriage. The 1962Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registrationsof Marriage obliges states to set a minimum age for marriage in nationallegislation and to ensure that no marriage can be legally entered into bypersons below that age, unless an exception is made by a competent authority inaccordance with national laws.[203]The convention does not specify a minimum age, but in the non-bindingrecommendation accompanying the convention it is recommended that the minimumage be no less than 15.The Convention reaffirms that states should take allappropriate measures to eliminate child marriage and the betrothal of girlsbelow puberty.[204]Many of the other standards also do not specify a minimumage, but there is an evolving consensus in international law that 18 should bethe minimum age for marriage. Notably, both the CRC and CEDAW committees havetaken a clear position on 18 as the minimum age. In 1994 the CEDAW committeeadopted a general recommendation on equality in marriage and family relationsthat explicitly endorses 18 as the minimum age for marriage for both boys andgirls in accordance with the CRC’s definition of a child.[205]The CRC’s 2003 General Comment on adolescent health and development alsourges increasing the minimum age for marriage with or without parental consentto 18 for both boys and girls.[206]These committees have pointed to the importance of delaying marriage to protectyoung girls from the negative health implications of early marriage such asearly pregnancy and childbirth and to ensure that girls complete theireducation.On a regional level the African Charter on the Rights andWelfare of the Child explicitly requires states to take effective action,including legislation, to specify the minimum age of marriage as 18 years.[207]The Maputo Protocol (Protocol to the African Charter on Human andPeoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa) on women's rights alsospecifies that states are to “enact appropriate national legislative measuresto guarantee that the minimum age of marriage for women shall be 18 years.”[208] InEurope, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted arecommendation that the minimum age for marriage be set at 18, in response towhich the Committee of Ministers recognized the clear tendency to fix theminimum age for both men and women at 18 years.[209]The Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age forMarriage and Registration of Marriages states that all marriages should beregistered by a competent authority.[210]The CEDAW and CRC committees have also addressed in general, and the CRCcommittee has addressed to Yemen in particular, the obligation of statesparties to make the registration of all births and marriages compulsory and toput in place measures to enforce implementation.[211]The CEDAW committee has argued that “the persistenceof the practice of early marriage […] may be perpetuated further by thenon-registration of births.”[212]It has also set out states parties’ obligations with regard to the compulsoryregistration of births as follows:The Committee recommends that the State party take measuresto achieve free and timely registration of all births and undertakeawareness-raising measures, throughout the country, particularly in ruralareas, on the importance of registering births and the negative effects ofearly marriage on women’s enjoyment of human rights, especially therights to health and education.[213]The Right of Children to Express TheirViews FreelyThe right of children to express their views is set out inarticle 12 of the CRC which stipulates that they have this right in all mattersaffecting them, according to their age and maturity.[214] The 2009 CRCcommittee’s General Comment no. 12 on the right of the child to be heardaffirms this right in any judicial or administrative proceeding affecting hisor her well-being.[215]This comment also recognizes that violence, including theviolence associated with child marriages, often goes unchallenged becausechildren do not recognize it as a violation of their human rights. The commentnotes the lack of child-friendly reporting mechanisms and the child’sinability to report abuse in confidence and to be protected from retaliation.[216]Inits comment, the committee goes on to set out states parties’ obligationsto establish reporting mechanisms such as telephone help lines and supportmechanisms to assist children to express their views. This includes access tophysicians and to teachers who can offer a safe space for children to expresstheir views or to seek help in any matter related to their well-being.[217]TheRight to Non-DiscriminationThe rights to non-discrimination and equality between menand women are enshrined in numerous human rights treaties, including the ICCPR,the ICESCR, CEDAW, and the CRC. CEDAW addresses the right to non-discriminationin relation to marriage, health, education, employment, and politicalparticipation.Article 1 of CEDAW defines "discrimination againstwomen" as any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis ofsex which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition,enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basisof equality of men and women.[218]CEDAW also calls in article 16 for the elimination of discriminationagainst women in all matters related to marriage and family relations. The CRCin article 2 recognizes the right of children to be free from discrimination,including on the grounds of sex and age.[219]Childmarriages, which in the vast majority of cases occur for girls and which impactgirls and women throughout their lives, are a form of gender-baseddiscrimination.The Right to Health and Access to HealthInformationThe right to health is set out in the ICESCR, CEDAW, theCRC, and other treaties. Article 12 of the ICESCR defines the right to healthas the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physicaland mental health, and requires that it be implemented without discriminationon the basis of sex, age, or other prohibited grounds.[220] Article 24 of the CRCrecognizes children’s rights to health and to access health services, andnotably the right to be protected from traditional practices prejudicial to thehealth of the child.[221]Article 12 of CEDAW places an obligation on states toeliminate discrimination against women in connection with health and theiraccess to health care. CEDAW stresses the need to provide appropriate servicesin connection “with pregnancy, confinement and postnatal period, grantingfree services where necessary, as well as adequate nutrition during pregnancyand lactation.”[222]In 2000, the Committee on Economic, Social and CulturalRights recognized that the right to health includes a right to access tohealth-related information and education.[223]The 2003 General Comment of the CRC committee emphasized the importance ofaccess to information for adolescents. The comment notes theobligations of state parties to promote “health education, as well asinformation campaigns, in particular with respect to ... sexual andreproductive health, traditional practices, domestic violence.”[224] More specifically, the comment urges governments  to take“preventive, promotive and remedial action” to safeguard womenfrom  harmful traditional practices, including child marriage, thatdeprive girls and women their right to adequate reproductive or sexual health.[225]In its general recommendation on women and health, the CEDAWcommittee recommended that governments ensure women’s access to servicesrelated to pregnancy, including neonatal and postnatal care and adequatenutrition during pregnancy and breastfeeding.[226] The CEDAW committeehas listed as negative factors contributing to women’s poor health:early marriage and early pregnancy, inadequate familyplanning services and illiteracy, which is an obstacle to obtaining andeffectively using health-related information.[227]To reduce maternal mortality, the CEDAW committee has alsodeveloped recommendations to ensure and improve especially rural women’saccess to adequate reproductive health, in particular measures “toincrease knowledge of and access to contraceptive methods, bearing in mind thatfamily planning should be the responsibility of both partners.”[228] TheCEDAW committee has noted the link between high rates of maternal mortality andchild marriage in numerous countries.[229]The CRC committee’s general comment on adolescenthealth also voiced concern that early marriage and pregnancy contributed tosexual and reproductive health problems, including HIV/AIDS.[230] In regard to India,the CRC committee was concerned that “a very high percentage of earlymarriages [could] have a negative impact on [adolescent girls’]health.”[231]The committee urged states parties to tackle child marriagethrough raising awareness and changing prevailing gender stereotypes negativefor women, including through legislation.[232]Thecommittee also recommended that states improve women’s access to sexualand reproductive health services, including family planning, adequate andcomprehensive obstetric care and mental health programs for young mothers whomay be prone to anxiety and depression, including about their inability to carefor a child.[233]Italso called on states parties to establish centers for information and adviceon the harmful effects of child marriage and early pregnancy.[234]The Right to EducationThe ICESCR guarantees to everyone the right to education.[235]The right to equal opportunity in education is stipulated in the CRC and CEDAW.[236]Underthese conventions, Yemen has agreed to provide free and compulsory primaryeducation and available and accessible secondary education to every child.[237]In its general recommendation on the aims of education, theCRC committee explains the purpose of education to develop a child’s“personality, talent, mental and physical abilities to fullpotential” and to prepare a child to assume life’sresponsibilities.[238]The committee also notes that an education provides children with life skillsand empowers them by developing their self-esteem and confidence.[239]In 2005, the CRC committee noted the deficient quality ofeducation in Yemen, characterized by low primary and secondary schoolenrollment and high dropout rates. The committee also noted the continued highilliteracy rates for women and negative stereotypes of girls in the schoolcurricula. Further committee observations on education included the highdisparities in education between urban and rural areas, and the very low jobqualifications of children because of inadequate vocational training.[240]The committee recommended that Yemen devote resources to realize free andcompulsory primary education for all, to quality training for teachers, and toimprove vocational training, including for dropouts, bearing in mind resourceallocation to decrease the disparity between girls’ and boys’education, and between urban and rural areas.[241]The CEDAW committee also raised concern about Yemen’shigh level of illiteracy for girls and women, and the high dropout rate forgirls. The committee recommended that:Yemen take measures to: ensure access to all levels ofeducation, including access to proper facilities, for all girls and women;increase formal and non-formal education for girls; provide training and employmentof female teachers; and to raise awareness about the importance of education asa human right and as a basis for the empowerment of women, and to take steps toovercome traditional attitudes that perpetuate discrimination, such as childmarriage.[242]The CEDAW committee has elsewhere noted that child marriageand early pregnancy impede girls’ rights to education, and are a primarycause of school drop-out for girls.[243]The ESCR committee’s general comment no. 13 on the right to educationstipulates that education is also an indispensable channel to realizing otherhuman rights. The committee notes that:as an empowerment right, education is the primary vehicleby which economically and socially marginalized adults and children can liftthemselves out of poverty and obtain the means to participate fully in theircommunities.[244]Education also serves to empower women and isconsidered a country’s best financial investment, the committee held.[245]The CRC committee’s general comment links adolescent mothers’health to the continuation of their education.[246]The CEDAW committee has raised concerns with many statesparties about the imperative to educate girls, described as “a key to theadvancement of women” and to overcome the impediments to girls’education, including “pregnancy and early and forced marriage”leading to girls dropping out.[247]TheCEDAW committee also underlined the need to address early and forced marriagesas factors preventing girls from enrolling in and completing their education.The committee further emphasized the need to improve girls’ andwomen’s literacy, especially in rural areas.[248]TheRight to be Free from Physical, Mental, and Sexual ViolenceAs this report shows, girls who are subjected to childmarriage may experience violence from their spouses, in-laws, and other familymembers. The CEDAW committee in its general recommendation no. 19 considersviolence against women “a form of discrimination that inhibits theirability to enjoy their inalienable rights on par with men,”[249]andnotes that gender-based violence impairs many of women’s fundamentalrights including the right to life, liberty, and security of person, the rightof equality in the family, and the right to the highest attainable standard ofphysical and mental health.[250]The CEDAW committee’s general recommendation no. 19 notesthat traditional attitudes and stereotypes that regard women as subordinate tomen perpetuate violence, such as family violence, forced marriage, dowrydeaths, acid attacks, and female circumcision. It found that such prejudicesand practices may justify gender-based violence as a form of protection orcontrol of women.[251]The CRC requires that states parties protect children fromphysical, mental, and sexual abuse or exploitation through legislation andother social and educational measures. The obligation to protect children fromviolence includes protection from parents or other caregivers.[252] Article 34 of the CRCclearly delineates the obligation of states to protect children from sexualexploitation and abuse.[253]V. RecommendationsTo the Parliament of YemenEnact legislation which:sets the minimum age for marriage at 18 in accordance with thedefinition of a child in the Convention on the Rights of the Child;makes those who perform, register, or assist in child marriagesliable to criminal prosecution, and establishes fines for the failure toregister marriages;establishes the principle of full and free consent of bothpartners to a marriage;recognizes marital rape as a criminal offense;ensures that girls married prior to the enactment of the newlegislation have the option of terminating their marriage and that the husbandremains legally obliged to maintain the wife in accordance with prior legalobligations;ensures that girls and women who are forcibly married shall havethe right to press criminal charges, seek a divorce, and seek alimony;ensures that children born to mothers under 18 shall have thesame rights as children born in a legally recognized marriage; andrepeals or amends articles 15 and 23 in the Personal Status Law,which violate the rights to enter freely into marriage and to full and freeconsent to marriage.To the Ministry of ReligiousEndowmentsRaise awareness with religious leaders about the harmful health andother consequences of child marriage on the lives of girls and women.To the Ministry of HealthIncrease and improve access to reproductive health services andinformation for all girls and women, including access to emergency obstetriccare and family planning.Expand reproductive health care outreach to rural communitieswhere a large percentage of Yemenis live and where girl marry at younger ages,Increase and improve training for birth attendants in rural areasas most girls and women, especially in rural areas, give birth at home.Raise awareness that government policy does not require husbands’authorization for women to seek health care, including obstetric care,regardless of the woman or girl’s age. Ensure that all health careworkers are aware that such authorization is not required.Provide tailored health information to young mothers about propernutrition and care for their health and the health of their babies.Raise awareness among health workers and the public on theimportance of registering births, including home deliveries.Raise awareness on the imperative to register all births in theMinistry of Health.The Ministry of EducationDevelop retention strategies to ensure that girls who enroll inschool are able to remain in school, such as incentives for families to keepgirls in school and to subsidize the costs of uniforms and textbooks.Provide continuing formal education and vocational trainingopportunities for married girls and women. Ensure that girls who have childrenare able to attend school.Increase the number of female teachers in rural areas as astrategy to retain girls in school.Provide or subsidize transportation to and from school for girlsliving in distant rural areas where nearby schools are not accessible, andwhere dropout rates and rates of child marriage are high.To the Ministry of JusticeProvide training for lawyers, public prosecutors, and judges ongender discrimination and violence against women, including child marriages.Raise awareness on the imperative to register all marriages inthe Ministry of Justice.Ensure that judges report cases of child marriages when reviewingmarriage registrations.To the Ministry of InteriorProvide training to law enforcement officials on genderdiscrimination and violence against women, and investigate cases of violenceagainst women and girls.After a law banning child marriages is in effect, conductinvestigations into child marriages and establish mechanisms (such as helplines) for community members to report child marriages.Ensure that the Department of Civil Status within the ministryexchanges information with the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Justiceon the registration of births and marriages, in urban and rural areas.Raise awareness about the obligation to register births andmarriages through the media.To Civil Society OrganizationsDevelop campaigns on preventing child marriage targeted atchildren and parents of primary and secondary schools students. Explain theharms the practice causes and the benefits of delayed marriage andchildbearing.Once a law banning child marriage is passed, establish mechanismsfor reporting cases of child marriage, for example via help lines or throughcollaboration with schools, hospitals, and clinics.Assist married children in seeking legal remedies for abuse,financial compensation after divorce, and in continuing their education.Develop and maintain dialogue with religious leaders on issuespertaining to the rights of girls and women, including on child marriage.To International DonorsSupport programs working to address violence and discrimination againstwomen and girls in the school curriculum.Advocate for programs that seek to address barriers togirls’ education, such as subsidies for school-related costs and theprovision of safe transportation for girls to schools in rural communities.Collaborate with the Ministry of Health on ensuring theavailability of skilled birth attendants in rural communities and providingtransportation to women and girls seeking emergency obstetric care in ruralareas.Fund programs offering services to victims of domestic abuse andespecially services tailored for young abuse victims.Support capacity-building initiatives for personnel at theministries of interior, justice, and health on the registration all births,deaths, marriages, and divorce.Support awareness campaigns on the imperative to register births,deaths, marriages, and divorce in urban and rural areas.Support programs that involve dialogue with religious leadersabout the harms of child marriage.AcknowledgementsThis report was researched and written by Nadya Khalife,Middle East and North Africa researcher in the Women’s Rights Division.The report was reviewed and edited by Liesl Gerntholtz and Janet Walsh,director and deputy director of the Women’s Rights Division, Christoph Wilcke,senior researcher in the Middle East and North Africa Division, Letta Tayler,researcher for Yemen, Zama Coursen-Neff, deputy director of theChildren’s Rights Division, and Rebecca Schleifer, advocacy director ofthe Health and Human Rights Division. Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor, andTom Porteous, program director, provided legal and program reviews.Amr Khairy, Arabic website and translation coordinator,provided assistance with translation into Arabic. Rumbidzai Chidoori, associatefor the Women’s Rights Division, prepared this report for publication.Additional production assistance was provided by Grace Choi, publicationsdirector, Kathy Mills, publications specialist, and Fitzroy Hepkins,administration manager.Human Rights Watch wishes to thank members of the HewarFoundation, the Sisters Arab Forum, and Seyaj Organization for ChildhoodProtection for their assistance in facilitating this research mission. We arealso thankful for the support and assistance of Ms. Shada Nasser and Dr. Arwaal-Rabi’i.We wish to thank the girls and women who shared theirexperiences with us. Without their support in helping us document theirstories, this report would have not been possible.We acknowledge with gratitude the financial support ofArcadia and other donors who have supported the work of the Women’sRights Division of Human Rights Watch.[1]World Bank, "Yemen,” undated,http://data.worldbank.org/country/yemen-republic (accessed April 11, 2011).[2]UNDP, “Human Development Report 2011, Sustainability and Equity:A Better Future for All,” 2011,http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/HDR_2011_EN_Complete.pdf (accessed November 4,2011), p. 137.[3]Constitution of Yemen, September 29,1994,http://www.al-bab.com/yemen/gov/con94.htm(accessed October 25, 2010), art. 2.[4]US Department of State, “2009Report on International Religious Freedom-Yemen,” October 20, 2009,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/topic,464db4f52,4a97c09c2,4ae860f7c,0.html(accessed October 25, 2010).[5]Human Rights Watch/Middle East and North Africa, Human Rights inYemen During and After the 1994 War, vol. 6, no. 1, October 1994, p. 4.[6]Human Rights Watch, Yemen: In the Nameof Unity: The Yemeni Government’s Brutal Response to Southern MovementProtests, December 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/12/15/name-unity-0,p. 12.[7]Constitution of Yemen, May 16, 1991,http://aceproject.org/ero-en/regions/mideast/YE/ICL%20-%20Yemen%20-%20Constitution.pdf/view(accessed October 25, 2010), art. 27.[8]“Note on the amended constitution, 1994,” YemenGateway, http://www.al-bab.com/yemen/gov/con94a.htm (accessed November 11,2010).[9]Constitution of Yemen, September 29,1994, http://www.al-bab.com/yemen/gov/con94.htm (accessed October 25, 2010),arts.31 and 40.[10]Human Rights Watch, Yemen: In the Nameof Unity, p. 25.[11]Ibid., p. 4.[12]Human Rights Watch, Yemen: All Quieton the Northern Front?: Uninvestigated Laws of War Violations in Yemen’sWar with Huthi Rebels, April 2010,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/04/07/all-quiet-northern-front-0, p. 15.[13]Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre,“Yemen: Conflict in various parts of the country continues todisplace,” August 12, 2011,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4e4a1cbf2.html (accessed November 4,2011).[14]“Women Irate at Remarks ofPresident of Yemen,” New York Times, April 16, 2011,http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/17/world/middleeast/17yemen.html?_r=2 (accessedNovember 2, 2011).[15]Personal Status Law (Qanun al Ahwal al Shakhsiyah),The Ministry of Legal Affairs, No.20, 1992, art. 40.[16]Ibid., art. 152.[17]Ibid., art. 12.[18]Ibid., art. 59.[19]Ibid., arts. 51-53.[20]Ibid., arts. 72and 36.[21]Freedom House, “Women’sRights in the Middle East and North Africa, Country Reports, Yemen,”2010,http://freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=384&key=268&parent=24&report=86(accessed October 25, 2010), p. 9.[22]Ibid., p. 18.[23]“Yemen: More Women Voters, but Fewer Women Candidates,”IRINnews, September 19, 2006,http://www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?reportid=61842 (accessed October 25, 2010).See also, UNDP, “ElectoralSupport Project for the Supreme Commission for Elections and Referendum ofYemen in Preparation for the 2006 Presidential, Governorate and Local CouncilElections,” 2006, http://www.undp.org.ye/reports/24773cf49b1155Election_11_Evaluation_Report_Final.doc(accessed April 11, 2011), p. 1.[24]Freedom House, “Women’s Rights in the Middle East andNorth Africa, Country Reports, Yemen,” http://freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=384&key=268&parent=24&report=86,p. 19.See also, Inter-Parliamentary Union,Yemen Majlis Alshoora (Consultative Council),http://www.ipu.org/parline/reports/2354_A.htm (accessed August 17, 2011).[25]UNDP, “Electoral Support Project for the Supreme Commissionfor Elections and Referendum of Yemen in Preparation for the 2006 Presidential,Governorate and Local Council Elections,”http://www.undp.org.ye/reports/24773cf49b1155Election_11_Evaluation_Report_Final.doc, p. 16.[26]World Bank, “Yemen”http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.CACT.FE.ZS (accessed April 11,2011).In 2000, female laborforce participation was 18.1 percent, and in 2005 it increased slightly to 21.3percent. In 2008 the total female labor force participation had remainedstagnant at 21.7 percent. During the same years in 2000, 2005, and 2008, thetotal labor force participation for men was 67.7 percent, 66 percent, and 65.9percent respectively, slightly decreasing per year.United Nations Statistics Division,“Yemen,” undated,http://data.un.org/CountryProfile.aspx?crName=Yemen (accessed November 10,2010).[27]Government of Yemen, Central Statistical Organization,“Yearbook 2009” www.csoyemen.org/publication/yearbook2009/LaborForce.xls (accessed April 11, 2011), p. 116.[28]Government of Yemen, Ministry of Planning and InternationalCooperation, “Millennium Development Goals, Needs Assessment, YemenCountry Report,” September 2005,http://www.yemencg.org/library/en/mdgs_en.pdf (accessed April 11, 2011), p. 47.[29]Government of Yemen, Ministry of Planningand International Cooperation, “Millennium Development Goals AssessmentReport, Yemen Country Report,”2005, http://www.yemencg.org/library/en/mdgs_en.pdf,p. 6.[30]Government of Yemen, Ministry of Public Health and Population,“Family Health Survey, 2003,”http://www.mophp-ye.org/arabic/docs/Familyhealth_english.pdf (accessed April11, 2011), p. 42.[31]International Finance Corporation,“Gender Entrepreneurship Markets Country Brief: Yemen,” 2006,www.siteresources.worldbank.org/.../YemenFINALNovember272006.doc (accessedNovember 11, 2010), p. 1.[32] Ibid., p. 2.[33] United Nations, “Country Assessment on Violence against Women: Case of Yemen,” August 2010, http://www.un.org/womenwatch/ianwge/taskforces/vaw/Country_Assessment_on_Violence_against_Women_August_2_2010.pdf(accessed April 11, 2011), p. 7.[34]Mohamed BA-Obaid, Catrien C-J-H Bijleveld, “Violence AgainstWomen in Yemen: Official Statistics and Exploratory Survey,” InternationalReview of Victimology, 2002, vol. 9, pp. 331-347.[35]Ibid.[36]Ibid. The study was based on a sample study of 120 girls and womenbetween the ages of 15 and 55.[37]Government of Yemen, Ministry of Public Health and Population,“Family Health Survey,”http://www.mophp-ye.org/arabic/docs/Familyhealth_english.pdf, pp. 171-172.[38]Sisters Arab Forum for Human Rights, “Yemeni NGOs 2nd ShadowReport on Implementation of the Convention of Elimination of Discriminationagainst Women (CEDAW),” June 2007,http://www.arabhumanrights.org/publications/countries/yemen/shadowreports/SAFHR-Yemen-cedaw41-08e.pdf(accessed February 15, 2011), p. 26.[39]Ibid., p. 27.[40]Ibid.[41]Ibid.[42]Government of Yemen, Ministry of Public Health and Population,“Family Health Survey,”http://www.mophp-ye.org/arabic/docs/Familyhealth_english.pdf, pp. 165-166.[43]UNESCO, “Education for All GlobalMonitoring Report: Reaching the Marginalized,” 2010, http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001866/186606E.pdf(accessed February 15, 2011), p. 413. The estimates are based on the mostrecent data available for each country between the period between 2001 and 2007.The gap in literacy rates between males and females in these three countries isalso smaller, 12 percentage points in Saudi Arabia, 10 percentage points inOman, and in the UAE, women led men in literacy rate by 2 percentage points.Ibid., p. 308.[44]Ibid., p. 309.[45]UNESCO, International Bureau of Education, “Yemen, EarlyChildhood Care and Education Programmes,” 2006,http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001472/147256e.pdf (accessed November 11,2010), p. 2.[46]UNESCO, “Education For All Global Monitoring Report: Reachingthe Marginalized,” http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001866/186606E.pdf,p. 80.[47]Ibid., p. 341.[48]The net secondary school enrolment rate in 2005 for childrenbetween 12 and 17 was 48 percent for boys, and 26 percent for girls. Ibid.,p.365.[49]Yemen Ministry of Education, UNICEF, Adventist Development andRelief Agency (ADRA), The Learning Conditions for Girls in Yemen: AdvancingGirls’ Education for the Attainment of Equal Opportunities (Sanaa: Ibn alYemen Press, August 2005), pp. 76 and 77.[50]Ibid., pp. 74, 75, 111 and 113.[51]UNICEF Division of Policy and Planning, “AcceleratingGirls’ Education in Yemen: Rethinking Policies in Teacher Recruitment andSchool Distribution,” February 2007,http://www.unicef.org/policyanalysis/files/Accelerating_Girls_Education_in_Yemen(1).pdf(accessed October 5, 2010), pp.5-6. See also, CEDAW Committee,“Consideration of reports submitted by States parties under article 18 ofthe Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination againstWomen,” Yemen, March 13, 2007, CEDAW/C/YEM/6, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/CEDAW-C-YEM-CO-6.pdf,p. 28.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with AhmadAyadil, school principal, Sanaa, August 29, 2010.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Kawkab M., Sanaa, September 2,2010.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with ArwaK., Sanaa, September 2, 2010.[55]UNESCO, “Education for All GlobalMonitory Report 2008, Regional Overview: Arab States,”http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001572/157267e.pdf(accessed May 24, 2011), p. 8. See also, “Yemen: Government Waives GirlsTuition Fees to Boost Female Enrolment,” IRINnews, May 7, 2006http://www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportID=26601 (accessed May 24, 2011).[56]Global Campaign for Education, RESULTS Education Fund, “MakeIt Right, Ending the Crisis in Girls’ Education,” 2011, http://www.ungei.org/infobycountry/files/MakeItRight_Report_07.pdf(accessed November 11, 2011), p. 20.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmad Ayadil, August 29, 2010.[58]International Center for Research on Women (ICRW), “Too Youngto Wed: The Lives, Health, and Rights of Young Married Girls,” 2003, http://www.icrw.org/files/publications/Too-Young-to-Wed-the-Lives-Rights-and-Health-of-Young-Married-Girls.pdf(accessed October 5, 2010), p. 1.[59]Population Council, “Programs to Address Child Marriage:Framing the Problem,” Transition to Adulthood, Brief No. 14, updatedJanuary 2008,http://www.popcouncil.org/pdfs/TABriefs/PGY_Brief14_ChildMarriage.pdf (accessedJanuary 19, 2011), p. 1.[60]UNICEF, “Early Marriage, A HarmfulTraditional Practice, A Statistical Exploration,” 2005, http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/Early_Marriage_12.lo.pdf(accessed November 11, 2011), pp. 3-4.[61]Ibid. pp. 5-6.[62]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage ChildSpouses,” No. 7, March 2001, http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf(accessed October 5, 2010), p. 6. See also, ICRW, “Too Young toWed,” http://www.icrw.org/files/publications/Too-Young-to-Wed-the-Lives-Rights-and-Health-of-Young-Married-Girls.pdf,p. 5.[63]Adel Majid al-Shargaby, “EarlyMarriage in Yemen: A Baseline Study to Combat Early Marriage in Hadhrahmawt andHudaidah Governorates,” Gender Development Research and Studies Centre,Sanaa University, 2005, pp. 4 and 7.[64]ICRW, “Child Marriage Around theWorld,” 2006, http://www.icrw.org/files/images/Child-Marriage-Fact-Sheet-Around-the-World.pdf(accessed January 19, 2011). Other countries included Niger, Chad, Bangladesh,Mali, Guinea, Central African Republic, Nepal, Mozambique, Uganda, BurkinaFaso, India, Ethiopia, Liberia, Cameroon, Eritrea, Malawi, Nicaragua, Nigeria,and Zambia. A 2010 updated list shows that Yemen, Liberia and Nigeria are nolonger listed in the top 20, and that Tanzania has been added to the list.These figures are based on demographic health surveys in which women aged 20 to24 were married before reaching 18. ICRW, Child Marriage Facts and Figures,http://www.icrw.org/child-marriage-facts-and-figures (accessed January 19,2011).[65]UNICEF, “Yemen Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey(MICS),” 2006, http://www.childinfo.org/mics/mics3/archives/yemen/survey0/outputInformation/reports.html(accessed January 19, 2011), p. 4.[66]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage ChildSpouses,” http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf, p. 9.[67]Adel Majid al-Shargaby, “Early Marriage in Yemen,”Gender Development Research and Studies Centre, Sanaa University,  p. 8.[68]Personal Status Law, art. 33 (2).[69]Ibid., art. 34.[70]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage ChildSpouses,” http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf, p. 6.See also, Adel Majid al-Shargaby, “Early Marriage in Yemen,” GenderDevelopment Research and Studies Centre, Sanaa University, p. 8 andUNICEF, “Yemen Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS),”http://www.childinfo.org/mics/mics3/archives/yemen/survey0/outputInformation/reports.html,p. 56.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Sawsan A., Sanaa, September 5,2010.[72]Abul Rahim al Showthabi, “Siyage Organization Vows to End Early Marriage:Nujood’s Case Opens Doors for Change,” Yemen Post, May 5,2008,http://www.yemenpost.net/28/Reports/20083.htm(accessed January 18, 2011).[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Fawzia M., Sanaa, September 5,2010.[74]According to UNICEF’s 2006 Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveyfor Yemen, only 22 percent of all births were registered. The most commonreason cited for non-registration is that mothers are not aware of therequirement to register their babies. There is a strong correlation between theeducational status of women and the registration of births. According to thesurvey, only 15.8 percent of births were registered by mothers with no orlittle education, compared to 41.4 percent of births registered by mothers whocompleted secondary school  and higher. There is also a strong linkbetween birth registration and social and economic status. Only 5 percent ofpoor households registered births while more than 50 percent of more wealthyhouseholds did so.UNICEF, “Yemen Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey(MICS),” http://www.childinfo.org/files/MICS3_Yemen_FinalReport_2006_Eng.pdf,pp. 4, 16 and 54.[75]In the late 1990s, many articles of Yemen’s Personal StatusLaw were amended which significantly set back the status of women, includingarticle 15. These changes were a reflection of socio-political changes thatwere taking place after unification of north and south Yemen, and after“conservative and traditional tribal groups became more powerful.”United Nations, “Country Assessment on Violence against Women:Yemen,” http://www.un.org/womenwatch/ianwge/taskforces/vaw/Country_Assessment_on_Violence_against_Women_August_2_2010.pdf,p. 10. See also, Japan International Cooperation Agency, Public PolicyDepartment, “Yemen: Country Gender Profile,”http://www.jica.go.jp/activities/issues/gender/pdf/e08_yem.pdf (accessedOctober 5, 2010), p. iv.[76]Personal Status Law, art. 15.[77]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Hooria Mashoor, formerdeputy director of the Women’s National Committee, Sanaa, December 23,2010.[78]Nujood was represented by Supreme Court lawyer, Shada Nasser.Nasser has since assisted nine girls to get a divorce, but only three caseshave been favorable.See also, Anna Sussman,“Minoui Reveals Saga of Yemen Divorce at Age 10,” July 18, 2010, Women’sENews, http://www.womensenews.org/story/journalist-the-month/100716/minoui-reveals-saga-yemen-divorce-at-age-10(accessed October 5, 2010).[79]Paula Newton, “Child bride gets divorced after rape,beatings,” July 15, 2008, CNN World,http://articles.cnn.com/2008-07-15/world/yemen.childbride_1_ali-mohammed-ahdal-nujood-ali-yemeni-girls?_s=PM:WORLD(accessed August 17, 2011).[80]“Government Body Calls for End to Child Marriage,” IRINnews,August 3, 2008, http://www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?ReportID=79584 (accessedNovember 11, 2010).[81]One of the duties of the Council of Ministers is to prepare draftlaws and resolutions and submit them to the House of Representatives(parliament). Constitution of Yemen, September 29, 1994, art.135 (c).[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Rashida al-Hamdani, president ofthe Women’s National Committee, Sanaa, August 28, 2010. See also, Nadiaal-Sakkaf, “Parliament Revokes Minimum Age for Marriage Law,” YemenTimes, February 23, 2009,http://www.yementimes.com/DefaultDET.aspx?i=1236&p=report&a=2 (accessedNovember 11 2010).A draft law submitted to parliamentby anyone other than a member of parliament must be first sent to one of twentypermanent committees. One of the roles of the committee is to review draft lawsprior to tabling them for general discussion. If any of the committees does notagree with an article in the draft law, they may make amendments that must bethen reviewed by the constitutional and/or legal committees, which the entireparliament then must approve. A request by five percent of parliamentarians forfurther discussion of specific articles suffices to initiate further committeereview. In order for a draft law to pass, it will need two-thirds majority. Thepresident of the republic enacts draft legislation into law following approvalby parliament. The president can within 30 days request parliament toreconsider the legislation, providing reasons. Parliament can make furtheramendments or give final approval to the law.Yemen Polling Center, Yemen Parliamentary Watch, “Bylaws ofthe House of Representatives,” April 2010, pp. 37-40.[83]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Abdulrasheed al-Faqih,executive director of the Hewar Foundation, November 26, 2010.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Rashida al-Hamdani, August 28,2010. See also, Nadia al-Sakkaf, “Parliament Revokes Minimum Age for MarriageLaw,” Yemen Times,http://www.yementimes.com/DefaultDET.aspx?i=1236&p=report&a=2.[85]The parliamentarians relied on articles 124 and 125 in theparliament’s bylaws that allow for further deliberation of specificarticles if requested by a representative of the government or five percent ofparliamentarians.The Sharia Legislative Committee istasked with reviewing all draft laws concerned with Islamic Sharia law.Yemen Polling Center, Yemen ParliamentaryWatch, “Bylaws of the House of Representatives,” p. 16.[86]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Hooria Mashoor, July 29,2010.[87]Government of Yemen, “Full report of the Sharia legislativecommittee on article 15 of the law number 15 of 1992 on personal statuslaw,” April 4, 2010. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[88]“Press Release of Religious Scholars on Setting an Age forMarriage,” News Yemen, March 21, 2010, http://www.newsyemen.net/view_news.asp?sub_no=1_2010_03_21_42440(accessed November 11, 2010)[89]Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,“Between Government and Opposition: The case of the YemenCongregation for Reform,” November 2009, http://www.carnegie-mec.org/publications/special/multimedia/index.cfm?fa=24095-yemen&lang=en(accessed November 11, 2010), pp. 3-7.[90]Ibid., pp. 17-18.[91]Ibid. See also, “Yemen’s Child Bride Backlash,”Foreign Policy, April 30, 2010,http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2010/04/30/yemens_child_bride_backlash?page=0,0(accessed October 25, 2011).[92]“Further Delays in Minimum Age of Marriage Law,” YemenTimes, October 31, 2010, http://www.yementimes.com/defaultdet.aspx?SUB_ID=35026(accessed November 11, 2010).[93]Ibid.[94]“Egypt’s Parliament Bans Female Circumcision, Marriageunder 18,”Monsters and Critics, June 8, 2008,http://www.monstersandcritics.com/news/middleeast/news/article_1409924.php/Egypt_s_parliament_bans_female_circumcision_marriage_under_18(accessed January 18, 2011).[95]Please see footnote 74.[96]Government of Yemen, Central Statistical Organization,“Yearbook 2003,” http://www.cso-yemen.org/books/stat_book_2003.pdf(accessed April 11, 2011), p. 56.[97]Presidential Decree No. 23, 1991, amended law no. 23, 2003 on CivilStatus and Civil Registrations (Al Ahwal al Madaniya wa al Sajil al Madani),http://www.yemen-nic.info/contents/laws_ye/detail.php?ID=11296 (accessedOctober 5, 2010), arts. 20 and 31.[98]Personal Status Law, art. 14.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Shada Nasser, Supreme Courtlawyer, Sanaa, August 29, 2010.[100]Law on the Rights of the Child (Qanun Hoquq al Tufl al Yamani), no.45, 2002, http://docs.amanjordan.org/laws/yemen/3378.html(accessed November 4, 2011), art. 2.[101]Personal Status Law, art. 127.[102]Civil Law, art. 50.[103]Please see section IV of this report for a full discussion ofconsent.[104]Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discriminationagainst Women (CEDAW), adopted December 18, 1979, G.A. res. 34/180, 34 U.N.GAOR Supp. (No. 46) at 193, U.N. Doc.A/34/46, entered into force September 3,1981, art. 16.Universal Declaration on HumanRights (UDHR), adopted December 10, 1948, G.A. Res. 217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810at 71 (1948), ratified by Yemen in 1994, art. 16.International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171,entered into force March 23, 1976, art. 23.Convention on Consent to Marriage,Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of Marriages, adopted  November7, 1962, G.A. res. 1763 (XVII), entered into force  December 9, 1964.[105]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage ChildSpouses,” http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf, p. 4.[106]Article 12 of the CRC notes that States parties shall assure achild who is capable of forming his or her views the right to freely expressthose views in accordance with the age and maturity of the child. CRC, art. 12.See also,Committeeon the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 12, The Right of the Child toBe Heard,U.N. Doc.CRC/C/GC/12(2009).[107]Personal Status Law, art. 23.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with Su’ad B., Sanaa, September2, 2010.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Bushra L., Sanaa, September 5,2010.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Salma D., Sanaa, September 2,2010.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Arwa K., September 2, 2010.[112]Robert F. Worth, “Tiny Voices Defy Child Marriage inYemen,” New York Times, June 28, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/29/world/africa/29iht-29marriage.14067507.html(accessed January 19, 2011).[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Sultana H., Sanaa, September 2,2010.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with Amal J., Sanaa, September 2,2010.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Kawkab M., September 2, 2010.[116]WHO, UNFPA, “Married Adolescents: No Place of Safety,”2007, http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2006/9241593776_eng.pdf (accessedFebruary 11, 2011), p.22.[117]Save the Children, “State of the World’s Mothers:Children Having Children, 2004” May 2004,http://www.ungei.org/resources/files/SaveTheChildren_SOWM_2004_final.pdf, p. 4.[118]Ibid.[119]WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, and the World Bank, “Trends in MaternalMortality: 1990 to 2008,” World Health Organization, 2010,http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2010/9789241500265_eng.pdf (accessedOctober 25, 2011), p. 26.[120]Yemen-German Reproductive Health Program, “SituationalAnalysis on Emergency Obstetric Care in Public Hospitals,” February 2006,http://www.yg-rhp.org/oc/EmOC%20Situation%20Yemen%202006%20YG-RHP.pdf, p. 10.[121]Republic of Yemen, Ministry of Health and Population, “FamilyHealth Survey,”http://www.mophp-ye.org/arabic/docs/Familyhealth_english.pdf,p. 147.[122]Yemen-German Reproductive Health Program,“Situational Analysis on Emergency Obstetric Care in PublicHospitals,”http://www.yg-rhp.org/oc/EmOC%20Situation%20Yemen%202006%20YG-RHP.pdf, p. 10.[123]Abdul Wahed Al Serouri et al., “Reducing Maternal Mortalityin Yemen: Challenges and Lessons Learned from Baseline Assessment,”International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, February 12, 2009, vol.105,Issue. 1, pp. 86-91.[124]WHO, Department of Making PregnancySafer, “Yemen Country Assessment,” [undated]http://www.who.int/making_pregnancy_safer/countries/yem.pdf (accessed December6, 2010), p. 3.See also, Abdul Wahed Al Serouri etal., “Reducing Maternal Mortality in Yemen,” International Journalof Obstetrics and Gynecology, pp. 86-91, and World Bank, “Yemen:Inequalities in Health, Nutrition and Population,” 2003,http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPRH/Resources/YemenPROF.pdf (accessedOctober 15, 2010), p. 14.[125]69.3 percent of girls between 15 and 19 give birth at home. Republic of Yemen, Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation,“Yemen, Statistical Portrait, 2007,” http://www.oxfam.org.uk/resources/poicy/gender/downloads/women_men_yemen_book.pdf(accessed February 11, 2011), p. 95.[126]There are only 2,375 trained, professional midwives in Yemen. Thatis a ratio of 0.6 midwives for every 52,000 persons. In Sanaa, the ratio ofdoctors is 5.2 for every 10,000 persons, while in rural areas such as Amran,the ratio is 0.5 to 10,000. Maternal deaths in Yemen can be explained by thethree delay model, which includes delay in seeking emergency obstetric care dueto a lack of danger signs, delay in reaching health facilities due to poverty,lack of ambulances or other transportation, and geographical obstacles, anddelay when arriving to health facilities that do not have enough personnel, oradequate supplies to treat emergency obstetric cases. Furthermore, Yemen isdivided into four physical regions; the coastal plain of Tihama, the mountainfoothills, the central highlands and the eastern semi-desert plateau. Many ofextremely rugged areas are without roads, and houses are linked with steepmountainous paths. The network of paved road mainly connects the cities, theother are still rudimentary. These natural barriers of topography have limitedaccess to health services. Yemen-German Reproductive Health Program, “SituationalAnalysis on Emergency Obstetric Care in Public Hospitals,”http://www.yg-rhp.org/oc/EmOC%20Situation%20Yemen%202006%20YG-RHP.pdf, pp. 8, 6and 11.[127]Ibid., p. 19.[128]S.Shawky and W. Millat, “Early Teenage Marriage and PregnancyOutcome,” Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, 2000, vol. 6,issue 1, http://www.emro.who.int/publications/emhj/0601/06.htm (accessedJanuary, 2011), pp. 46-54.[129]Ibid.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with Amal J., September 2, 2010. Theinterviewee noted that they [doctors] had to take the fetus out on twooccasions, which is why we have used the term “abort.”[131]Human Rights Watch interview with SultanaH., September 2, 2010.[132] Save the Children, “State of the World’sMothers,” http://www.ungei.org/resources/files/SaveTheChildren_SOWM_2004_final.pdf, p.14.[133] Anemia is a co-factor leading to maternal or child death.Yemen-German Reproductive Health Program, “Situational Analysis onEmergency Obstetric Care in Public Hospitals,” http://www.yg-rhp.org/oc/EmOC%20Situation%20Yemen%202006%20YG-RHP.pdf, p. 23.[134]Anita Raj et al. “The Effect of Maternal Child Marriage onMorbidity and Mortality of Children Under 5 in India: Cross Sectional Study ofa Nationally Representative Sample,” BMJ, 2010, p.6.[135]Yemen-German Reproductive Health Program, “SituationalAnalysis on Emergency Obstetric Care in Public Hospitals,”http://www.yg-rhp.org/oc/EmOC%20Situation%20Yemen%202006%20YG-RHP.pdf, p. 26.[136]Anita Raj et al. “The Effect of Maternal Child Marriage onMorbidity and Mortality of Children Under 5 in India,” BMJ, p. 6.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Najla R., Sanaa, September 5,2010.[138]A Ministry of Health survey found that29.6 percent of women in urban areas, and 53.7 percent of women in rural areasnoted that getting permission to access treatment was an obstacle. Otherobstacles to receiving treatment include not knowing where to go to accesshealthcare, not having enough money, distance, lack of  transportation,and unavailability of female provider. These obstacles were particularly highfor women living in rural areas. Republic of Yemen, Ministry of Health andPopulation, “Family Health Survey,”  http://www.mophp-ye.org/arabic/docs/Familyhealth_english.pdf,p. 114.[139]According to Dr. Arwa Al-Rabi’i, the authorization forms areprinted forms in the name of the hospital or medical center that state that thehospital will not be responsible for any incident that may occur due to theprocedure that will be performed. It will explain the procedure and reason foradmission and require the woman’s guardian’s signature. HumanRights Watch telephone conversation with Dr. Arwa Al-Rabi’i,gynecologist, January 27, 2011.[140]Population Action International, “How Family PlanningProtects the Health of Women and Children,” May 1, 2006,http://www.populationaction.org/Publications/Fact_Sheets/FS2/How_Family_Planning_Protects_the_Health_of_Women_and_Children.pdf(accessed November 11, 2010), pp. 1-2.[141]Ibid.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Sultana H., September 2, 2010.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Husnia F., Sanaa, September 5,2010.[144]Jocelyn Dejong, Golda El-Khoury, “Reproductive Health of ArabYoung People,” BMJ, October 21, 2006, vol.333,http://www.bmj.com/highwire/filestream/389549/field_highwire_article_pdf/0.pdf(accessed November 11, 2011), pp. 849-851.[145]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima S., Sanaa, September 2,2010.[146]The rate of contraceptive use for women aged 15-49 in Yemen and theUnited Arab Emirates is 28 percent, equal to the rate in the United ArabEmirates. Saudi Arabia has the lowest contraceptive use for women in the region(24 percent) and Iran has the highest prevalence of contraceptive use (73 percent).UNFPA, “State of World Population 2011, People and Possibilities in aWorld of 7 Billion,” 2011,http://foweb.unfpa.org/SWP2011/reports/EN-SWOP2011-FINAL.pdf (accessed October27, 2011), p. 114.[147]Population Reference Bureau, “Women’s Reproductive Healthin the Middle East and North Africa,” MENA Policy Brief, February2003, http://www.prb.org/pdf/WomensReproHealth_Eng.pdf (accessed November 11,2010), p.6.[148]According to the Yemen Family Health Survey, the percentage ofmarried girls and women between 15 and 19 who discussed family planning withtheir husbands was only 39.3 percent. Married girls whose needs were unmet withregard to birth spacing was 46.1 percent. Republic of Yemen, Ministry of Healthand Population, “Family Health Survey,” http://www.mophp-ye.org/arabic/docs/Familyhealth_english.pdf,pp. 166-167.[149]WHO, “Multi-country Study on Women’s Health andDomestic Violence against Women: Initial Results on Prevalence, Health Outcomesand Women’s Responses: Summary Report,” 2005, p. 8.The multi-country study found thatgirls in this age bracket were more vulnerable to physical and sexual abuse bya partner, non-partner, or both, than older women.[150]ICRW, “Too Young to Wed,” http://www.icrw.org/files/publications/Too-Young-to-Wed-the-Lives-Rights-and-Health-of-Young-Married-Girls.pdf,p. 11. See also, Robert Jensen and Rebecca Thornton, “Early FemaleMarriage in the Developing World,” Gender and Development, July2003, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 9-19.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with RhadiaN., Sanaa, September 2, 2010.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with Huda A., Sanaa, September 2,2010.[153]Human rights Watch interview with Su’ad B., September 2,2010.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with Afrah Q., Sanaa, September 4,2010.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima S., September 2, 2010.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Thuraya H., Sanaa, September 5,2010.[157]WHO, “Multi-country Study on Women’s Health andDomestic Violence against Women: Initial Results on Prevalence, Health Outcomesand Women’s Responses” (Chapters 3 and 4), 2005 http://www.who.int/gender/violence/who_multicountry_study/Chapter3-Chapter4.pdf,pp. 32-33.[158]Robert Jensen and Rebecca Thornton, “Early Female Marriage inthe Developing World,” Gender and Development, pp. 9-19.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Reem al-Numeri, Sanaa, September2, 2010.[160]Sherifa Zuhur, “Gender, Sexuality and the Criminal Laws inthe Middle East and North Africa: A Comparative Study,” February 2005,http://www.wwhr.org/files/GenderSexualityandCriminalLaws.pdf (accessed May 24,2011), pp. 44-45.[161]Population Council, “Understanding Sex Without consent AmongYoung People: A Neglected Priority,” Brief no. 7, July 2007,http://www.popcouncil.org/pdfs/TABriefs/PGY_Brief07_NonconsensualSex.pdf(accessed November 11, 2010), p. 3.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with Reem al-Numeri, September 2,2010.[163]Arthur Weinreb, “Child Bride in Yemen Dies of InternalBleeding Days After Wedding,” Middle Eastern Affairs, April 10,2010, http://news.suite101.com/article.cfm/child-bride-in-yemen-dies-of-internal-bleeding-days-after-wedding-a223789#ixzz0kiwNY00v(accessed November 11, 2010).[164]United Nations, “Country Assessmenton Violence against women: Yemen,”http://www.un.org/womenwatch/ianwge/taskforces/vaw/Country_Assessment_on_Violence_against_Women_August_2_2010.pdf,p. 11.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Zahra R., Sanaa, September 6,2010.[166]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage ChildSpouses,” http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf, pp. 4and 9. See also, Nawal M. Nour, “Child Marriage: A Silent Health andHuman Rights Issue,” Reviews in Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 2009, vol. 2,no. 1, pp. 51-56.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with RamziyaB., Sanaa, September 6, 2010.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with Fathiya L., Sanaa, September 5,2010.[169]Human Rights Watch interview with Radhia N., September 2, 2010.[170]UNICEF Division of Policy and Planning, “Child Marriage andthe Law,” January 2008,http://www.unicef.org/siteguide/files/Child_Marriage_and_the_Law.pdf (accessedOctober 5, 2010), p. 20.See also, Yemen Ministry ofEducation, UNICEF, Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA), The LearningConditions for Girls in Yemen (Sanaa: Ibn al Yemen Press, August 2005), pp.49-51.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Afrah Q., September 4, 2010.[172]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “EarlyMarriage Child Spouses,” http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf,p. 12.[173]Human Rights Watch interview with Magda T., Sanaa, September 5,2010.[174]UNICEF Innocenti Digest, “Early Marriage ChildSpouses,” http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/digest7e.pdf, p. 16.[175]Ibid.[176]Save the Children, “Women on the Front Lines of Healthcare:State of the World’s Mothers, 2010,”http://www.savethechildren.org/atf/cf/%7B9def2ebe-10ae-432c-9bd0-df91d2eba74a%7D/SOWM-2010-Women-on-the-Front-Lines-of-Health-Care.pdf(accessed April 11, 2011), p. 32.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with MahaR., Sanaa, September 2, 2010.Maha was the only interviewee who had completedher secondary education. She plans to go to college to become a pharmacist.[178]Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discriminationagainst Women (CEDAW), adopted December 18, 1979, G.A. res. 34/180, 34 U.N.GAOR Supp. (No. 46) at 193, U.N. Doc.A/34/46, entered into force September 3,1981. The Convention was adopted by Yemen in 1984 with reservations to article29, para. 1., on the interpretation of the Convention.[179]Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage andRegistration of Marriages, adopted  November 7, 1962, G.A. res. 1763(XVII), entered into force  December 9, 1964. The Convention on Consent toMarriage was ratified by Yemen in 1987 with no reservations.[180]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16)at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23,1976. Yemen ratified the ICCPR in 1987 with no reservations.[181]International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights(ICESCR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200 A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 16) at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1996), 993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into forceJanuary 3 1976. Yemen ratified the ICESCR in 1987 with no reservations.[182]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20,1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc.A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990. Yemen ratified the CRCwith no reservations.[183]CRC, arts.1, 2, 3, 6, 12, 19, 24, 28 and 29.[184]CEDAW, art. 16 (2).[185]African Charter on the Rights and Welfareof the Child (ACRWC) OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), entered into forceNovember, 29, 1999,art. 21(2) - Childmarriage and the betrothal of girls and boys shall be prohibited ....; andProtocol to the African Charter onHuman and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (the MaputoProtocol), adopted by the 2nd Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Union,Maputo, September 13, 2000, CAB/LEG/66.6, entered into force November 25, 2005,art.6 (calling for laws to establish 18 as theminimum age of marriage).[186]Committee on the Rights of the Child,“Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 44 ofthe Convention, Concluding Observations, Yemen,” CRC/C/15/Add.267,September 25, 2005, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/pdfid/45377ea90.pdf(accessedNovember 16, 2010), para. 59.[187]Ibid.See also, CEDAW Committee,“Concluding Observation of the Committee on the Elimination of All Formsof Discrimination against Women, Yemen,” July 2, 2008, CEDAW/C/YEM/CO/6,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/CEDAW-C-YEM-CO-6.pdf(accessed October 5, 2010), art. 379.[188]Ibid.[189]Ibid.[190]Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR), adopted December 10,1948, G.A. Res. 217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948), ratified by Yemen in1994, art. 16, ICCPR, art. 3, and ICESCR, art. 10.[191]CEDAW, art.16, and Convention on Consentto Marriage, art. 2.[192]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 19 (The Family), Protectionof the Family, the Right to Marriage and Equality of the Spouses, (Article 23),(Thirty-night session, 1990), Compilation of General Comments and Generalrecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty bodies, UN Doc.HRI/Gen/1/Rev.7(2004), p. 149, para. 4.[193]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 28, Equality ofRights Between Men and Women (Article 3), (Sixty-eight session, 2000),Compilation of General Comments and Recommendations Adopted by Human RightsTreaty Bodies, UN Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.7 (2004), p. 178, para. 27.[194]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 21, Equality inMarriage and Family Relations, (Thirteenth Session, 1994), Compilation ofGeneral comments and General Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights TreatyBodies, UN Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1(2004),paras. 16, 1 (a)and (b).[195]CEDAW, art. 16 (b).[196]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 21, Equality inMarriage and Family Relations, (Thirteenth session, 1994), paras.16, 1 (a) and(b).[197]UN Committee on Economic, Social and CulturalRights, General Comment No. 16, The equal right of men and women to theenjoyment of all economic, social and cultural rights (Article 3),(thirty-fourth session, 2005), para. 27.[198]United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of Violence againstWomen (DEVAW), December 20, 1993, G.A. res. 48/104, 48 U.N. GAIR Supp. (No. 49)at 217, U.N. Doc.A/48/49 (1993), art.2(a).[199]CRC, art. 1.[200]See for example CRC, “Consideration of Reports Submitted byStates Parties under Article 44 of the Convention, Concluding Observations,Angola,” October 11, 2010,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/crcs55.htm, paras.26 and 27.[201]CRC, “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Partiesunder Article 44 of the Convention: Concluding Observations, Pakistan,”CRC/C/PAK/CO/4, October 15, 2009,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/co/CRC-C-PAK-CO4.doc (accessedNovember 16, 2010), paras.26 and 27.[202]CRC, “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Partiesunder Article 44 of the Convention, Concluding Observations, Yemen,”CRC/C/15/Add.267, September 21. 2005,http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CRC.C.15.Add.267.En?Opendocument(accessed April 27, 2011), para. 30[203]Convention on Consent to Marriage, art.2.[204]Ibid., preamble.[205]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 21, Equality inMarriage and Family Relations, (Thirteenth Session, 1994), para. 36.[206]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 4,Adolescent Health and Development in the Context of the Convention on theRights of the Child, (Thirty-third session, 2003), para. 20.[207]ACRWC, art.21 (2).[208]Maputo Protocol, art.6 (a).[209]Parliamentary Assembly of the Council ofEurope, “Forced Marriages and Child Marriages,” Resolution 1468(2005), http://assembly.coe.int/main.asp?Link=/documents/adoptedtext/ta05/eres1468.htm(accessed November 11, 2010), and Council of Europe, Committee of Ministers,“Forced Marriages and Child Marriages,” Parliamentary AssemblyRecommendation 1723 (2005), https://wcd.coe.int/wcd/ViewDoc.jsp?Ref=CM/AS(2006)Rec1723&Language=lanEnglish&Ver=final(accessed July 20, 2011), para. 6.[210]Convention on Consent to Marriage, art. 3.[211]For the specific recommendation to Yemen, see: CRC“Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 44 ofthe Convention, Concluding Observations, Yemen,” May 10, 1999, para. 20.For other countries, see forexample: CEDAW Committee, “Concluding Observations of the Committee toEnd All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Papua New Guinea,” July30, 2010,  http://www.universalhumanrightsindex.org/documents/826/1865/document/en/pdf/text.pdf,paras. 49 and 50.[212]CEDAW Committee, “Concluding Observations of the Committee onthe Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Ethiopia,”CEDAW/C/ETH/4-5, January2004,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/EthiopiaCO30.pdf, para.253.[213]Ibid., para. 254.[214]CRC, art. 12.[215]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 12, TheRight of the Child to Be Heard,U.N.Doc.CRC/C/GC/12(2009), para. 2.[216]Ibid., para. 120.[217]Ibid.[218]CEDAW, art. 1.[219]CRC, art. 2.[220]ICESCR, art. 12.[221]CRC, art. 24.[222]CEDAW, art. 12.[223]Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, “Generalcomment 14: The right to the highest attainable standard of health,”E/C12?2000/4, August 11, 2000, para 12 (b).[224]Ibid., para. 36.[225]Ibid., para. 21.[226]Ibid., para. 2.[227]CEDAW Committee, “Concluding Observations of the Committee toEnd All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Nepal,” January 13, 2004,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/NepalCO30.pdf, para. 212.[228]Ibid., para. 213.[229]See for example CEDAW Committee, “Concluding Observations ofthe Committee to End All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Nigeria,”July 8, 2008,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/CEDAW-C-NGA-CO-6.pdfpara.336. “The Committee is especially concernedat the very high maternal mortality rate, the second highest in theworld....The Committee notes the various contributing factors such as...earlyand child marriages, early pregnancies, high fertility rates and inadequatefamily planning services, the low rates of contraceptive usage, leading tounwanted and unplanned pregnancies, and the lack of sex education, especiallyin rural areas. The Committee expresses concern about the lack of access bywomen and girls to adequate health-care services, including prenatal andpostnatal care, obstetric services and family planning information,particularly in rural areas.”[230]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 4,Adolescent Health and Development in the Context of the Convention on theRights of the Child, (Thirty-third session), para. 20.[231]CRC, “Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rightsof the Child, India,” February 23, 2000, CRC/C/15/Add.115, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/publisher,CRC,,IND,3ae6afc44,0.html(accessed December 9, 2010), para. 50.[232]Ibid., art. 24.[233]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 4,Adolescent Health and Development in the Context of the Convention on theRights of the Child, (Thirty-third session), para. 28.[234]Ibid., para. 11.[235]ICESCR, art. 13.[236]CRC, art. 29, CEDAW, art. 10.[237]CRC, art.28 (a) and (b).[238]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 1, TheAims of Education (Article 29(1)), (Twenty-sixth session, 2001), Compilation ofGeneral Comments and General recommendations Adopted by Human Rights TreatyBodies, UN Doc. HRI/gen/1/rev.7, p.294, para. 1 (a).[239]Ibid., para. 2.[240]CRC, “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Partiesunder Article 44 of the Convention, Concluding Observations,Yemen,” September 21, 2005,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/pdfid/45377ea90.pdf, para. 63.[241]Ibid., para. 64.[242]CEDAW Committee, “Concluding Observations of the Committee toEnd All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Yemen,” July 9 ,2008,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/CEDAW-C-YEM-CO-6.pdf,art. 374.[243]See for example, CEDAW Committee,“ConcludingObservations of the Committee to End All Forms of Discrimination against Women,Uganda,” October 22, 2010,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/CEDAW-C-UGA-CO-7.pdf,para. 31.[244]CESCR, General Comment No. 13, The Right to Education (Article13),(Twenty-first session, 1999), Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.7,p. 71, para. 1.[245]Ibid.[246]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 4,Adolescent Health and Development in the context of the Convention on theRights of the Child, (Thirty-third session, 2003), para. 31.[247]CEDAW Committee, “Concluding Observations of the Committee toEnd All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Sierra Leone,” June 11,2007,http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/cedaw25years/content/english/CONCLUDING_COMMENTS/Sierra_Leone/Sierra_Leone.pdf,para. 30.[248]CEDAW Committee,“ConcludingObservations of the Committee to End All Forms of Discrimination against Women,Niger,” June 11, 2007,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/publisher,CEDAW,CONCOBSERVATIONS,NER,468b5dfa2,0.html, para. 30.[249]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 19, Violence againstWomen, (Eleventh session, 1992), Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev.7(2004), p. 246, para. 1.[250]Ibid., para. 7.[251]Ibid., para. 11.[252]CRC, art. 19.[253]Ibid., art. 34.Related ContentDecember 8, 2011News ReleaseYemen: Child Marriage Spurs Abuse of Girls and WomenYemen’s Next Government Should Set Minimum Age at 18December 8, 2011News ReleaseYemen: Child Marriage Spurs Abuse of Girls and WomenRegion / CountryMiddle East/North Africa YemenProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch