Marry Before Your House is Swept Away: Child Marriage in Bangladesh | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsbangladesh0615_web.pdfDonate NowDownloadsbangladesh0615_web.pdfJune 9, 2015Marry Before Your House is Swept AwayChild Marriage in BangladeshBelkis, 15 years old, holds her one-year-old son in the house where she lives with her mother, two sisters, and one brother. Belkis was married when she was 13 years old to a man who threatened to commit suicide if the family didn’t agree to the marriage. After 14 months, her husband sent her home; he no longer financially supports her or the baby. Belkis fears her family’s home will be washed away by river erosion by the end of the year. March 30, 2015.© 2015 Omi for Human Rights WatchMarry Before Your House is Swept AwayChild Marriage in BangladeshSummaryKeyRecommendationsTo theGovernment of BangladeshToInternational Donors and the United NationsMethodologyI. How GirlsBecome Brides:  Contributing Factors to Child MarriagePovertyNaturalDisasters: River Erosion, Cyclones, and FloodingLack ofAccess to EducationSocialPressureHarassment,Intimidation, and CoercionDowryII. HarmfulConsequences of Child MarriageTerminationof EducationEarlyPregnancy, Lack of Access to Family Planning, and Health ProblemsDomesticAbuse and Violence Including RapeAbandonmentIII.Bangladesh Government Responses to Child MarriageEfforts toPromote Access to EducationSocialProtection and Disaster ReliefBirthRegistrationLocalGovernment’s Role in Preventing Child MarriageReform ofthe Child Marriage Restraint Act (CMRA)Access toTemporary Protective SheltersDomesticViolence (Prevention and Protection) ActDifficultyObtaining a Fair DivorceIV.Bangladesh’s International Legal ObligationsRight toEquality and Non-DiscriminationRight toMarriage, Choose a Spouse, and Minimum Age of MarriageRight toEducationRight to beFree from Physical, Mental, and Sexual ViolenceRight toHealthRight ofChildren to Express Their Views FreelyThe Impactof Natural Disasters on Bangladesh’s Legal ObligationsRecommendationsTo the PrimeMinister of BangladeshTo Membersof Parliament, the Cabinet Division, and the Ministry of Law, Justice, andParliamentary AffairsTo theMinistry of Women and Children AffairsTo theMinistry of Primary and Mass Education and the Ministry of EducationTo theMinistry of Health and Family WelfareTo theMinistry of Home AffairsTo the LocalGovernment Division of the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Developmentand CooperativesTo theMinistry of Religious AffairsTo the Ministryof Social WelfareTo UnionParishadsToInternational Donors and the United NationsAcknowledgementsAnnex 1Letter toBangladesh Government Presenting Human Rights Watch Research Findings on ChildMarriage in BangladeshSummary“This is a place affected by rivererosion,” Azima B.’s parents told her, explaining why she had tomarry at age 13. “If the river takes our house it will be hard for youto get married so it’s better if you get married now.”Azima said that people in the communityhad been “shaming her” for still being unmarried because she istall and looks old for her age. “I protested a lot to my parents butthey said, ‘It is a shame for us to keep you in the house.’ Iwanted to continue my education, but my mother said, ‘Your father hasfixed your marriage and if you don’t listen to your father, people willsay what kind of girl is that who doesn’t listen to her father?’”Azima said, “I am the oldest andonly after I get married can [my sisters] think about getting married. If theriver takes the house it will be hard for them to get married.”Azima’s sisters are ages 12, 10, and 8 years old; her parents are nowconsidering a marriage for the 12-year-old.Azima married a 17-year-old boy threedays after his parents decided she was an acceptable bride.“They’ve already asked me tohave children,” Azima, now age 14, said of her in-laws. “I livein their house—I have to keep them happy. My husband has also asked meto have children. I said I wanted to wait for two years, but they said, ‘No,you should have children now.’ So I guess I will have to have childrennow.”Bangladesh has the fourth-highest rate ofchild marriage in the world after Niger, the Central African Republic, andChad, according to the United Nations children’s agency, UNICEF. In theperiod 2005 to 2013, according to UNICEF, 29 percent of girls in Bangladeshmarried before the age of 15 and 65 percent married before the age of 18. Childmarriage around the world is associated with many harmful consequences,including health dangers associated with early pregnancy, lower educationalachievement for girls who marry earlier, a higher incidence of spousal violence,and an increased likelihood of poverty.Research shows that globally girls aged10-14 are five times more likely to die during delivery than mothers aged20-24; girls aged 15-19 are still twice as likely to die during delivery thanwomen aged 20-24. The link between lack of or poor education and child marriageis borne out by research finding that in Bangladesh women with primary,secondary, and higher education, compared to women with no formal education,were respectively 24 percent, 72 percent, and 94 percent less likely to marry ata young age. A study across 7 countries found that girls who married before theage of 15 were more likely to experience spousal abuse than women who marriedafter the age of 25. Global data shows that girls from the poorest 20 percentof families are twice as likely to marry before 18 as girls whose families areamong the richest 20 percent.In other respects, Bangladesh has beencited as a development success story, including in the area of women’srights. The UN cited Bangladesh’s “impressive” povertyreduction from 56.7 percent in 1991-1992 to 31.5 percent in 2010. Bangladeshhas achieved gender parity in primary and secondary school enrollment,according to the UN. Maternal mortality declined by 40 percent between 2001 and2010.Bangladesh’s success in achievingsome development goals begs the question why the country’s rate of childmarriage remains so high. This report aims to help answer that question andsuggest ways in which Bangladesh’s government can apply effectivestrategies to achieve comparable success in reducing child marriage.In Bangladesh there are several factorsdriving the high rate of child marriage. Gender discrimination feeds socialattitudes and customs that harm girls at every stage of their lives and fuelthe country’s extremely high rate of child marriage. Desperate povertyremains a daily reality for many families in Bangladesh, and many parents seechild marriage as their best option to safeguard the future of a daughter theyfeel they can neither feed nor educate nor protect. Bangladesh’s statusas one of the countries in the world most affected by natural disasters andclimate change adds an additional element of hardship to many families,especially those living in the most marginal and disaster-affected parts of thecountry.Bangladesh’s government has respondedto the growing attention to the harms linked to child marriage by promisingswift action. At the July 2014 Girl Summit in London, Bangladesh’s PrimeMinister Sheikh Hasina pledged to take steps to reduce child marriage inBangladesh and to ultimately end it by 2041. She committed, by 2021, to endmarriage for girls under 15 and reduce by more than one-third the number ofgirls between the ages of 15 and 18 who marry. As part of this effort, shepledged that her government would revise Bangladesh’s law which prohibitschild marriage, the Child Marriage Restraint Act (CMRA), before 2015, develop anational plan of action on child marriage by the end of 2014, and take othersteps to change social norms and engage civil society in the fight againstchild marriage.Sheikh Hasina’s efforts to followthrough on the commitments she made at the Girl Summit have already been marredby delay. One reason for this was a debacle over a proposal to revise the CMRAby changing the age of marriage in Bangladesh to 16 years old for girls and 18years old for boys. This proposal was vigorously opposed by civil societyactivists in Bangladesh, as well as international experts. At the time ofwriting, the government still appears to be pushing forward with this proposal,while the process of reforming the law has been delayed. The development of anational plan of action on ending child marriage has also been delayed and isnot complete at the time of writing.This report aims to support the commitmentsBangladesh’s government has made to ending child marriage by documentingthe experiences and insights of child brides and their family members. HumanRights Watch interviewed 114 people for the report in late 2014. The majorityof those interviewed were girls and women who experienced child marriage first-hand.Their experiences highlight some successes in reducing child marriage inBangladesh, but also many areas where the Bangladesh government can and shoulddo more.The legal age of marriage in Bangladesh iscurrently 18 for women and 21 for men. Bangladesh’s Child MarriageRestraint Act (CMRA), first passed in 1929 and subsequently amended severaltimes, makes it a criminal offense to marry or facilitate the marriage of agirl under 18 or a man or boy under 21, but the law has rarely been enforcedand is widely ignored.When asked about how they had madedecisions about when their daughters should marry, families interviewed forthis report talked again and again about poverty. Girls described parentsdeciding to marry them off simply because the family was going hungry. Manyfamilies also linked poverty, education, and child marriage, saying that theyarranged a marriage for their daughter because they were too poor to keep herin school. Many of the families interviewed are so poor that even the smallestexpense associated with school, for example, exam fees which may be as littleas US$0.13, is unaffordable. Social norms and gender discrimination leadparents to view their sons as future economic providers and their daughters asburdens who eventually leave for their marital home—meaning that familiesare more likely to pull their daughters from school first when money is short.Poverty also prevents boys from attending school. Schools do little to retainstudents, prevent child marriages, or educate students about sexual andreproductive rights and the fact that child marriage is illegal and harmful.One of the major factors pushing thesefamilies into such desperate poverty is natural disasters. Bangladesh’sextreme vulnerability to natural disasters, exacerbated by climate change andcombined with its large population, means that for many poor families theirlivelihoods, homes, and land are under threat from flooding, river erosion,cyclones, and other disasters.Some families interviewed by Human RightsWatch said they had made decisions about marriage for reasons directly relatedto natural disasters—some, for example, rushed to marry off a daughter inanticipation of losing their home to river erosion. Other families describednatural disasters as a recurring stress factor, taking food from thefamily’s mouth and making child marriage seem like the best option for agirl and the family.Harassment and intimidation also played amajor role in driving child marriage. Unmarried adolescent girls often faceunwanted advances and threats, including the threat of abduction from suitors, andparents, feeling unable to protect their daughters and with no prospect of helpfrom police or local authorities, see marriage as a solution. Families are alsoinfluenced by social pressures from neighbors in communities where the onset ofpuberty in a girl is seen as a signal that it is time for her to marry. Thewidespread practice of girls’ families paying dowry to her groom createsadditional pressure, as dowry tends to be lower and even avoidable for theyoungest of brides. Boys are also the victims of child marriage inBangladesh, though it is estimated that the rate of child marriage is 11 timeshigher for girls than boys.“My life is destroyed” is howone girl described the effect child marriage had on her. Human Rights Watchinterviews with married girls in Bangladesh found they almost always lefteducation permanently. They became pregnant early, either because they were pressuredto or felt that they should, or because they had no access to contraception andinformation about family planning. Even if they left their husbands or gotdivorced early, economic and social pressures often kept them from resumingtheir studies. Some suffered health problems as a result of early pregnancy,and many suffered violence and abuse in their home. Some of the most heartbreakingstories were from girls who had been abandoned or cast out by abusive husbandsand in-laws, yet were begging to be taken back, for lack of other options.The efforts and promises ofBangladesh’s government to end child marriage have not translated intoadequate action. Reforms like the government’s expansion of birthregistration are important because, if implemented effectively, they could playa key role in ending child marriage by allowing accurate verification of aperson’s age to determine if they are old enough to legally marry. However,Human Rights Watch’s research shows that local officials routinely takebribes to provide false birth certificates in order to facilitate childmarriages. The government has taken important strides in facilitating access toeducation by banning primary level school fees. However, other costs associatedwith attending school mean that education remains out of reach for too manychildren, and for girls the consequence of lack of access to education can bechild marriage. Government agencies providing assistance to families in povertyor affected by disasters should be more directly involved in preventing childmarriage. Bangladesh’s law on child marriage should be reformed, but evenmore importantly, it should be fully enforced.International law prohibiting genderdiscrimination requires that the age of marriage be the same for both women andmen, and evolving international standards set 18 as the minimum age. Setting ahigher age of marriage for men, even when the minimum age of marriage for womenis 18, is a harmful form of gender discrimination which reinforces social normsabout older men marrying younger girls. International law also provides everyindividual the right to freely choose whether and whom to marry and to defermarriage until she or he has reached sufficient age to be capable of free andfull consent. Bangladesh’s obligations under international law alsocompel it to protect its peoples’ rights to education and health and tobe free from physical, mental, and sexual violence.In many of the villages Human Rights Watchvisited in the course of researching this report, child marriage is not onlysocially acceptable but also expected. As long as the government looks theother way, or even facilitates child marriage, for example, when localgovernment officials provide forged birth certificates, marrying off youngdaughters will be a survival strategy for parents who feel unable to care fortheir children or fear the consequences of strong social stigma againstunmarried girls. The stories in this report explain the hard choices familiesface, and the ways in which the government is failing to prevent childmarriage.The Bangladesh government’s high-levelpolitical commitment to end child marriage is a positive step. But it will notachieve its targets unless child marriage becomes a permanent priority for allparts of the government and is backed up by effective legislation, policies,and programs.Key RecommendationsTo the Government of BangladeshComprehensively reform theChild Marriage Restraint Act (CMRA) by the end of 2015. Reform of the CMRAshould include:Setting the minimum age ofmarriage at 18 for men and women with no exceptions;Expanding measures toprevent child marriage;Providing assistance tomarried children and adults who married as children.As per the primeminister’s commitment at the July 2014 London Girl Summit, produce anational plan of action to end child marriage by 2041, and fully incorporate thisplan of action into the government’s seventh 5 year plan for fiscal years2016 through 2020. Ensure that the plan is adequately resourced.Make marriage registrationcompulsory for all religions. Create digital records that are accessiblethroughout the country as proof of marriage.Initiate a nationwideawareness campaign against child marriage in a variety of media and in formatsaccessible to those with disabilities and limited literacy, emphasizing thehealth risks of early pregnancy, the benefits of girls’ education, thelaw prohibiting child marriage, the consequences for those who break the law,and the mechanism for reporting child marriage and obtaining assistance.Eliminate all costs tostudents and parents for textbooks, education materials, exams, and uniformsfor all children in compulsory education, and take steps to alleviate thenegative effects of other indirect costs on children from poorer households.Coordinate with schools tomonitor problems of harassment of female students and intervene to prevent andend harassment, including by contacting law enforcement authorities in casesinvolving alleged criminal acts.Incorporate a detailedmodule on sexual and reproductive health into the national curriculum as anexaminable, independent subject and ensure that it is taught in all schools.Investigate all complaintsof child marriage promptly, intervene to prevent child marriage wheneverpossible, and refer for prosecution anyone who has committed a crime under theCMRA, including officials who solemnize child marriages and those who provideforged birth certificates to facilitate child marriages. Establish a mechanismto receive and investigate reports of local government officials providingforged birth certificates. Dismiss and refer for prosecution any officialsfound to have forged birth certificates.To International Donors and the United NationsEncourage the Bangladeshgovernment to pass a reformed CMRA in 2015 which complies with internationallaw and best practices and sets the minimum age of marriage at 18 years forboth women and men with no exceptions.Encourage the Bangladeshgovernment to develop a comprehensive national strategy to end child marriagethrough a broad consultative process, participate in its development, and supportits implementation. Integrate strategies to prevent child, early, and forcedmarriage and to support married girls into assistance programs.MethodologyThis report is primarily based on researchconducted in Bangladesh in September, October, and November 2014. A HumanRights Watch researcher carried out a total of 114 individual and groupinterviews, including 59 interviews with girls and young women who had marriedbefore the age of 18 in the last 5 years.Interviews with girls and young womenaffected by child marriage, family members, and local officials were conductedin the districts of Noakhali, Laxmipur, Khulna, Sirajganj, and Gaibandha. Childmarriage is a problem across all regions of Bangladesh, in both rural and urbanareas. We chose to conduct research in districts across four different regionsof the country in an effort to capture regional variations in the causes andconsequences of child marriage. We also selected these districts in partbecause they all contain extensive areas where there is significant impact fromnatural disasters, including cyclones, river erosion, and flooding. One of thegoals of this research was to determine whether there were specificvulnerabilities to child marriage in areas affected by natural disasters. Themajority of, but not all, interviewees lived or had lived in areassignificantly affected by natural disasters.The most recently married girl weinterviewed was a 15-year-old who had married 3 days prior to the interview.The youngest married girl we interviewed was 10 years old. The researcher alsointerviewed fathers and mothers, most of whom were parents of child brides, buta few of whom were individuals who had resisted community norms and chosen todelay their daughters’ marriages.Because most of these interviews wereconducted in homes in villages, the researcher, in addition to hearingpeoples’ stories, also often got a firsthand look at the livingconditions in which interviewees lived. These often consisted of large extendedfamilies living in one or two room shacks. Virtually all homes had mud floorsand some were built entirely from bamboo, leaves, and tarpaulins.The interviews were conducted in Banglathrough a female interpreter. All interviewees were advised of the purpose ofthe research and that the information they shared would be used for the purposeof this report. They were advised of the voluntary nature of the interview andthat they could refuse to be interviewed, refuse to answer any question, andterminate the interview at any point. The majority of interviews were recorded,with the interviewees’ consent, for later reference; all intervieweescould refuse having the interview recorded.Most interviews were conducted with onlythe interviewee, translator, and Human Rights Watch researcher present, but insome cases the interviewee requested that another person be present. A fewinterviews were conducted with family groups. Interviewees were only askedabout abuse within their marriage, including sexual violence, when theinterview was taking place in private. All interviewees were already connectedwith local NGO representatives who have some capacity to assist with obtaininglegal and medical services where needed.Twenty-four interviews with localofficials, teachers, NGO workers, and representatives of internationalorganizations provided context and information about the policy and legalframework relevant to child marriage in Bangladesh. Interviews with national andinternational NGOs and international organizations were conducted in Dhaka.Human Rights Watch shared our findings withthe government of Bangladesh and requested a response from the governmentwithin about three weeks through a letter sent by email, fax, and courierservice on February 18, 2015. The letter was copied to the governmentinstitutions which are the focus of recommendations of this report; a copy isincluded in this report as an appendix. At the time of publication, HumanRights Watch had not received any response to the letter.All interviewees’ names have beenchanged to pseudonyms or withheld to protect their privacy.The exchange rate at the time of theresearch was US$1 = 77 Bangladesh taka; this rate has been used for conversionsin the text, which have generally been rounded to the nearest dollar.I. How Girls Become Brides:Contributing Factors to Child Marriage“River erosion took our house, so we camehere,” Beauty A. said. “We didn’t know anyone so we werevulnerable so my husband was able to threaten us. He told my father, ‘Iwill marry your daughter or I will burn your house down.’ My father hadrefused to give me to him because he already had a wife, but then he threatenedus.”Beauty’s father eventually agreed tothe marriage and Beauty married. She is not sure what her age was when shemarried, but she believes she is about 40 now, and her oldest child, a son, is25. She and her husband had three children before he abandoned the family andreturned to his first wife. Beauty struggled to feed her children on her own,in part because of flooding. “When it rains everything gets destroyed—alot of agriculture gets destroyed. If the crops are destroyed, there is no workfor us.” For the last two years, she said, the situation has been muchworse because a new embankment built two years ago by the government blocks thewater from receding and has increased the flooding and resulting cropdestruction.Beauty took her two daughters out of schoolafter class five and class three because even though the school was free, shecould not afford stationery, pens, and uniforms. She arranged marriages forboth daughters when they reached age 15. “I know the right age to getmarried is 18,” she said in relation to her younger daughter who hadmarried three months earlier. “But I don’t have enough money tofeed her.”[1]Bangladesh has the fourth-highest rate ofchild marriage in the world, after Niger, the Central African Republic, andChad, according to the United Nations children’s agency, UNICEF.[2]About 74 percent of Bangladeshi women currently aged 20 to 49 were married orin a union before age 18, despite a minimum legal marriage age for women of 18.[3]In the period 2005 to 2013, according to UNICEF, 65 percent of girls inBangladesh married before age 18, and 29 percent married before age 15.[4]UNICEF data indicates that the rate ofmarriage among girls under the age of 15 in Bangladesh is the highest in theworld.[5]In absolute numbers, Bangladesh is the country in the world with thesecond-highest total number of women aged 20 to 24 years old who were marriedor in a union before age 15, after India.[6] Two percentof girls in Bangladesh are married before age eleven.[7]Boys are also the victims of child marriage in Bangladesh, though it isestimated that the rate of child marriage is 11 times higher for girls thanboys.[8]While the rate of child marriage inBangladesh is high across all parts of the country and all demographic groups,research shows that some girls are at higher risk than others. A heightenedincidence of child marriage is associated with living in rural areas, receivingless education, and poverty. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) foundin 2007 that 70 percent of girls living in rural areas in Bangladesh aremarried before age 18, compared to 53 percent of girls in urban areas.[9]80 percent of women with no education and 80 percent of women with only primaryeducation married before 18, compared with 57 percent of women who studied atleast to secondary school.[10]Girls from the poorest 20 percent of families are twice as likely to marrybefore 18 as girls whose families are among the richest 20 percent.[11]Recent research has suggested that there is also an increased risk of childmarriage in Bangladesh in areas affected by natural disasters associated withclimate change.[12]In other ways, Bangladesh has been cited asa development success story, including in the area of women’s rights. TheUN cited Bangladesh’s “impressive” poverty reduction from56.7 percent in 1991-1992 to 31.5 percent in 2010.[13]Bangladesh has achieved gender parity in primary and secondary school enrollment,according to UN figures.[14]Maternal mortality reportedly declined by 40 percent between 2001 and 2010.[15]Bangladesh’s development achievementshave occasioned particular comment by experts because they have occurred inspite of weak governance and high corruption, a phenomena often referred to asthe “Bangladesh paradox.” As the Economist wrote in 2009,“Of course, no one ever believed in such a paradox. It was a polite wayof telling politicians that the country could do even better if they kept theirhands out of the till.”[16]The United Nations University attributesBangladesh’s successes in significant part to the economic growth thecountry has enjoyed due to two key factors: growth of the garment industry andremittances sent by the growing numbers of Bangladeshis who have migratedoverseas in search of work.[17]It also noted with approval the Bangladesh government’s willingness topermit NGOs to deliver crucial services, an approach that has led toflourishing Bangladeshi NGOs in some sectors becoming models for othercountries.[18]The United Nations and others have warned,however, that in an environment where Bangladesh’s governance has becomenot stronger, but instead increasingly compromised, Bangladesh is likely tostruggle to maintain its progress on these development indicators.[19]Rising economic inequality in the country, as well as the increasing threatsposed to Bangladesh by climate change, are of particular concern.[20]Bangladesh’s success in achievingsome development goals begs the question of why the country’s rate ofchild marriage remains among the worst in the world. This report aims to helpanswer that question and suggest ways that the Bangladesh government can applyeffective strategies to achieving comparable success in reducing childmarriage.PovertyI don’t have enough money to feed my daughters– that’s how I decide when I should marry them.– Fatima A., mother of five.[21]“The main problem [causing childmarriage] is poverty,” a local government official told Human RightsWatch. “People don’t have enough to eat every day. They need morefinancial help from the government.” She cited an example of a marriageshe had helped to prevent where the family was given government assistance of300 taka [US$4] per month as a successful effort to prevent the marriage.[22]Poverty was the reason most commonly citedby girls and family members as driving decisions to marry young, and oftentheir poverty was so extreme that the family simply did not have enough to eatand they arranged marriages for their daughters specifically because of thelack of food. Almost none of the extremely poor families interviewed for thisreport had received assistance from government aid programs.Families interviewed by Human Rights Watchwho were unable to make ends meet often saw girls as a burden. This view islinked to discriminatory gender roles in Bangladesh, as daughters are expectedto marry and go to live with their husband’s family, while sons typicallyremain living with and helping to support their parents. Gender discriminationmeans that when parents cannot afford to feed or educate all of their children,it is usually girls’ futures that are sacrificed first.“We were very poor— sometimeswe would eat every two or three days,” Lucky C., married at 15, said.“Even though they really wanted all three of their daughters to study itwasn’t possible, so they got me married.” Lucky is the youngest ofthe three girls. Her older sisters married at ages 11 and 12. “Theeconomic situation of my in-laws is a little better– at least I can eatnow,” she said.[23]“My parents couldn’t feed me sothey decided to get me married, so I had no choice,” Shahana C., whomarried at age 14, said. Shahana married a year after her father died ofcancer. Her mother struggled to support her three daughters by doing road work.“Married life is very good. My family is not having to suffer because ofhaving to feed us.”[24]Human Rights Watch research found that parentssometimes enlist relatives to help care for some of their children, but thesearrangements also create vulnerability to child marriage and other problems,including denial of education.Ruhana M. was 10 when she was sent to livein Dhaka with her stepsister who works at a garment factory. “Becausethere are four brothers and three sisters in my family including me and we arevery close in age, our parents couldn’t feed us. … She[Ruhana’s stepsister] took me and said, ‘I will feed her and sendher to school,’” Ruhana said. The stepsister did not send Ruhana toschool. “My [step] sister worked and I stayed home and worked in thehome,” Ruhana said. “Whether it’s a sister or anyone else,would anyone take care of someone for free? I cooked and cleaned and fixedclothes.” Two years later, just days after Ruhana began menstruating atage 12, her stepsister helped arrange for her to be married. Ruhana said thather parents agreed to the marriage reluctantly. “At first my parentsdidn’t agree, but then they thought they couldn’t feed me, so theyagreed.”[25]A parent’s ill health or death wassometimes a factor in moving forward plans for a daughter’s marriage.“My father was very old and he said, ‘IfI die who is going to get my daughter married?’ That’s why I gotmarried early,” said Shahnaz H. She does not know her age or when she gotmarried, but at the time of the interview, she looked about 16, had a daughter,and was pregnant with a second child.[26]Many of the people interviewed for this reportwere landless, often working as sharecroppers, cultivating other people’sland and bearing the risk of flooding and resulting crop destruction, whileoften having to pay rent for land on which to build the most basic of homes.Taslima A. was forced to leave school andgo to Dhaka to work in a garment factory at age 14 or 15. She is the soleprovider for her family; the family struggles to survive in rural Noakhali inpart because Taslima’s father has disabilities. Taslima married at 15,and now at age 18 is struggling to get a divorce from her abusive husband. Sheearns 6,000 taka [$78] per month in the factory. “I don’t haveaccess to the government, but you do,” she said to Human Rights Watch.“You should tell them that people like me, with a father with no legs, weare suffering. They could give us land. We need land, and money, and domesticanimals. We paid money to get this land [where the family’s house is]from someone, but that person is now trying to evict us. We don’t have alot of money— they are pressuring us that we have to either pay orleave.”[27]Natural Disasters: River Erosion, Cyclones, andFloodingWhatever land my father had and the househe had went under the water in the river erosion and that’s why myparents decided to get me married.– Sultana C., who married at age 14and is now 16 years old and 7 months pregnant.Natural disasters in Bangladesh and thelack of an adequate government safety net for families affected by them,compound the poverty that drives child marriage.Bangladesh’s geo-physical locationmakes it prone to frequent and sometimes extreme natural disasters, includingcyclones, floods, storm surges, river bank erosion, earthquakes, droughts,tornados, and salinity intrusion, which cause widespread loss of life andproperty damage.[28]The country typically experiences at least one major disaster a year and losesover three percent of its gross domestic product (GDP) every year due tonatural disasters, while holding the highest disaster mortality rate in the world.[29]Bangladesh’s status as one of themost densely populated countries in the world (1,100 people per squarekilometer) with a large poor population (47 million people living in povertyand 26 million in extreme poverty, out of a population of 166 million) makesits people especially vulnerable when natural disasters occur.[30]The most disaster-prone areas of Bangladesh are also the country’spoorest areas.[31]The World Risk Index, which “shows the respective risk of becoming avictim of disaster pertaining to extreme natural events,” in 2013 rankedBangladesh as the fifth-highest country in the world in terms of risk.[32]Bangladesh’s troubles with naturaldisasters are now further compounded by climate change. The IntergovernmentalPanel on Climate Change (IPCC)[33]describes Bangladesh as one of the countries most vulnerable to climate change,“in terms of its exposure to extreme events and lack of capacity to copeand adapt.”[34]The IPCC warns, “South Asia’s climate is changing and the impactsare already being felt.”[35]According to a World Bank study from 2013, Bangladesh is considered an“impact hotspot” with extreme river floods, more intense tropicalcyclones, rising sea levels, extraordinarily high temperatures, and decliningcrop yields. Experts also warn that the high risk of inundation resulting fromincreased river flooding and tropical cyclone surges will mostly affect areaswith high poverty rates.[36]A 2014 study found that the “impetus for childmarriages and dowry […] are exacerbated by the climate challenges beingexperienced by families in rural Bangladesh.”[37]For many families in Bangladesh, floodingand the resulting destruction of crops has a devastating impact on foodsecurity, and is a great struggle to recover from every time. But it is an expectedannual event and therefore a foreseeable risk. In addition, many of thecountry’s poorer residents have no choice but to live in areas vulnerableto cyclones, or in the shadow of creeping river erosion that advances steadilyover the course of months or years, eventually and inevitably rendering thosein its path homeless and landless.People living in disaster-affected areas inBangladesh often live in extreme poverty before disaster strikes. Familiesinterviewed for this report indicated that a cyclone, another flood, anespecially high or long flood, or the arrival of river erosion at theirdoorstep can push a family from a situation where they are barely managing toget from one day to the next to one where child marriage becomes part of adesperate survival strategy. As one NGO activist working in disaster-affectedparts of Noakhali district told Human Rights Watch, “The link betweendrought or flooding and child marriage may not be direct, but they areindirectly related. The economic situation of the family affects the decisionto marry.”[38]A number of families interviewed for this reportdrew more direct links between disasters and their daughters’ marriages.This was particularly common among families who had lost their homes and landas a result of river erosion.“This is a river erosion area—because of that my father is very poor, so he got me married,” saidSultana C., who married at age 14, a few months after her family lost theirhome. “Whatever land my father had and the house he had went under thewater in the river erosion and that’s why my parents decided to get memarried.” Sultana is now 16 and 7 months pregnant. She lives with herin-laws in a house they built on leased land after they too lost their home andland to river erosion. “I used to enjoy student life,” Sultanasaid. “Without studies, life is very difficult.”[39]The fear of river erosion also contributedto decisions by families to marry their girls, our research found.“Because of river erosion people think girls are a burden for theirfamily, so if someone wants to marry a girl they don’t wait,” anNGO worker explained. “Families think that if their house goesthey’ll have to go to another place and it will take time to getestablished and find a husband and meanwhile the girl is getting older anddowry is going up.[40]Also when they have a house, before it is taken [by the river], the in-lawsfamilies will think the family owns a house, which gives them more importance.After [the house is swept away] they might rent and that makes them lessimportant and means less status for the girl [and less bargaining power inarranging a marriage].”[41]“This is a place affected by rivererosion,” Azima B.’s parents told her, explaining why she had tomarry at age 13. “If the river takes our house it will be hard for you toget married so it’s better if you get married now.” A year afterAzima’s marriage, her parents’ house has not yet been destroyed,but the river is coming closer and the family is expecting to lose their houseand land within the next few years. “I protested a lot,” Azimasaid, against her parents’ decision for her to get married. “I hadto get married because if the river takes our house I have to think about whatwill happen to my sisters. I am the oldest and only after I get married canthey think about getting married. If the river takes the house it will be hardfor them to get married.” Azima’s sisters are ages 12, 10, and 8years old; her parents are now considering a marriage for the 12-year-old.[42]Human Rights Watch also interviewed anumber of girls and families where child marriages followed the destructioncaused by Cyclone Aila. Cyclone Aila struck an area spanning both sides of theborder between Bangladesh and India in May 2009, killing more than 200 peopleand making more than 500,000 people homeless.[43]Rahela S. married at age 13, about a yearafter both of her parents were killed by Cyclone Aila. “At that time theyhad left me at my grandmother’s house. It [their house] was swept away.No one saw their dead bodies,” she said. Rahela went to live with heraunt and uncle but they had been injured when their house collapsed during thecyclone, and were struggling to afford education for their two children.“You know orphans don’t get education,” Rahela said.“My aunt and uncle asked me not to go to school— they said I shouldwork in their house and look after their children.” About one year after CycloneAila, her aunt and uncle arranged a marriage for her. “I can’treally blame them,” Rahela said. “They don’t have enoughmoney to provide for their own children.”[44]“Because of our financial problemsafter [Cyclone] Aila, I got my daughter married,” said Anika M., whoarranged a marriage for her daughter Rahana when she was 14 years old. Thefamily went hungry as they rebuilt their house which had been destroyed by thecyclone, and then struggled for a year to pay off the debt they had incurredfor the rebuilding.[45]They estimate that 300 to 400 homes in their area were swept away.While flooding, unlike river erosion, doesnot typically leave families homeless and landless, it represents a constantbattle for survival for many poor families. Sharecroppers often lose theirlivelihoods and food as floods sweep away crops, animals, and sometimes thecontents of their homes with great regularity. Landless families have no optionbut to settle in areas that are barely habitable, and they often have no hopeof relocating. Regular flooding keeps them extremely poor and drives decisionsabout schooling and marriages for their children.“Our crops were destroyed in seven ofthe last ten years,” said Farhana B., who took extra work herding cows toraise a dowry for her 14-year-old daughter’s marriage.[46]“The flooding wouldn’t come inour house but it would be outside and it would be impossible to go out andimpossible for my father to go to work,” said Nafisa K., whose fathersells cooking utensils. “The water would stay for about three months.Sometimes my father could take a boat to work but sometimes he had to just stayhome.” Nafisa’s parents took her out of school after class fivebecause they could not afford the expense, and a year later, at about age 14,they had her married.[47]Many families experienced multiple types ofnatural disasters, for example, losing their homes to river erosion and thenhaving no choice but to resettle in an area stricken by regular flooding. Forthese families, each new set of natural disasters compounds the poverty causedby the last.“Our house keeps breaking [because ofthe river]. We keep bringing mud to stop it falling,” said Shapna A., whomarried at age 12. “The water would come in and not go out and then myfather couldn’t go to work. He works with land so he can’t workwhen the land is underwater.” Shapna’s father is a day laborer. Thefamily’s house was also damaged during Cyclone Aila. “I was inclass six and while I was studying I was married off,” Shapna said.“My mother thought I have two younger siblings and they can’t spendall their money on me.” Shapna’s husband was 24 or 25 at the timeof the marriage.[48]Lack of Access to EducationI got married because I quit school.–Mariam A., who married at the ageof 15. She left school after class five because going on to class six wouldhave involved higher costs and a longer walk of 3.5 kilometers each way.There is a strong connection between accessto education and child marriage in Bangladesh. Many of the girls interviewed byHuman Rights Watch explained that they were married when their families couldno longer afford to educate them. There were also girls who said that thedecision that they should marry came first and that their leaving school was aresult, not a cause, of that decision, but that was less common.Access to education is a struggle for allpoor children in Bangladesh, but gender discrimination means that girls facespecific obstacles. For example, often their parents see them as a burden and,because they are expected to marry and go to live with their husband’sfamily, less worthy than their brothers of the investment education requires.This may result in families with limited means prioritizing education for theirsons over education for their daughters, particularly in secondary education.One of Bangladesh’s greatestdevelopment successes is the increase in enrollment of both boys and girls inprimary education. For 2009-2013, UNICEF reported a male literacy rate of 78percent and a female literacy rate of 82 percent in Bangladesh.[49]UNICEF also reported that 77 percent of boys and 81 percent of girls wereattending primary education.[50]By secondary school, however, attendancerates have fallen to 43 percent for boys and 47 percent for girls.[51]As the World Bank notes, “With a dropout rate by grade five of about 50%,the challenge is not just getting girls in school—it is keeping themthere.”[52]Attrition continues to be extremely highduring secondary school; for every 100 children beginning class 6, only 35 willpass the Secondary School Certificate (SSC) examination at the end of class 10,and only 10 will pass the Higher Secondary Certificate examination.[53]While the attendance rate in secondary school is higher for girls than boys, atmore advanced levels of education, girls’ achievement begins to fallbehind. By the time students register for the SSC exam at the end of class 10,girls are only 46 percent of those registered, and less than 44 percent ofthose who pass.[54]One factor which discourages schoolattendance by girls, and therefore puts them at higher risk for child marriage,is a lack of hygienic and private toilets, a gap that becomes more difficultfor girls to manage as they reach the onset of menstruation. A 2014 study inBangladesh found that 40 percent of girls reported missing school duringmenstruation for an average of 3 school days each menstrual cycle. In thisstudy, 82 percent of girls said their school facilities were not appropriatefor managing menstrual hygiene, 12 percent had access to female-only toiletswith water and soap available, and only 3 percent said the toilet they used hada trash bin.[55]Such gaps in attendance compromise girls’ eligibility for governmentstipends linked to attendance (discussed below), cause girls to fall behind intheir studies, and undermine parental support for keeping girls in school.The link between education and childmarriage is borne out by research finding that women with primary, secondary,and higher education, compared to women with no formal education, wererespectively 24 percent, 72 percent, and 94 percent less likely to marry at ayoung age.[56]This study found that, “Women's education appeared as the mostsignificant single determinant of child marriage as well as decline in childmarriage.”[57]The government has made major efforts toincrease access to education for all children, and especially for girls. Theseinitiatives, which include making five years of primary education free, arediscussed in detail later in this report.[58] Thestories of the girls below, however, echo the observations of researchers andaid organizations: education still remains out of reach for poor families, andfor many girls the consequence of lack of access to education is childmarriage.“My parents thought they would marrythe girls off so at least they could afford to send the son to school,”said Bibi M., who left school and was married at age 14 to a 23 or 24-year-oldman.[59]Ruhana M. married at 12 and now has asix-year-old daughter. She does day labor as a road worker to pay for herdaughter to go to school. “I will not be the way my parents were. I haveone child and I only want one child so I can provide for her and I will workhard and take care of her. I work to make sure she goes to school. It’snot good to get anyone married very young— I won’t make the samemistake with my daughter,” Ruhana said.[60]Even for children who are in grades orschools where there are no tuition fees, there are associated costs, typicallyincluding exam fees, pens, and stationery, and sometimes also uniforms, booksand study guides, and private tuition. For many families interviewed by HumanRights Watch, even the smallest associated costs put education out of reach oftheir children.“There are a lot of parents who wouldsend their children to school if it weren’t for these costs,” anNGO worker in Laxmipur said. “There are a lot of people who can’teven afford a 10 taka [$0.13] exam fee.”[61]Razia B. and her husband have so farmanaged to keep their three sons in school, and their youngest daughter isstill in primary school, but their older daughters left school early. Razia isuncertain of her daughters’ ages, but said that their marriages tookplace about two years after they began menstruating. “We couldn’tpay her exam fees,” Razia said of her middle daughter.[62]“I can’t pay so she will haveto quit,” Khadija A. said, explaining why she is about to take her oldestchild, a 13-year-old daughter, out of school. Khadija is 35 years old and has 4children. Her family lives in two rooms and survives through her husband doingagricultural work and any other work they can find. “She studied untilclass five, but now she needs to go to high school. The high school charges2,500 taka [$32] in registration fees. I would also have to pay for privatetutoring and books.”[63]Musamat C., age 20, was married at about 13because her parents could not afford to send her to school. She has not yetsent her six-year-old daughter to school, but she hopes to be able to send hersoon. She explained that families must pay 300-500 taka [$3.89-6.49] for auniform plus exam fees of 150 taka [$1.95] three times a year—and thesecosts make it difficult for families as poor as her own to send children toschool.[64]Some families interviewed by Human RightsWatch reported that they must make the difficult decision about whether to payfor education or food and sometimes children were too hungry to go to school.Sanjida H.’s mother took her out ofschool after class four.[65]“Should I be feeding her, or making her go to school?” her motherasked. “Before she went to school she got hungry but in the morningsometimes there was no food.”[66]In rural Noakhali, a community activistsaid that while families struggle to pay school fees and related costs,“[t]he biggest problem is that schools are not available. Often there isone school for four or five kilometres and some school teachers are not showingup or are not competent.”[67]Mariam A. said she is 15, but she looksyounger. She spoke to Human Rights Watch 3 days after her marriage to a21-year-old man. Her parents are agricultural workers and she is the eighth ofnine children. Her sisters married at age 14 or 15. “I studied to classfive,” she said.[68]“But to go to school for class six was too far away and the route was notgood – the school [where they teach class six] is 3.5 kilometers away. Igot married because I quit school.” Mariam said there is no possibilityof returning to school now, both because of distance and because she cannot payfor exam fees and other associated costs. Mariam’s mother-in-law, whoinsisted on being present during the interview, added, “I can’tfill my own stomach – how can I send her to school?”[69]In some areas, the only school withinreasonable proximity was a non-government school, where fees are charged.“Even 20 years ago, there were no schools in this area. Now there aresome schools, so this is the first generation getting some education,” acommunity leader in Noakhali told Human Rights Watch. “There are a lot ofprimary government schools now, but not secondary schools.”[70]Non-government schools set their own fees. Some are also not accredited by thegovernment, for example, madrasas which teach only religious subjects,not a general curriculum. In one area of Noakhali that Human Rights Watchvisited, the closest government high school was 45 kilometers away.[71]Girls interviewed by Human Rights Watchindicated that girls who are still in school experience less pressure from thecommunity to get married. Mariam A., who married at the age of 15, explained,“We’re poor and when our girls get to a certain age a lot of peoplesay a lot of bad things and it makes us uncomfortable so our parents marry us.If we were studying they might not have been able to say anything. I reallywished to do something with my life, but my parents are poor so I had to getmarried.”[72]“My parents say they will wait untila little later, until after I’m 15,” Sadia B. said about when shewill get married. She is not certain of her exact age, but says she is under15. She studied until class five, but then stopped because her family could notafford the 550 taka [$7] annual school fees plus the cost of books and copies.Since she left school, “A lot of people are talking about me gettingmarried,” she said. “I don’t want to getmarried—it’s too soon. I’m not really sure if my parents willlisten to me [and delay marriage]— they might, they might not. Thebiggest problem for girls is money. Families without money can’t pay forschool.”[73]“There should be access toeducation,” Adnan M., a 16-year-old boy, told Human Rights Watch.“People can’t afford education. If education is accessible thennaturally the age of marriage will go up.”[74]Social PressureWhen my daughter got to a certain agepeople in society said, “You have to get her married.” You have toremember I am a very poor person, so I have to listen to what society says. Ihave to go out sometimes and they said, “Your daughter will do bad thingswith boys while you’re out.” I have to go out to work— I doagricultural work and I am out all day. If while I’m out somethinghappens to my daughter I will be taken out of my house and beaten up and heldresponsible.–Abida N., age 40, explaining why she arranged for her oldestdaughter to marry at age 15.Many girls and parents interviewed by HumanRights Watch cited social pressure as a key factor driving child marriage incommunities where child marriage is the norm. While NGOs have reached somecommunities with awareness raising efforts about the risks of child marriage,such efforts by the government are noticeably absent. Attempts by somegovernment officials and police to make communities aware that child marriageis illegal are undermined by community members’ experiences of localgovernment officials frequently facilitating child marriage by providing forgedbirth certificates in exchange for bribes.“Elders [male community leaders] inthe area might say your daughter is getting old,” is Rekha H.’sexplanation for why both her older and younger sisters were married at age 11,and Rekha herself married at age 12. “No one said anything, but [myparents] were afraid, so before anyone could they got us married.”Rekha’s brother married at age 13. Rekha and the other two olderdaughters never attended school, but their two younger sisters are currently inschool. The three older daughters are trying to prevent their parents fromarranging a marriage for a fourth sister who is now 11 years old. “We aretrying to stop them. We are saying we have health problems and feel weak andcan’t work properly. I think we’ll be able to prevent it,”Rekha said.[75]“A lot of people used to put theireyes on my daughters, so I had to get them married,” Asma C. said. Asmahas seven children—four sons and three daughters. At the time of theinterview her daughters were 18, 16, and 15 years old. They were all married,at the ages of 16, 14, and 15 respectively. Asma explained their early marriagesin part based on her own experience. “I married when I was veryyoung,” she said. “I still lost two milk teeth after I was married.Maybe I was nine years old. It was two years after I married before I becameclever [began menstruating].”[76]“People here had been shaming mebecause I’m tall and I look older than I am,” Azima B. said,explaining her parents’ decision to have her marry at age 13. “Iprotested a lot to my parents but they said, ‘It is a shame for us tokeep you in the house.’ I wanted to continue my education, but my mothersaid, ‘Your father has fixed your marriage and if you don’t listento your father people will say what kind of girl is that who doesn’tlisten to her father?’” Azima married a 17-year-old boy three daysafter his parents decided she was an acceptable bride.[77]Those interviewed for this report describedstrong social pressure to get girls married to prevent them from having aromantic or sexual relationship before marriage, and there is also great stigmaattached to “love marriages.”[78] Even justthe possibility that a girl would be perceived as being involved in a romanticrelationship was sometimes enough to prompt a rushed marriage, which can happenwithin a matter of days, according to interviewees. Child marriage is used byboth communities and families to curb girls’ agency and deny them thechance to make their own decisions about dating and marriage. Girls who are tooyoung to marry may still be mature enough to make their own decisions aboutdating and relationships and should be permitted to do so without facing forcedmarriage as a consequence. Urgent as it is to end child marriage, efforts to doso should be carefully crafted to respect girls’ autonomy in decisionsabout relationships.“In our area people say all kinds ofbad things,” said Nafisa K., who married at about age 14. “Theywould come and tell my parents I had spoken to some boy who in fact I had notspoken to, and my parents got really hurt and decided to get me married.”[79]“My mother wanted me to get marriedbecause she was afraid I would fall in love with someone,” said HasinaA., who is 15 or 16 and married 5 months ago. “She stopped my educationbecause she wanted me to get married. She said I was getting old and peoplewere saying a lot of things.”[80]Abida N., after marrying her older daughterat 15, told Human Rights Watch she would like to allow her younger daughter towait until she is 20 to marry, “But if she is going to do something withsome boy, to save myself I will have to get her married. We need to save ourdaughters. Not all girls are good. To save their lives and dignity we have toget them married. A 10-year-old girl and a 12-year-old boy ran away and gotmarried from this area recently. If we try to follow the government rule [theminimum marriage ages of 18 for women and 21 for men set by the Child MarriageRestraint Act (CMRA)] we will be in trouble. Boys and girls run away and thenwe’re in trouble.”[81]“We had to get her married to saveour respect,” Dipanjali B. said, explaining why she arranged herdaughter’s marriage at 17. “She was very pretty and people werethreatening to kidnap her and every time she went to school she washarassed.” Dipanjali’s daughter told her parents that there was aboy with a motorcycle who said he wanted to take her to his family’sshop, and her parents became alarmed. “Sometimes girls are taken andsometimes they run away,” Dipanjali said. “Either way it is a hiton our dignity. My husband and my brothers got together and decided [on amarriage for her]. My daughter was not happy to marry— she wanted tostudy more and get a job but unfortunately we couldn’t [let her dothat].”[82]“We were afraid someone would causetrouble for her,” Suresh M. said, explaining why he arranged for hisdaughter to marry at age 16. “A boy had proposed to her, but we managedto cover that incident up. If anyone got to know that a boy proposed it wouldhave caused problems for her. He would disturb her— he got others to takethe proposal to her.” Suresh regrets his decision now. “If I hadhad a little more patience, I could have managed the situation and that wouldhave been better because now she’s having too many problems in herin-laws’ house.”[83]The importance attached to a girl’sreputation and the fragility of that reputation means that a girl’sfuture can easily be damaged simply by rumors.“The boys disturb us,” saidParveen L., who married at age 15. “They throw little stones, they standin the path. They threaten us and say, ‘We’ll do you some harm—we will tell everyone that there is a relationship between you and me.’People in the village see these things and if they think there is arelationship then we will never be able to get married.”[84]There is also a fear of boys or men “taking girls away,” a phrasewhich encompasses both abduction and elopement.“If our daughter went off or someonetook her away it would hurt our pride and our respect and we could never get itback,” Shahida A. said, explaining why she forced her daughter to marryat age 16. “At this age girls sometimes start liking boys and dosomething wrong, or boys take girls away. We are poor people and this would bevery shameful for us, so we decided to get her married.”[85]Many of those interviewed for this reportlinked social pressure with poverty. “The poor people’s daughtersalways have to suffer,” said Fatima A., who married her daughter, AyeshaL., at age 15. “Rich people’s daughters can become old and no onesays anything, but when our daughters become a little old everyone saysthings.”[86]Religious leaders play an influential role,which can be positive or negative. In some areas, local activists cited growingreligious conservatism as a cause of increased child marriage.[87]“Sometimes imams [Muslim religious leaders] are encouraging childmarriage, asking why girls who are 18 or 20 are not married yet,” a civilsociety activist told Human Rights Watch.[88]Social pressures can be so intense thatparents sometimes end up feeling that arranging an early marriage is an act ofkindness and loving parenting.[89]“Twelve is a normal age for marriagehere,” said Laki B., explaining why her father, a religious leader,arranged her marriage when she was 12 years old. Laki’s mother said,“Her father is very fond of her— that’s why he wanted to gether married young. He thought she was his only daughter so it would be verygood to get her married early. He didn’t understand that this wouldhappen.” Laki, at age 15, has moved back in with her parents afterserious abuse by her husband and in-laws.[90]“My parents have no other childrenand they love me very much,” said Marjina A., who is not sure of her agebut looks 14 or 15 and has been married for more than one and a half years.“Out of their caring they got me married because we didn’t have anymoney to send me to school, so they thought it was better to get memarried.”[91]Some interviewees made it clear that whilesocial pressure is a significant driver of child marriage, it can be resistedand it can be changed.“When I got married I was so young Iwas not ready, but my parents forced me,” said Noor B., who married atage 11 and has 2 sons and 2 daughters. “So I decided if I had children Iwould not get them married young.” Noor’s husband does not work andis physically abusive to her, but she has started her own business and has ashop selling clothing where she has earned enough to pay for herchildren’s education with assistance from loans that are availablespecifically to pay for education fees. Her daughters are now 22 and 26 yearsold and neither are married—the older one just finished her bachelor ofarts degree and the younger one is applying to universities. “I had tostruggle a lot because a lot of people say, ‘You are feeding milk andmangoes to your daughters, but they are getting old.’ I say I am the onewho will understand my daughters,” Noor said. “As soon as mydaughters start working and earn money to stand on their own two feet I willchoose their husbands.”[92]Omar N., a 60-year-old rickshaw driver,never attended school himself. He has three daughters and three sons and isdetermined that his children should go to school. His oldest daughter marriedat 19 but his younger daughters, ages 18 and 15, are unmarried and are stillstudents. “Of course I have to listen to these things—people saying,‘You have to get your daughter married, or she will do bad things,’”he said. “I listen and try to explain. In some places I use bad words tothem [people who say these things] and sometimes I explain calmly. I say,‘Look at female politicians—my daughter could be one of them oneday but only if I educate them.’”[93]One mother suggested, however, thatpressure could escalate into physical violence.“When my daughter got to a certainage people in society said, ‘You have to get her married,’”Abida N., age 40, said. “You have to remember I am a very poor person, soI have to listen to what society says. I have to go out sometimes and they said,‘Your daughter will do bad things with boys while you’re out.’I have to go out to work— I do agricultural work and I am out all day. Ifwhile I’m out something happens to my daughter I will be taken out of myhouse and beaten up and held responsible.”[94]Harassment, Intimidation, and CoercionHe was afraid my parents would marry me tosomeone else— that’s why he did this to me.– Reena F., explaining why aclassmate raped her when she was 14 years old.A significant minority of the women andgirls Human Rights Watch interviewed reported that their parents had tried toresist marrying them as children but had later agreed to marriages as a resultof harassment or threats, including threats of abduction or even assault.[95]Families facing these threats felt that they had little or no ability to obtainhelp and protection from police or other local government officials, even whenthe behavior clearly constituted a crime.“There is so much sexual harassment.Parents who are better off who get their daughters married [young] usually doso because of sexual harassment,” an NGO worker told Human Rights Watch.“Poorer parents do it for financial reasons.”[96]Reena F. was 14 when she was raped by aclassmate who carried out the assault with the specific intention of forcingher to marry him. “He used to disturb me all the time and one time heforced himself on me,” she said. “He was afraid my parents wouldmarry me to someone else— that’s why he did this to me.”Reena F. is now 21 years old and has a 7-year-old son, conceived as a result ofthe rape, and a 2-year-old daughter. “He called me and said, ‘Iwant to talk,’” Reena F. said, describing the circumstances of therape. “I said, ‘No, my parents will be angry.’ I was veryyoung. He promised to give me clothes. He took me to a jungle area and rapedme. I screamed but no one heard me.”After the attack, Reena F. did not knowwhat to do. “I really didn’t understand anything at that time. Ididn’t tell my parents because I was in fear. When I started havingmorning sickness, I told my grandmother and she told my parents.” NeitherReena F. nor her family reported the rape to the police. “We didn’tgo out of fear,” she said. “If other people knew [about the rape]we were afraid of what would happen. My parents are very simple— theythought it would cause shame for our family.”Reena F. left school after the attack and after she had the baby herparents arranged a marriage to another man who knew about the rape and agreedto accept her son and have him live in their home. The rapist kept harassingReena F. until soon after she was married. “He kept saying, ‘I gaveyou a baby so you need to come back to me.’ But after my husbandthreatened him he stopped.”[97]Several families interviewed by HumanRights Watch described marrying a daughter out of fear, in the face of threatsthat she would be abducted by a thwarted suitor. Many interviewees lived inextremely marginal communities—isolated geographically from lawenforcement and local government and sometimes cut off from roads andaccessible only by foot or by boat. These are often areas where the populationis in flux, undermining social cohesion that might provide protection in theabsence of police. In these environments, everyone is vulnerable, and unmarriedgirls who are nearing or have reached puberty are particular targets ofharassment and seen by their parents as being at great risk.“He threatened my mother andthat’s why she agreed to the marriage. I do whatever my mothersays,” Musamat C. said. Musamat is not sure how old she was when shemarried, but she is 20 years old now, and her children are 6 years old and 3years old, so it seems likely that she married at about the age of 13.“He spoke to my mother, but my mother was not interested because hisparents didn’t want to accept me because they were well off and I wasvery poor.” After Musamat’s future husband threatenedMusamat’s mother, the marriage went ahead. [98]Farida A., a widow with 3 children,arranged a marriage for her oldest daughter, Sanjida H., when the girl was 17after threats of kidnapping from her own relatives. Her brother-in-law wantedSanjida to marry his son. Farida resisted at first, because the boy’smother was dead and his father had recently lost his home to river erosion.“But my other brother-in-laws started saying, ‘If you don’tmarry her to the boy we will kidnap her,’” she explained. “Ilive alone here and I am very vulnerable so I decided to get her married tohim. I was very intimidated because I couldn’t really protect her.”[99]Sanjida’s husband now lives in Farida’s house along with Sanjidaand Farida’s two younger children. “He doesn’t really feedher,” Farida says. “He works when he wants to but sometimes hedoesn’t want to work.”Parents’ fears of leaving girlsunprotected in the home also prompted some marriages, Human Rights Watch found.“If my mother wasn’t there and we were in the house alone, anyonecould do anything to us,” Rumi C. said, explaining why her father had hermarried at 15. Rumi’s mother was ill with cancer and expected to die, anddid in fact die after Rumi married. Rumi’s father is a day laborer andwas away from the house all day; he feared for the safety of Rumi and her twoyounger sisters if their mother died and could no longer protect them in thehome. “Before anything bad happened, he decided to get me married,”Rumi said.[100]Girls looking to their families for help incombating harassment sometimes found that their family’s solution waschild marriage.“Boys said that they love me. I wasvery pretty—they wanted to marry me,” Rabiya A. said, describingthe events that led to her marriage at age 13. “I told my mother becauseI wanted her to tell the boys’ parents that they should stop, because itwas making it hard for me to go to school or to go anywhere. After I told mymother she went and talked to their parents and they scolded their sons and thesons stopped and I was able to move about in peace. But my mother was afraidfor their respect. Six days after I told my mother boys were disturbing me, Igot married.”[101]Several girls described how they had quitschool because of harassment and that child marriage quickly followed thedecision to leave school.Aliya B. left her studies at a madrasaand agreed to a marriage because of harassment.[102]“Boys used to say they wanted to go out with me all the time. I felt veryscared and didn’t feel secure. I said yes [to getting married] because ofall these boys,” she said. She has not yet gone to live with her in-laws.She says she is glad about getting married because it has ended the harassment.“Now the boys have stopped harassing me so I feel happy.”[103]Rohima M., age 13, quit school two monthsago, one month before she was due to take her exams for class five. Sheexplained that her parents did not want her to quit school, but she quit“because one particular boy was coming to say he wanted to marry me,”and she was afraid of him. She said that another reason was that she is tallerthan other girls in her class, and looks older. “People in the neighborhoodlaugh at me for [still] going to school at this age,” she said.[104]The fear of harassment or dishonor to thefamily resulting from pre-marital relationships is so pervasive that many girlsand parents we interviewed described child marriages resulting not fromharassment itself, but merely the fear of harassment.“My mother is old-fashioned,”said Nabila C., who left school at class 6 when she was 12 years old andmarried at age 14. “She thought boys would disturb me so she stopped myeducation. No one disturbed me—she was just afraid. When I became matureat age 12 my mother started wanting to marry me so when she found this boy shegot me married.”[105]DowryNow she is pretty and young and we cangive her away for free. If you bring the police we will have more problems whenshe gets older.– Ruhana M.’s older brother,arguing for why Ruhana should marry at age 12. The marriage went forward.The practice of a bride’s familypaying a “dowry” to the groom’s family, in the form of cash,jewellery, or goods, creates incentives for poor families to marry off theirdaughters earlier. It also constitutes a form of gender discrimination thatfurther impoverishes poor families who have daughters, and disputes about dowrypayments can lead to domestic violence against girls and women.A 1980 law banned the practice of thepayment of dowry to the groom’s family by the family of the bride.[106]In spite of this, the payment of dowry remains widespread in Bangladesh,including among extremely poor people, where a bride’s parents may givesome of their own belongings, for example, the mother’s jewellery, inlieu of cash.[107]“Seventy to eighty percent of Muslim families give dowry,” an NGOworker in Laxmipur said, “and in Hindu families they all give dowry. Richfamilies give ‘gifts’ and don’t use the term dowry.”[108]Farhana B. paid a dowry of 45,000 taka[$584] when her daughter married at age 14. “An NGO gave us some money,and I borrowed some cows and looked after them for someone else and made somemoney from that,” Farhana said, explaining how she raised the money. Herhusband is a rickshaw driver in Dhaka who earns about 200 taka [$2.60] per day.“If I don’t give money then they don’t want to take mydaughter. It’s really impossible to marry a daughter without a dowry eventhough it’s illegal,” she said.[109]Dowry, however, is typically lower or maynot be necessary at all for child brides. “The reason girls from verypoor families get married very early is that when they are young they are verybeautiful and don’t have to pay any dowry, so their parents think this isthe only way they can deal with this,” a community activist explained.[110]“If they get older, dowry becomes compulsory,”Asma C., a mother of 3 teen daughters who married at 14, 15, and 16, told HumanRights Watch.[111]“My uncle said, ‘Don’tget her married now—I will bring the police if you do,’” saidRuhana M., who married at age 12. “But my older brother said,‘Don’t bring the police. Now she is pretty and young and we cangive her away for free. If you bring the police we will have more problems whenshe gets older.’”[112]“People should not give dowry.”Shilpa A., who married at 15, told Human Rights Watch. “It’s avicious cycle that makes people want to marry their children young because thedowry goes up if they wait. At these times there is very little value of womenin the market—without a dowry a woman has no value. In this area very fewpeople agree to get married without a dowry. It’s a very big problem—often they are asking for 50, 75, 100 thousand taka [$649, $974, $1299].”Shilpa’s family was able to refuse topay dowry for her marriage because her uncle and grandfather are both religiousleaders. Her father-in-law, however, had to sell some of the family’sland to pay the 20,000 taka [$260] dowry necessary for his oldest daughter toget married. “My sister-in-law’s dowry went to pay for herhusband’s sisters’ dowries— it gets passed on.”[113]“Child marriage happens mostlybecause of economic reasons, because people are so poor and feel if they gettheir daughter married younger they can pay less dowry,” an NGO worker inSirajganj said. “But then they get more problems, because there is moredivorce and more pressure on girls for more dowry [after they’vemarried].”[114]“They needed to get me married earlyor they would have had to pay dowry,” Aaliya M. said, explaining why herparents had her married at age 17. “They don’t have any money andcan’t pay dowry, so they fixed my marriage with my father’ssister’s son.”[115]Interviewees reported great pressure ongirls to agree to marriages, even at a young age not only because of their ownlack of agency, but also because of their feelings of responsibility regardingthe impact a failure to get married on their part may have on the rest of thefamily.Soraya A., who married when she was 15 andis now 18 years old, told Human Rights Watch, “I wasn’t happy atall when they asked me to get married because I was too young. But I had toagree because I had two sisters and it would cause problems for them. If Iwaited two years, then they would be old and have problems [finding ahusband].”[116]So entrenched is the practice of dowry thatseveral parents told Human Rights Watch that they had insisted on paying dowryfor their daughter, believing that the girl would be valued more highly andtreated better by her in-laws if she came with a dowry. “His family said,‘We really like her— we don’t want any dowry,’”Alima A., who married at age 13, said describing her 25-year-oldhusband’s parents’ enthusiasm for the match. “My fatherinsisted on a 40,000 taka [$519] dowry and jewellery because he said, ‘Ionly have two girls and I won’t marry them for nothing.’”[117]Dowry practices also create pressure forboys and men to marry well and enrich their families through the dowry theirbrides bring. Adnan M., a 16-year-old boy, told Human Rights Watch, “Therate of taking dowry is going up. Parents are very evil— they want to usetheir sons to make some money.”[118]II. Harmful Consequences of Child MarriageThe United Nations Population Fund recentlydescribed the impact of child marriage on girls and their families in thefollowing terms: “Child marriage robs girls of their girlhood,entrenching them and their future families in poverty, limiting their lifechoices, and generating high development costs for communities.”[119]Girls and women interviewed for this report echoed these findings, speakingpoignantly of the harm they had seen in their own lives as a result of childmarriage.Termination of EducationI quit school because I got married. I wasin class nine. My husband wouldn’t allow me to continue studying. I hadto work [in the home]. Continuing education was unthinkable.– Soraya A., age 18, who married atage 15.For the girls interviewed who were stillstudying at the time of their engagement or marriage, child marriage ended theirstudies in all but a few cases. Even families who wished to support theirdaughters’ education after their marriages were largely unable to do so.“In the village people don’t study after marriage,” Saima A.told Human Rights Watch. “In a city or town, yes, but here things aredifferent.”[120]“I quit school because I gotmarried,” Soraya A., age 18, who married at age 15, told Human RightsWatch. “I was in class nine. My husband wouldn’t allow me tocontinue studying. I had to work [in the home]. Continuing education wasunthinkable.”[121]Some of the girls and their familiesinterviewed by Human Rights Watch had included access to education as anexplicit part of the marriage negotiation process— but after marriage, invirtually all of these cases, husbands and in-laws reneged on the agreement andforced the girls to leave school.Rabiya A. married when she was 13 and herhusband was 30. “My in-laws said, ‘If you want to study you can,’but as soon as I was married they said, ‘It’s not possible,’”Rabiya said. Rabiya is now 14 and said her in-laws and husband are disappointedthat she is not pregnant yet.[122]Kalpana B. told Human Rights Watch that herprospective in-laws had promised to continue her daughter’s educationwhen they negotiated for their 20 or 21-year-old son to marry Kalpana’s15-year-old daughter. Her daughter had just finished class nine and had alreadybought her books for class ten. The family has a shrimp cultivation businessand could afford education for their three daughters. “I didn’twant to get her married at that age, but a lot of people said, ‘You havethree daughters, you should get the oldest married,’” Kalpana said.As soon as Kalpana’s daughter wasmarried, however, her in-laws reneged on their promise and she was forced to dropout of school. “Her husband said, ‘My mother is ill so it’snot possible for us to continue her education now.’ Her mother-in-lawsaid, ‘We need a grandchild so it is time for you to get pregnant.’”Kalpana’s daughter is 17 now, and has a six-month-old child. The baby wasborn by c-section, and the daughter had a hard time recovering from theoperation. “I made a mistake, and I’ll never make this mistakeagain,” Kalpana said about having agreed to the marriage. About her 2younger daughters, now ages 13 and 7, she said, “I will not get themmarried so soon. They will study and stand on their own feet and then getmarried.”[123]In some cases, Human Rights Watch was toldthat girls themselves decided to leave school because they did not likestudying. Doing so led swiftly to marriage, however, sometimes making themregret their decision.“My parents tried very hard to keepme in school,” Reba B. said. “But I refused.” Reba says sheis 17 years old but looks much younger. She married four months ago and movedin with her in-laws, about an hour’s travel from where her parents live.She said that she left school because she found studies difficult. Her parentsarranged her marriage about eight months later. “Because I left school,they got me married,” Reba said. She now regrets her decision.“Girls should study as much as possible. I didn’t and I made amistake.” There is no chance of her returning to school now. “Myin-laws won’t allow it. I have to stay at home. I am the only one thereto help my mother-in-law.”[124]“I would have married later if I hadstudied,” said Tahmina L., age 15. Tahmina said she hated school andwouldn’t stay. Because she was out of school, her mother arranged amarriage for her just after she turned 15.[125]A few girls we interviewed had managed toreturn to school, but only after a separation or divorce.Marufa B. married 2 years ago at age 15,but was immediately unhappy in her in-laws’ home. “My mother-in-lawused to treat me very badly and my husband was also with her. I would alwayshave to work all day and I wasn’t allowed to take any rest. My husbandhit me once or twice,” she said. Marufa went back to visit her parentsafter four months of marriage and refused to return to her husband’shouse; she is now separated from her husband. “At first [my parents] toldme to stay on in the marriage, but then when I still resisted they said theycan’t force me and it’s better that I come back now becauseit’s harder if I have a child.” Marufa had already been admitted toclass 11 when she left school to get married. She is now back in school andpreparing for her class 12 exam. She hopes to go to university and studypsychology.[126]“I always said even if I got marriedI would continue my education,” said Sabina B., whose parents arrangedfor her to marry at age 14 after losing their house to river erosion. “Myin-laws agreed, but as soon as we were married they said, ‘No’—so I refused to go to their house and got divorced.” Sabina got divorcedone month after her marriage and remained with her parents. She continued hereducation and now, at the age of 18, is applying to university. She remarriedin spring 2014, but is waiting for her husband to finish his undergraduatedegree before she goes to live with him.[127]Some girls encountered resistance fromtheir parents when they tried to return to school after divorce, typicallybecause they were still seen as “marriageable” and subject to someof the same pressures as unmarried girls.“They got me married and I came backand now they want to get me married again and I’m refusing,” saidSara A., who married at 14 but returned to live with her parents after just amonth. Her father took her back home after her in-laws locked her up to preventher from running away. Sara, now 19 or 20, is back in school, but has to payall her school expenses herself, which she does by tutoring other children.“My parents only give me rice, but nothing else— no clothes and nomoney for education. They think if they cut off my education I’ll agree[to marry again].” Sara hopes to make it at least as far as her class 12exam, and says she may marry again “if I finish my education and stand onmy own two feet and meet someone good.”[128]Hafsa A. left class 6 when she married at12 but has been back home living with her parents for a year since her husbandabandoned and divorced her when she was 13. “I really want to go back toschool. I told my parents and they say no. I say, ‘You didn’t giveme a chance,’ but they are still refusing. The neighbors say, ‘Ifyou send her to school she will fall in love with someone.’ That’swhy I’m still not able to go to school.”[129]A small number of the girls Human RightsWatch interviewed had managed to continue their studies after a child marriagewhile living with their in-laws.[130]Haniya M., who is unsure of her age,married a neighbor six months earlier and was preparing for her SSC exam at thetime of the interview. “My in-laws just didn’t mind my going toschool,” she said. Haniya’s husband is also a student, studying inDhaka at a computer training institute. She is grateful to be continuing herstudies, however, especially since at the madrasa where she studies theother girls who married have all left school. Haniya hopes to become a socialworker and have a job where she can “explain to girls not to get married,stay in school, and don’t get pregnant too soon.” She attributesthe fact that she has managed to continue her education in part to herfamily’s financial situation; her parents both work, her father sellingfood in the bazaar and her mother as a seamstress, making them slightly betteroff than others in the community. “People are very poor and theycan’t send their children to school,” Haniya said. “My familyis also poor but there are many people poorer than us.”[131]Early Pregnancy, Lack of Access to Family Planning,and Health ProblemsMy in-laws didn’t really wantbabies, but I didn’t understand how to take medicines to not have achild. I was very young, so I just got pregnant.– Lakshmi S., who married at12 and now, at 18, is the mother of a 6-year- old son and an infant daughter.In Bangladesh and elsewhere, child marriageoften leads to early pregnancy, which can have severe health consequences forboth mothers and babies, including dramatically elevated rates of mortality.[132]Women in Bangladesh have a 1 in 110 chance of dying in childbirth, making suchdeaths “unacceptably common,” according to UNICEF.[133]Part of the reason for this is a high birth rate among adolescent girls.[134]Complications resulting from pregnancy and childbirth are the main cause ofdeath among adolescent girls aged 15-19 years old in developing countries.[135]Globally, research shows that girls aged 10-14 are five times more likely todie during delivery than mothers aged 20-24; girls aged 15-19 are still twiceas likely to die during delivery than women aged 20-24.[136]The children of young mothers also facehigher mortality rates.[137]Young mothers are less likely to get prenatal care and often do not have enoughinformation about or access to proper nutrition while pregnant. Babies born tomothers under 20 years of age in low and middle-income countries face a 50percent higher risk of still birth or dying in the first few weeks versusbabies born to mothers aged 20-29.[138]Babies born toadolescent mothers are also more likely to have low birth weight, which canhave long-term health consequences.[139]Due to physical immaturity, young girls aremore susceptible to obstructed labor, which is a leading cause of maternalmortality globally.[140]Obstructed labor can cause obstetric fistula, a childbirth injury that leavesits victims with urine or fecal incontinence.[141]Data on fistula is difficult to collectbecause of the stigma associated with the condition and the effort involved inreaching remote areas where many of those with fistula live. A 2003 studyestimated the prevalence of obstetric fistula in Bangladesh at 1.69 per 1,000 womenwho had ever been married.[142]The report links child marriage and lack of medical care as key factors leadingto fistula, saying, “While the proximate causes of fistulas are physicalinjuries, the larger causes are social i.e. poverty, lack of education,childbearing at too early age and lack of medical care. In many rural areas,girls are married off just after they experience their first menstrual flow,between 10 and 15 years of age. These girls become pregnant which leads to manyunwanted conditions including mortality and long term morbidity like obstetricfistula.”[143]Globally, UNFPA estimates that 2 million women are living withobstetric fistula injury, with 50,000 to 100,000 new cases occurring each year,in spite of the fact that the condition is almost entirely preventable throughadequate medical care.[144]A doctor supervising a maternal health careprogram in Dhaka told Human Rights Watch, “In my hospital we see manyadolescent pregnancies each day, representing about 20 to 25 percent of thetotal antenatal cases.” She said that these adolescent patients oftensuffer from complications including, “pre-term labour, waters breakingearly, prolonged and obstructed labour, pulmonary hypertension, restrictedgrowth of the foetus in the uterus, anaemia, intractable nausea, vomiting anddehydration, genital injuries, malnourishment, and psychological trauma.”She described efforts her staff members make to counsel married girls and theirin-laws regarding the risks of early pregnancy— and of child marriage.“I consider prevention of early marriage as very important. Counsellingagainst early marriage and early pregnancy is a very importantintervention,” she said.[145]The majority of women and girls who givebirth in Bangladesh do so at home, receiving neither professional prenatal carenor the attendance of a health professional during the birth, according to theWorld Bank.[146]During the period from 2006 through 2013, only 31 percent of births inBangladesh were attended by skilled health personnel.[147]In the course of researching this report,many girls described experiencing health problems which they believed wererelated to early pregnancy. Because few of them had seen a doctor or otherhealth professional, they typically received neither formal diagnosis nortreatment.“I had a miscarriage three monthsinto my pregnancy, six months after I got married,” said Shapna A., whomarried at 12, and is now 13 years old. She felt unwell after the miscarriage.“I wouldn’t feel hungry, I was dizzy, fainting, and became verythin. I don’t want a child now,” she said. Shapna said no one evertaught her anything about contraception.[148]Researchers have found that 70 percent ofwomen who married as children in Bangladesh did not use contraception prior tochildbirth, compared to 49 percent of women who married as adults.[149]The majority of girls interviewed for this report became pregnant soon afterthey married, because they had no information about or access to familyplanning, because their husbands or in-laws demanded that they become pregnant,or because they themselves felt that they needed to have children as soon aspossible.[150]Schools in Bangladesh do not provide any education on family planning, letalone assistance to students in obtaining contraceptive supplies.[151]The most effective way to ensure that all young people have the informationthey need about puberty, family planning, and contraception would be to includethis information in the standard mandatory school curriculum like any otherexaminable subject, according to UNFPA.[152]Many girls do not learn about familyplanning from their mothers or other family members. Abida N.’s daughtermarried at age 13 and had a son 2 years later. “She didn’t knowanything about contraception, and I didn’t tell her anything,”Abida said. “We didn’t have this knowledge.”[153]“I’m the mother— how canI talk to her about these things?” said Farhana B., whose daughtermarried at 14 and had a child 2 years later. “I feel shy. Even my ownmother would never talk to me about this.”[154]Bangladesh has been seen as a model forother countries for its success in reducing its birth rate, an achievementoften attributed to its adoption of a model of using health outreach workers.[155]The married girls interviewed for this report, however, seemed largelyunreached by government efforts to promote family planning. Some NGOs workingin the areas where interviews were conducted teach women and girls about familyplanning and contraception and may also provide contraceptive supplies, butthese programs reach only a small proportion of women and girls, representativesfrom the NGOs told Human Rights Watch.[156]Government hospitals and health clinics have programs that provide condoms,hormonal pills, and other forms of contraception, including hormonal injectionsand patches, but NGO workers said that fees charged for these supplies andservices are a barrier for very poor people.[157]“Girls don’t really understand[about family planning],” an NGO worker said. “Usually theirhusbands decide. They usually end up having children very soon. Childrenusually come in a very unplanned way.”[158]Lakshmi S. married at 12 years old and now,at age 18, has a 6-year-old son and a daughter who she cradled during theinterview who was one month and 6 days old. “My in-laws didn’treally want babies, but I didn’t understand how to take medicines to nothave a child. I was very young, so I just got pregnant,” she said.[159]“My in-laws weren’t asking forkids, but I didn’t understand how not to have them,” said NabilaC., who married at 14 and had a daughter when she was 15. “If I knew how,I would have waited another two or three years.”[160]Even when girls manage to get access tocontraceptive supplies, they do not necessarily know how to use them correctlyin order to prevent pregnancy.“My husband didn’t want me totake pills, so I was hiding it from him,” said Nafisa K., who is notcertain about her age but thinks she is about 14 or 15. She has been marriedfor a year and 7 months and has a 10-month-old daughter. “I took themfrom my mother without her knowing— they were hers. I didn’t takethem every day— I don’t know how to take them.”[161]In addition to a lack of information aboutfamily planning and access to contraception, married children also often facepressure from their husbands and in-laws to get pregnant immediately—andmay fear negative consequences, including abandonment and divorce, if they failto produce children.“My husband wanted a child rightaway,” said Rekha H., who married at age 12. “I had no informationabout contraception. I didn’t know anything [about contraception] or useanything.” At age 17 or 18, Rekha has 2 sons, and says she and hersister, who married at age 11, both have health problems she believes are aresult of early pregnancy. “We feel weak and we can’t workproperly,” she said.[162]“They’ve already asked me tohave children,” Azima B., who is 14 and married a year ago, said of herin-laws. “I am thinking I will have to have children. I live in theirhouse— I have to keep them happy. My husband has also asked me to havechildren. I said I wanted to wait for two years, but they said, ‘No, youshould have children now.’ So I guess I will have to have children now.”[163]Domestic Abuse and Violence Including Rape[H]e forcibly entered me and I would cryso much that everything would get wet from my tears. It was so difficult, sopainful. The first time, the next day I couldn’t even move and they tookme and gave me a bath.– Rashida L., who married when shewas 10 or 11.An estimated 60 percent of married women inBangladesh have experienced abuse at the hands of their spouse or in-lawsaccording to the UN special rapporteur on violence against women.[164]Bangladesh government responses, including police response, legal assistance,and the provision of emergency shelter for women fleeing violence, are notadequate.Research demonstrates a strong correlationbetween earlier marriage and greater risk of experiencing spousal violence. Astudy across 7 countries found that girls who married before the age of 15 weremore likely to experience spousal abuse than women who married after 25.[165]Married girls interviewed for this report described abuse as commonplace andthemselves as having limited options to resist and escape it.Most of the girls we interviewed were sentto live with their husbands and in-laws immediately after marriage and wereexpected to have sex with their husbands. They had little ability to refusesexual relations or to determine how and when sex took place.Rashida L. married when she was 10 or 11,before she had begun menstruating. Her husband was about 25 years old.“At that time when my period started I didn’t know what it was andI didn’t tell my husband. I told another woman, and she asked how old Iwas and she said I shouldn’t have had sex with my husband. I said heforcibly entered me and I would cry so much that everything would get wet frommy tears. It was so difficult, so painful. The first time, the next day Icouldn’t even move and they took me and gave me a bath.”[166]“He forced himself upon me and beatme and finally divorced me and sent me home,” Hafsa A., who married atage 12, said. “I didn’t know what I was supposed to do.”[167]Ruhana M. married at age 12, just a fewdays after she began menstruating. “When my husband used to come to staywith me [have sex] I wouldn’t know how to stay with him,” she said.“I would lose consciousness and my teeth would clench and they wouldthrow water on me. I would go out from my husband’s room to sleep with mysister and she would explain to me and then take me back to my husband’sroom.” The couple were living in Dhaka, but Ruhana’s husband becamefrustrated with her and took her to his parents who live in a village and lefther there to live with them.[168]Many young brides we interviewed hadexperienced assault and other physical abuse at the hands of their husbands andin-laws.[169]“He tied my hands and feet andstarted putting me in a bag and said he would kill me with a machete and throwmy body in the river,” Rashida L. said, about the husband she married atage 10 or 11.[170]Laki B., age 15, was eight months pregnantand asleep along with her parents and siblings in her parents’ two-roombamboo home when they awoke to the sound of crackling. Laki’s estrangedhusband had set fire to their house. The family managed to escape, but thehouse was half destroyed.Laki, who married when she was 12 and herhusband was 27, told Human Rights Watch she fled back to her parents severalmonths earlier when her husband’s long history of beating her culminatedin him kicking her in the stomach when she was 5 months pregnant. The abusebegan immediately after the marriage, she said, first at the hands ofLaki’s parents-in-law but then from her husband too. Laki’s explanationfor why they beat her was, “Because I wasn’t very good looking, andalso because I eat too much rice. Since I was pregnant, if I eat too much ricethey beat me up.”Laki left and moved back in with herparents. But her husband showed up at their home several months later.“He wanted to stay with me. I refused because I was afraid he would kickme again. Then he tried to hang himself. We cut him down and got his aunt tocome get him. But a few days later he came back and tried to burn our housedown,” Laki said. The fire was nine days earlier and Laki had not seenher husband since then. Laki’s mother said they saw him the night of thefire and tried to catch him, but he got away. Laki’s baby was due in 10or 12 days. She hopes to get a divorce and stay with her parents.[171]“One day he kicked me in the lowerabdomen, another time he came in and put a pillow over my mouth,” saidShahina L., age 14, describing the abuse she encountered from the husband shemarried 5 or 6 months earlier. “[The abuse] started as soon as I gotmarried. My husband used to beat me up and my in-laws shouted at me because Iwould protest about his beating me.” Shahina’s husband had severescarring from burns from his ankle to his back; she does not know how he gotthe scars, but wonders if perhaps he has mental health problems because ofbeing burned. After two months of this abuse, she managed to call hersister’s husband and ask him for help and he came and rescued her andbrought her back to her parents.[172]“My mother-in-law and otherelders come and say he won’t gamble and play cards and beat me anymoreand then they take me back [to my husband]. After they take me back, he startsthose things again,” said Paramita B., who married at 14 or 15 to a manwho was 20 or 22 years old at the time. She said she has endured regularphysical abuse from her husband, as well as being denied food, since aboutthree months after they married. Paramita showed Human Rights Watch multipleold scars and new bruises on her legs. “When I had appendicitis herefused to treat my illness. Recently when he beat my leg he also kicked mystomach,” said Paramita, who has a 3-year-old son. She has fled back toher parents’ house seven or eight times to escape violence, and herparents are encouraging her to get a divorce, but she always goes back.“I have a small child— I don’t want him to befatherless,” Paramita said. “It will be a dishonor. Anyway, if Icome back home to my parents how long will I be able to stay? They are alsopoor— how long will they be able to feed us?” Paramita’sfather is old and struggles to do agricultural work in an area where the ricefields are damaged every year by flooding. “I got married for happiness,but this is how it is now,” said Paramita.[173]Disputes over dowry were often a triggerfor abuse.“My mother-in-law scolded because wedidn’t give anything good for dowry,” said Bibi M., who married at14. “During marriage a lot of people give jewellery or furniture but wewere in such a state that we couldn’t give them anything. Mymother-in-law would go to other weddings and compare: ‘They got this andthis and my son got nothing.’ Even now my husband says: ‘A lot ofpeople give vans [motorized rickshaws] to their husband, but you didn’tgive me anything.’”[174]“My mother-in-law said lots ofthings, like, ‘She hasn’t given you anything. I’ll get you aprettier girl from a rich family,’” said Hafsa A., who married atage 12 and was abandoned by her husband after about a year of marriage.“She told him to take me back home.”[175]Some girls whose families paid dowry toldHuman Rights Watch they faced pressure after the marriage to pay more or to paymore quickly.“They got me married with one lakh[100,000 taka – US$1,299] but they wanted another 50,000 [$649] and theyall started beating me— my husband, my mother-in-law, my father-in-law,and my sister-in-law,” said Roshana M., who married at the age of 14.“When I said I couldn’t pay they sent me back home.”[176]Nasima A. married at 16. Her parentspromised a dowry of 62,000 taka [$805] but still owed 10,000 [$130] at the timeof the wedding. “After marrying, for one month it was okay,” Nasimasaid. “But my husband used to drink and do drugs and he started to beatme up and say I ruined his life and demand money. I couldn’t give himmoney, so he beat me. My father-in-law used to say, ‘This girldoesn’t want to live with you— if she did, she would have broughtthe money.’” Nasima’s father eventually managed to pay theremaining 10,000 taka [$130], but the abuse continued and after about 2 yearsof marriage, Nasima fled back to her parents. With the help of an NGO, she hasnow filed a court case seeking a divorce and return of the dowry, but herhusband and his family have not appeared for the court dates.[177]“When I first got married, my husbandand in-laws were very caring,” said Musamat N., who married at age 12, toa 19-year-old husband. “But there were some dues for the dowry andbecause we hadn’t paid it they started behaving badly with me.”Musamat’s father had abandoned her mother and Musamat’s mother, whodoes domestic work, had told Musamat’s in-laws she would need one to twoyears to pay the second half of the dowry. “But after two months theystarted asking for it,” Musamat said. “She managed to get the moneyfrom the people she works for. I came and took the money and paid the rest ofthe dowry. Now things are a bit better.”[178]A number of young wives, especially thosefrom slightly more well-off families, found that their husbands expected to befinancially supported either by their wife or her family, and when suchfinancial support was not forthcoming, these husbands responded with abuse.Taslima A. was 15 years old and alreadyworking in a garment factory in Dhaka when her stepmother (her father’ssecond wife) arranged for her to marry the son of a neighbor. “He was notnice,” Taslima said. “He didn’t do any work. He expected meto bring money and when I didn’t he beat me.” Taslima’sfather, seeing the abuse, took Taslima away from her husband and back to thehome where he lives with Taslima’s stepmother three months prior toTaslima being interviewed by Human Rights Watch. “I’m not divorcedfrom him yet,” Taslima said. “I’m trying to get divorced, buthe refuses to give me a divorce. I refuse to eat his rice, though— he hasno money and can’t provide rice.” Taslima’s mother andsiblings live in a small village in Noakhali; Taslima is solely responsible forproviding their financial support from her wages at the factory, as her fatherhas no legs and does not work. “I’m like a son and adaughter,” she says. She earns 6,000 taka [$78] a month. She says thather parents are looking for another husband for her to marry after her divorcecomes through. She says she does not know whether she wants to get marriedagain but she will do whatever her parents tell her to.[179]Household responsibilities and the tightgrip of control by in-laws may mean that some girls do a disproportionateamount of the household’s work and even become virtual prisoners in thehome.“Before I would go out and play anddo whatever I want,” said Masuma A., who married at the age of 15 to a25-year-old husband. “Now that I am married I can’t really go outmuch because if I go to the road my mother-in-law says bad things. I only go toweddings and to see my parents.” Masuma’s first child was born whenshe was 15.[180]“She was tortured several times afterher marriage,” Suresh M. said, about his daughter who married when shewas 16. “They used to beat her up. When her husband goes away for workher mother-in-law gives her so many tasks and she doesn’t finish them andthen when her husband comes home her mother-in-law complains to her husbandabout her. She came back home, but she prefers to go back even when she’sbeaten because in Hindu society it is very difficult to get married for asecond time so she thought she wouldn’t have a future if she didn’tgo back.”[181]“When a woman wakes up in the morningand sets her foot on the floor a man finds fault with this,” said SaimaA. “Women work much harder than men do here.”[182]AbandonmentI begged him on my knees to take me back,but he refused. For a girl, after her parents’ home, her in-laws’house is her home, so I wanted to go back there. Girls don’t get marriedtwice, so I knew I had to go back.–Hafsa A., who married at age 12.A number of girls interviewed by HumanRights Watch described facing extreme financial hardship and/or social stigmaas a result of being abandoned by their husbands who were not compelled to paysupport, even for children.The marriages that preceded abandonmentwere often violent and deeply troubled. Faced with a reality of being unable tofeed their children, being returned to parents who do not want them back,and/or facing extreme social stigma as a result of the broken marriage, somegirls interviewed by Human Rights Watch saw returning to abusive husbands andin-laws who had rejected them as the best of their intolerable options.[183]“When I was five months pregnant, Iwas sent back,” said Roshana M., who married at 14. Her in-laws demanded50,000 taka [$649] in additional dowry after she was married and abandoned herafter she was unable to pay. That was a year and a half ago—Roshana isnow 15 or 16 and has a one-year-old daughter. “They’re not takingme back. I want to go back. Even if they beat me, I want to go back,”Roshana said. “People will say bad things about me now that I have achild, so even though it is very painful for me I still want to go back.”[184]“I begged him on my knees to take meback, but he refused,” said Hafsa A., who married at 12. Her husbandabandoned her under pressure from his mother who was unhappy that Hafsa’sfamily had not been able to pay a dowry. Hafsa’s mother-in-law also toldher son falsely that Hafsa spoke on the phone to other men. “One day hebrought me home and said, ‘I’ll come and get you in a few days,’but then he sent me a divorce paper. For a girl, after her parents’ home,her in-laws’ house is her home, so I wanted to go back there. Girlsdon’t get married twice, so I knew I had to go back.” Hafsa has nowbeen back with her parents for a year; her husband shows no signs of changinghis mind and taking her back.[185]“My in-laws asked my parents to takeme back, but my parents refused – they said we married her and she willstay here,” said Sediqa A., who married at age 15 to a 28-year-old man.“Then my in-laws forcibly divorced me.” Because Sediqa’sparents did not want her back, she had planned to stay with her husband, eventhough she was beaten almost daily by her husband and in-laws, often with astick, and deprived of food. However, one day after she had been married forabout a year, her in-laws took her to the house of the chair of the UnionParishad (the local government council), where divorce papers had already beenprepared and were awaiting signature. “They told me to sign. Theydidn’t give me a chance to say anything, and I signed,” Sediqasaid. She then returned to live with her parents, at age 16, and she is nowstudying again. “I said no to the marriage, but despite that they got memarried. I’ll continue studying and find my own way.”[186]III. Bangladesh Government Responses to ChildMarriageThe current government of Bangladesh, inpower since 2009, has pledged swift action on child marriage and committed toend it by 2041. At the July 2014 Girl Summit in London, Bangladesh’sPrime Minister Sheikh Hasina further committed to end marriage for girls underthe age of 15 by 2021 and reduce by more than one-third the number of girlsbetween the ages of 15 and 18 who marry. As part of this effort, she pledgedthat her government would revise the Child Marriage Restraint Act (CMRA),develop a national plan of action on child marriage before 2015, and take othersteps to change social norms and engage civil society in the fight againstchild marriage.[187]These are welcome and important changes,but as this report shows, current efforts are insufficient and the governmentis already falling behind on meeting its commitments, with the end-2014deadline for reform of the CMRA and development of the national plan of actionalready past with neither goal achieved. Worse yet, the government risks goingin the wrong direction and making it even harder to stop child marriage throughits proposal to lower the age of marriage for girls to 16 with parentalconsent.[188]The commitments by Prime Minister Hasina will not be achieved unless they arebacked up by legislation, policies, and programs specifically and effectivelydesigned to take on Bangladesh’s serious problem with child marriage.Bangladesh has been hailed in recent yearsas an impressive success story in terms of development. The United NationsDevelopment Program (UNDP) cites the country’s “remarkable”progress in reducing poverty, improving infant health, reducing maternalmortality, and reducing the incidence of communicable diseases.[189]The Asia Foundation calls Bangladesh’s economic and social development a“unique success story”, citing a decline in poverty from 60 percentto 30 percent since the 1990s, the achievement of gender parity in primary andsecondary school enrollment, declining fertility rates and infant and maternalmortality, and rising life expectancy which it says “are among thefastest improvements in basic living condition ever seen in history.”[190]Many of these achievements, especially the increase in access to education forgirls and poverty reduction, should play an important role in reducing childmarriage, even in the absence of the specific focus on ending child marriagethat Bangladesh’s prime minister announced in July 2014.Plan International has conducted researchwhich suggests that there has been a decline in the rate of child marriage inBangladesh, although the rate remains high.[191] Theresearch found that 77 percent of women currently aged 45–49 reportedthat they had married before they turned 18, whereas 70 percent of womencurrently aged 20–24 had married before age 18.[192]The decline was more pronounced in relation to marriages before the age of 15,where 43 percent of women currently aged 45–59 had married before theyreached the age of 15, in comparison to 23 percent of women who are currently15 to 19 years old.[193]The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)expresses concern about the lack of greater progress in reducing child marriagesaying, “The median age of marriage for girls is approximately 15.5 yearsreported by married women ages 20-49 in 2007—men by contrast averageapproximately 26 years of age as of their first marriage—figures whichhave remained stagnant for decades despite improvements in girls’education.”[194]Bangladesh’s ruling party, the AwamiLeague, claims significant success in reducing child marriage, saying in a July2014 statement: “In Bangladesh, the practice of child marriage hasdeclined in the last two decades. The marriageable age for women is 18, but 20years ago 52% of the nation’s women would be married within 15 years ofage. At present this rate has declined to 17%. The proportion of women marryingin their early teens continues to decline as a result of education, employmentand social awareness.”[195]Research for this report produced a widevariety of views on whether the current government’s efforts to end childmarriage are effective. A significant number of NGO workers and communitymembers cited some progress, but they generally felt that it was too slow andmany obstacles remained. Donors have invested increasing funds recently insupporting efforts to reduce the prevalence of child marriage in Bangladesh,both through support for government efforts and through community-level NGOprograms.“Ten years ago the situation was muchworse” an NGO worker in Gaibandha said. “Ten years ago, there wereboth a larger number of girls getting married and the ages of marriage wereyounger. The government already has a law, but the implementation isn’tthere.”[196]Reshma L., age 22, who married at 15, saidshe believed that attitudes are changing somewhat. “I know the right agesto get married are 18 for women and 22 for men, but at that time wedidn’t know. My niece is 15 and we are blocking her marriage for the next2 to 3 years. The government has done publicity through mobile phones to tellpeople not to do child marriage. My parents knew [it was forbidden] but thelaws weren’t as strict then as they are now. Now they know better andthey are protecting my niece.”[197]Other interviewees were less hopeful, and afew NGO workers and community activists said child marriage is actuallyincreasing in their areas, attributing this to various factors includingreligious conservatism and parents’ increasing fear of premaritalrelationships due to growing use of mobile phones. Some community members felthopeless about the situation of women. “The government is doing nothingto prevent these things. People are getting killed. The government couldprevent violence against women. [But] men have all the value. Women have novalue here,” Saima Z. said.[198]This section examines the efficacy of someof the existing measures the government has taken that should directly orindirectly help to prevent child marriage, and identifies areas where thegovernment should do more.Efforts to Promote Access to EducationOne of the government’s keystrategies for increasing access to education was the abolition of primaryschool fees in the 1990s, making education through class five free for allchildren. The government has also made primary education compulsory.While abolishing fees made education farmore affordable, there are still associated costs parents must pay in order forchildren to go to school. For the poorest of families, these costs puteducation beyond reach. One family after another described how the costs ofexam fees, uniforms, copies, pens, stationery, and tutoring put school out ofreach for them, even for young children for whom there are no school fees andfor whom books are free.[199]Some families struggled or failed to keep their children in primary schoolbecause the primary schools closest to their home were non-government schools,where fees are charged.These findings are echoed by research onBangladesh funded by the UK’s Department for International Developmentwhich found that income and food security, both indicators used to measurepoverty, had the “most cross-cutting and significant effects” onaccess to education.[200]The researchers wrote: “[D]ata suggest that policies that have beenintroduced to enable the poor to attend school such as free schooling;subsidised schoolbooks and stipends for the poor to attend school are notaccurately targeted or having the desired effects.”[201]The research also documented the prevalence of major associated costs ofeducation, even in primary school, finding that the average cost of primaryschool per child per year was US$55, a major burden in a country where thegross national income per capita was $520. This was in spite of the fact thatschool is “free.”[202]Some associated costs of education thatexclude poor children are a result of questionable practices or corruption byteachers. Private coaching is a particularly expensive associated cost, oftenbeginning from around class four or five but sometimes even earlier, and iseasily subject to abuse.[203]Teachers often offer private coaching to their own students, essentiallycharging students for teaching outside of regular class hours subjects whichshould be fully covered during class hours. “You have to take privatecoaching to pass the exam,” an NGO worker explained. “Teachers onlypass those who pay them for coaching. When parents are not educated, they haveno choice but to take coaching. It should be abolished.”[204]Another problem is that even when books arefree, students may be under pressure to use “guidebooks” which arenot free. “The government has made a rule to use no guidebook or haveprivate coaching until class eight,” a teacher in Sirajganj said. “Butin guidebooks, they have all the answers to questions in the text books –and people are trying to sell these guidebooks. Teachers are lazy and parentswho are uneducated can’t help their children. There is corruption betweenteachers and the people selling the guidebooks. The salesman will say,‘Send me five students [to buy books] and I will pay you this much.’”[205]There were many suggestions that thegovernment should look for ways to abolish costs associated with education.“That would be of some help,” an NGO worker said. “Of course thegovernment has made education free, but if they did a little more it would go along way.”[206]“[Girls will stay in school] if thegovernment makes sure education is free until the SSC exam [normally taken atage 16] and makes a law saying all girls have to go to school until theSSC,” a community leader in Noakhali said, when asked how the governmentcould decrease the number of girls dropping out of school and getting married.“At least for girls, the government should pay for exam fees, books, etcetera. Uniforms should be provided for free. School committees should meetwith all parents and tell them not to marry their girls.”[207]Some families had managed to get theirchildren through class five but could not afford to pay once older children reachedlevels where fees are charged. Many girls told Human Rights Watch that theyleft school after class five because the greater costs of subsequent gradeswere prohibitive for their families or sometimes because continuing to classsix would involve going to a different school and such a school was notaccessible from their home.Gender discrimination also plays a role inwhether girls will receive an education and a few families interviewed for thisreport prioritized education for their sons, or simply did not value educationfor girls beyond primary school. Other families choose to keep girls home whileboys continue to attend school because of concerns about harassment and safetyas girls travel to school, especially if the distance to school becomes greaterin later grades. In the majority of cases, parents did see the value ofeducation for girls and had often tried desperately to find ways to keep theirdaughters in school, but failed in the end.[208]The government has established severalstipend and scholarship programs, including a major stipend programspecifically for assisting girls in secondary school. These programs howeverfail to reach many girls at risk of child marriage. To be eligible for somebenefits, girls must meet strict criteria on grades and attendance which areoften particularly difficult for children from poor families.[209]Poverty is likely to lead to gaps in attendance, sometimes because the familysimply has no food. These gaps exclude girls from eligibility for stipends thatrequire 80 percent attendance.[210]Girls from poor families are also more likely to have uneducated parents, whichleaves them at a disadvantage as they have no one to help them with theirstudies at home; they are thus less likely to earn merit-based scholarships.[211]Human Rights Watch also heard concerns thatthe impact of stipends and scholarships may be undermined by corruption andnepotism. One teacher told Human Rights Watch:The subsidy is a good initiative bygovernment, but it is being abused. People who aren’t poor are getting itbecause of corruption by the [Union Parishad] chair who is the one who gets todetermine who gets the subsidy. There is a lot of nepotism by the chairman– the subsidy may go to people he knows, not people who really deserveit.[212]This concern was echoed by researchers whoexamined a stipend program in Bangladesh for poor primary school students whereparticipants in the program were selected by school management committees. Theresearchers’ study, which included interviews with 21 officials from theBangladesh government, donors, NGOs, and administrators of the stipend program,concluded: “With no clear-cut guidelines or empirical methods foridentifying the poorest students, it is possible that the vacuum could befilled by deliberate or unintended biases and distortions. Almost universally,those interviewed expressed scepticism that SMCs would not succumb to some formof corruption or bias.”[213]Social Protection and Disaster ReliefThey eat everything that is meant for us.–Hasina A., 15 or 16 years old, ongovernment assistance.[214]The government has extensive socialprotection programs. In its 2011-2015 plan, “Accelerating Growth andReducing Poverty,” the government lays out a detailed plan for socialprotection, including listing dozens of separate social protection programs.[215]The plan repeatedly mentions early marriage as a challenge, and reiterates thegovernment’s goal of increasing the age of marriage, especially forwomen. The plan also discusses prioritizing women within social protectionprograms, saying: “The existing programs for social protection for disadvantagedwomen would be continued. Gender sensitive measures would be taken to protectwomen from economic vulnerability and risk due to natural disasters.”[216]The government acknowledges thedifficulties and gaps in reaching the staggering number of people in need inBangladesh:The main challenges of implementing socialprotection programs are coverage issues, targeting beneficiaries, leakages, anddisparity in regional distribution…Given the large demand for socialprotection support and the present low coverage, public expenditures on socialprotection programs will be increased from 2 percent of GDP in 2009 to 3percent by the end of [2015]. At the same time, efforts will be made to makethe existing and new programs much better focused on reaching the intendedbeneficiaries and serving the needs of long term poverty reduction strategy.[217]Among the many people Human Rights Watchinterviewed who were apparently living in extreme poverty, including widows,people with disabilities, and elderly people, only a few had received anygovernment assistance, and almost none had received long-term help. Insteadthere were consistent complaints from those we interviewed that assistance isgiven not to the poor and the needy but as a form of nepotism or political patronage.A member of a Union Parishad (localgovernment council) attributed this frustration to what she said was a supplyof assistance that was miniscule compared to the need. “There might be3,000 eligible people in a Union and we might get 10 cards,” she said, referringto the cards that are distributed to people who have been granted monthlyassistance by the government. She described a process through which the chairand members of the Union Parishads consulted with community members, localpolice, teachers, doctors, and family planning officers to determine whichfamilies should receive government assistance. “I’ve heard invarious places that corruption takes place,” she said. “But notwith our chair – he is very well off and gives his own money sometimes.He has a big heart.”[218]Human Rights Watch heard allegations ofcorruption from NGO workers who alleged that in some districts assistance neverreached needier members of the community. “If you go to the governmentoffices there are a lot of services, but they are not functioning,” anNGO worker in Noakhali said. “It all goes to [local officials’] ownnetworks.”[219]This view seemed to be shared by the formerdeputy governor of the Bangladesh Bank who in a 2014 speech suggested that anofficial database of poor and extremely poor people was needed to make socialprotection programs effective and avoid inadequate beneficiary targeting,nepotism, corruption and leakage, and overlapping of program distribution.“Otherwise,” he said, “no projects will be successful.”[220]Interviewees often said that they knew orknew of people who did receive assistance, but that they believed thatreceiving it was based on connections or bribes, not need or clear eligibilitycriteria.“They bribe the government officials– they give 2,000 taka [$26] and then they continue to get relief,”Fatima A. said, explaining why she believes others in her community receivegovernment assistance but her family does not, even after their house and landwere swept away by river erosion. “The member and chair [of the UnionParishad] when they need our votes they come to our house but then [after theelection] they forget. Those who pay two or three thousand taka [$26 or $39]get assistance for two or three years, but we can’t give anything so wedon’t get anything.”[221]Although most interviewees were living inextreme poverty, often to the point of regularly going hungry, virtually noneof them had received government assistance. None of the interviewees who hadlost their land and homes to river erosion had received any assistance from thegovernment. Interviewees described a system where decisions about who wouldreceive assistance are in the sole discretion of local government officials.“I have never received any help fromthe government,” Beauty A., a single mother of three said. Beauty hassupported her three children since her husband abandoned her eight years ago—shealso supports her mother. “I have asked the member and the chair for helpseveral times but they never give it. I asked to put my mother on the old agelist but he refused. The member and chair say, ‘There are so many poorpeople in this country – how do you expect us to help?’ My motheris injured now and I can’t even pay her medical bills.”[222]“The government gives a lot of foodfor us – rice, pulses,” Musamat C., a 20-year-old single mother oftwo told Human Rights Watch. “It’s given to the UP. But when we goto ask for it they say, ‘Come back later,’ or, ‘We have none.’I never got anything. When we go to the member [of the Union Parishad] they say,‘If we help you, you will feel insulted. You people eat better than us– we shouldn’t give you anything.’”[223]“The government gives reliefsometimes to people here,” Shahnara N., a 25-year-old widow and mother oftwo said. “But my name is not on the list. I don’t know how to geton the list. The local UP [Union Parishad] member makes the list so she decideswhether I can be on it. My mother and I went to her house several times to askto be on the list but so far she hasn’t agreed.” Shahnara’shusband was murdered four years ago. She struggles to feed her children bycaring for other people’s livestock. She left school after class twobecause her father, a fisherman, could not afford to pay for her education.[224]Some people said they believe that localgovernment officials kept assistance for themselves rather than distributingit. Human Rights Watch put questions about how assistance is distributed andconcerns that needy families are excluded to the central government of Bangladeshin a February 2015 letter. At the time of writing, we had received no response.“Whatever is given for the [UnionParishad] chairman and others never reaches us. They keep it forthemselves,” said Khadija A., a mother of 4 whose oldest child, a 13-year-olddaughter, just left school because the family cannot afford for her to continueattending. “I am living in such a condition that even if it rains Iwon’t be able to stay in my house. We have no roof on our house. Pleaselet the government know how we are living.”[225]“The government doesn’t doanything,” said Hasina A., who left school and married at age 15 becauseher family was too poor to pay for her education. “They eat everythingthat is meant for us. They don’t do anything for the poor.” Hasinasaid the government should give rice to poor people, especially to people wholose their land and become homeless, as her grandfather did a year earlier.“His house and everything was taken away by the river,” she said.“They don’t give anything even to those who lose their land toriver erosion.”[226]Aside from the challenges in accessingassistance programs for people grappling with poverty, our research found gapsin assistance to families affected by natural disasters. The government’snational plan for disaster management for 2008 through 2015 states that thegovernment’s vision is “to reduce the risk of people, especiallythe poor and the disadvantaged, from the effects of natural, environmental andhuman induced hazards, to a manageable and acceptable humanitarian level, andto have in place an efficient emergency response system capable of handlinglarge scale disasters.”[227]The plan includes a one-page “Plan for women, children, elderly anddisabled” which instructs each “concerned” ministry todevelop a plan for protecting these populations from disaster.[228]The national government has also made efforts towardsdeveloping a national climate change adaptation policy that prioritizes theimpact of climate change on vulnerable groups. In the National Adaptation Planof Action (NAPA)[229]submitted to the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention onClimate Change (UNFCCC) in 2009, the Ministry of Environment and Forestsacknowledged the impact of climate change in Bangladesh and recognized that“adverse impacts from climate change will fall disproportionately on[the] most vulnerable groups within the country as a whole as well as withineach vulnerable region of the country.”[230] TheNAPA specifically identifies poor women and children as most vulnerable andstates that “[a]ny attempt to adapt or to cope with the adverse impactsof climate change will need to have special emphasis on protecting and helpingthese most vulnerable groups.”[231] Similarly, theBangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan, the primary nationalclimate change policy document for 2009 through 2018, states that “[t]heneeds of the poor and vulnerable, including women and children, will bemainstreamed in all activities under the Action Plan”.[232]However, none of these disaster reduction and climate change plansmention child marriage or target any interventions at the link between naturaldisasters and child marriage.A number of families interviewed who hadbeen directly affected by Cyclone Aila reported that they had received smallamounts of food or cash assistance in the immediate aftermath of the cyclone.Aside from this assistance, none of the interviewees affected by disasters,including those who had lost their homes and all of their land to rivererosion, described receiving any type of disaster assistance.Khushi M., who lost her home to river erosion,told Human Rights Watch:The government hasn’t given usanything – even people who lost their houses [to river erosion]didn’t get anything. They made a colony [resettlement community] for somepeople who lost their houses, but the member and the chair [of the UnionParishad] handpicked who could settle there and it wasn’t the mostvulnerable. The colonies were given to government goons who then sold them for5,000 taka [$65] to each family. The goons paid 2 to 3,000 taka [$26-39] to thegovernment for each place and then sold them for 5,000 taka [$65]. This countryis a poor country and they’ve sent us to this place where there isnothing but poverty. What can I say? We always have to worry.[233]An NGO worker in Laxmipur made similarallegations: “Sometimes the government builds colonies for them [peopledisplaced by river erosion], but the local leaders always give them to thepeople they know. There is never enough for everyone.”[234]Birth RegistrationThe government has taken significant stepsto ensure that all births are registered and that all Bangladeshis have birthcertificates. A 2004 law made registration of births mandatory within 45 daysof the birth.[235]UNICEF expressed concern in 2014 that many families delay registering birthsuntil they need to enroll their children in school.[236]However, activists interviewed for this report felt that the law has had apositive impact and new births are now consistently registered and have beenfor about two years.[237]The 2004 law also aimed to issue birthcertificates for adults and by 2008, 40 percent of people had received birthcertificates and another 30 percent were expected to receive them soon.[238]In 2009, the government established an online database of birth registrationswhich by February 2014 had captured 101 million registrations (out of apopulation of over 166 million), with plans for all manual registrations tomigrate to the online system by the end of 2014.[239]This system is designed to fully replace manual registration.[240]One of the explicit goals of the newinitiative on birth registration is to prevent child marriage.[241]Child marriage could be significantly curbed if births were universally andaccurately registered and officials conducting and registering marriagesverified the ages of all spouses through the online system and refused topermit underage marriages.[242]In cases documented by Human Rights Watch,the ages of the spouses were either not verified by religious leadersconducting marriage ceremonies or registrars registering marriages or, wherethey were, false birth certificates had been issued by local governmentofficials. In other cases, officials remained willing to perform or registermarriages even when they knew that the girl was underage and the marriageunlawful.Many interviewees described the ease withwhich families found registrars or other officials willing to conduct weddingswith no proof of age, or who actively assisted families, with the payment of abribe, to forge birth certificates. NGO workers and community leadersinterviewed by Human Rights Watch indicated that officials issuing birthcertificates or performing marriages are not obliged to verify information throughthe online registration system and do not typically do so even though thisshould be a key mechanism for preventing the use of forged birth certificates.[243]“The kazi [Muslim marriageregistrar] came here to perform my marriage,” Soraya A., age 18, whomarried at age 15, told Human Rights Watch. “He said, ‘She’snot 18 so you need to change that [birth] certificate.’ We got it changedand then I got married.” Soraya explained that her family had her birthcertificate changed by the Union Parishad (local council) office and paid anofficial 500 taka [$6.49] to change it. The official issued a new birthcertificate with the same registration number but a different date of birth.[244]“When the kazi saw that mydaughter’s birth certificate said that she was 14, he refused to do themarriage,” said Farhana B. “He took it to the [Union Parishad]chairman and got it changed and then did the marriage.” The chairmancharged the family 100 taka [$1.30] to change the birth certificate.[245]Shilpa A. told Human Rights Watch that heruncle who was running for political office initially got her a fake birthcertificate saying she was 18 so that she could vote for him and her parentslater used the fake birth certificate to have her married, when she was 15.[246]“We did a lot of demonstrationsagainst child marriage,” Saima A., a community activist in Noakhali, toldHuman Rights Watch. “But in reality the government representatives [atthe Union Parishad] change the age on birth certificates to allow childmarriage. So our work seems futile in the face of the government peoplethemselves.”[247]“We need to stop corruption and the changing of birth certificates [bythe government],” Saima A.’s husband told Human Rights Watch.“All of the birth certificates are [accessible] at the Union Parishadinformation center, but if you pay 500 or 1,000 taka [$6.49 or $13] it will bechanged. This needs to stop. One way to stop this is to have a certificate bothat birth and at school and require both to be shown so it is harder to docorruption.”[248]Girls interviewed by Human Rights Watchsaid officials rarely ask the future spouses themselves about their ages.Instead they rely on the word of the fathers, who are typically the ones whohave arranged the marriage.“I don’t know if he asked formy birth certificate,” Marufa B. said about the maulvi [Muslimreligious leader] who performed her marriage ceremony when she was 15 yearsold. “He didn’t ask my age.”[249]“The kazi asked for my age,but he asked my father,” said Rumi C., who married at 15. “Idon’t know what he said.”[250]“My marriage ceremony was by a kazi.He asked my age and elders in my area who were there said I was 18. I had abirth certificate but he didn’t see it. The birth certificate had my realage,” said Karuna M., who married at 14.[251]In some cases, even when officials saw abirth certificate that showed that a bride was underage, they were stillwilling to perform the marriage.“A maulvi performed mymarriage,” said Nabila C., who married at 14. “He saw my birthcertificate. It said I was 15. He didn’t mind. I faced no obstacles ingetting married – no one tried to stop me.”[252]Families also seemed to have littledifficulty finding a notary public or other official who did not require abirth certificate at all.“The kazi came to myhouse to do my marriage. He asked my age and my parents said 18. Hedidn’t ask for a document,” said Mala D., who married at age 13.[253]Local Government’s Role in Preventing ChildMarriageMany interviewees believed that localgovernment had a critical role to play in devising and implementing effectivesolutions to child marriage. Some activists reported that they had beensuccessful at stopping planned child marriages by reporting them to localgovernment officials and asking them to intervene.[254]By contrast, many others Human Rights Watch spoke to alleged that corruption inlocal government and a lack of political will impede an adequate response tochild marriages.“The best way to end child marriageis if people in the administration – the chair, the member, the police,the officer in charge, and the deputy member sit together and decide to endchild marriage,” a community leader in Noakhali told Human Rights Watch.“If they do this, I am 100 percent certain they can end child marriageforever. They need to take more initiative, be more active, sit togethermore.”[255]“If the government forms a committeeand does campaigns in every village, [child marriage] can be stopped,”said Latifa A., who married at age 14.[256]Some interviewees pointed to the crucialrole of the central government in ensuring that laws and policies areconsistently enforced across all institutions and in all parts of the countryand to the current gaps in enforcement. In numerous cases, people describedsituations where local officials, both from the Union Parishad (local council)and the police, had intervened to prevent a child marriage in one village onlyto have the family easily circumvent their efforts by going to anotherjurisdiction or a different official instead. A number of interviewees saidthat they had gone “to court” to get married; these people had seena notary or lawyer and signed an affidavit which they believed made them married.In fact, such an affidavit has no legal validity.[257]“My wedding ceremony was supposed tobe in my [parents’] house but someone filed a complaint regarding itbeing a child marriage, so the middleman moved us to Khulna town and we signedan affidavit of marriage at the court instead,” said Laila B., whomarried a man of 25 or 26 when she was 12 years old. “We just had to goto Khulna for two hours.”[258]“I took her to court to marry becauseshe was young so the kazi wouldn’t marry her,” Anika M.said, regarding her daughter’s marriage at age 14. “I knew the kaziwouldn’t marry a girl this age.” At the court she said sheencountered no such problems. “I just went there and told them her nameand age. You don’t have to show a birth certificate—we did it througha lawyer.” The lawyer’s fee for the service was 600 taka [$8].[259]“A lot of people get married in courtafter someone tried to stop them at the UP [Union Parishad],” a communityleader explained. “They get a fake birth certificate elsewhere.” Hesaid he had also been involved in situations where police intervened, tookprospective child spouses into custody, and released them only if the parentsagreed not to go ahead with the marriage. “It is very difficult tomonitor the undertaking, though,” he admitted. “They might go to arelative’s place and get married there. We’ll never know.”[260]Increasingly child marriages are conductedsecretly for fear of intervention by authorities. This can be seen as a sign ofprogress and that enforcement efforts are having an impact. But it also pointsto the need for more effective measures to detect planned child marriagesbefore they take place and to respond with assistance for underage spouses andsanctions for those who arrange and conduct weddings of children.“My wedding was performed secretlybecause the government wouldn’t have allowed me to get married before18,” said Lucky C., who married at age 15. “We told the kaziI was 19. The neighbors knew but they were happy because it was better for methan suffering in poverty. The police didn’t know – if they hadthey would have arrested my parents.” Although Lucky says she has heardthat you can be arrested for child marriage, she does not know of any caseswhere anyone actually was arrested.[261]“A lot of child marriages these daysare taking place in secret because when they come to know that social workerswill try to stop them they do the marriage secretly,” a communityactivist said.[262]A Union Parishad member confirmed that thisis a problem. “We try to stop child marriage,” she said.“When I hear of one about to happen I tell the UP head and sometimes hetells the deputy commissioner. A few months ago we stopped a child marriage. Thepolice came in and the husband ran away. But two months later they got marriedsomeplace else. They went to a notary public and did an affidavit. Thegovernment should stop allowing [marriage] affidavits by a notarypublic.”[263]The Union Parishad member explained thatalthough the police will sometimes assist in trying to prevent a childmarriage, they will never arrest anyone responsible for such a marriage, eventhough the CMRA makes child marriage a criminal act with anyone who contracts,performs, conducts, or directs a child marriage subject to imprisonment.[264]“Police aren’t able to arrest them,” she said. “Thepolice come and the marriage is stopped.” She believed, however, that atougher response by police was merited. “The government should jail maulviswho do marriages without birth certificates,” she said. “Then thiswould immediately stop.”[265]In researching this report, Human Rights Watch did not hear of any cases ofarrest and prosecution for child marriage.Some local activists expressed cynicismabout how genuine the government’s will to end child marriage really is.“If the prime minister and the Awami League decide to stop childmarriage, it is possible because they have a committee in every area, but theyhave no will to do this,” an activist in Noakhali told Human RightsWatch.[266]Reform of the Child Marriage Restraint Act (CMRA)Child marriage has been illegal inBangladesh since 1929 under the CMRA.[267]Bangladesh’s prime minister tacitly acknowledged the gaps in the law,however, when she pledged in July 2014 to reform the CMRA. While many of thegaps that permit child marriage in Bangladesh have to do with enforcement ofthe law, the law itself is also an obstacle.The CMRA is flawed, outdated, and cursory.It violates international law by setting different ages of marriage for womenand men (18 for women; 21 for men).[268]It sets penalties that are outdated, for example, a fine of 1,000 taka ($13)for arranging or conducting a child marriage. It provides only for punishment,with no attention to preventive measures, or legal and social assistance topeople who have been victims of child marriage.Even in the area of punishing childmarriage, its provisions are not supportive of victims, giving victims only oneyear to bring a complaint, permitting a complainant to be compelled to pay abond, and failing to oblige police and local government to respond tocomplaints. By applying the same punishments to anyone involved in planning orsolemnizing a child marriage, whether that person is a family member, anofficial, or religious leader, the law fails to ensure that any responses to achild marriage are in the best interest of the victim. The law gives the courtthe power to issue an injunction against a child marriage in a specificsituation where there are indications that such a marriage is planned, butfails to provide any detail on how such an injunction should be monitored andenforced and the child at risk assisted.Access to Temporary Protective SheltersShelters can provide an important emergencyoption for girls at risk of child marriage, and girl brides seeking to flee,including from violence in the home. None of the child brides interviewed forthis report had ever used a shelter or expressed awareness of the existence ofshelters.Bangladesh has both government and NGO-runshelters, but they have limited geographic reach and inadequate capacity.[269]The 2010 Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection) Act obliges thegovernment to create shelter homes that victims of domestic violence may bereferred to as a temporary measure. The Ministry of Women and Child Affairsruns 7 shelters, one in each of Bangladesh’s 7 divisions or regions, buta ministry official acknowledged in discussion with Human Rights Watch thatthis is too few and that shelters are needed in each of the country’s 64districts.[270]The CEDAW Committee, which monitors government compliance with the Conventionon the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), alsoexpressed concern about the limited number of shelters in Bangladesh, sayingthat it “views these to be inadequate in responding to the needs of thevictims of violence against women.”[271]Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection) ActIn 2010, Bangladesh passed the DomesticViolence (Prevention and Protection) Act. This law offered new hope to victimsof domestic violence, but has suffered from lack of enforcement.The law provided new forms of recourse andassistance for women and children who are victims of abuse within theirfamilies. The law includes a broad definition of domestic violence, includingphysical, psychological, sexual, and economic abuse. The law grants magistratesthe power to issue orders providing victims with protection, housingarrangements, maintenance, compensation, and child custody. The act alsoprovides for victims to be connected with shelter and medical and legalservices. Perpetrators of domestic violence can be jailed and/or fined forviolations of court orders under the act.The UN special rapporteur on violenceagainst women in 2013 visited Bangladesh and assessed the status of thegovernment’s enforcement of the act. She found that the greatestchallenge was a lack of awareness of the law by both government authorities andvictims. Advocates reported that the number of cases filed under the actactually went down in the second year that it was in force, compared to the first,and that domestic violence cases are still typically dealt with under previouslaws including the Penal Code and the Dowry Prohibition Act which lack the samerange of protections for victims.[272]In her report on the visit, the special rapporteurwrote that in spite of the act’s new provisions, “[V]ictims ofviolence are reluctant to seek support through the justice system due toseveral factors, including community pressure and stigma, the lack ofresponsiveness by the justice system, pressure to withdraw complaints by localpolice and also the length of proceedings. The [Domestic Violence] Act remainsunderutilized and limits the protective value of the law.”[273]Women and girls interviewed for thisreported echoed this sense of futility about turning to the justice system.Aqlima C. sued for repayment of about500,000 taka ($6,494) her husband received from her family over their six yearsof marriage, funds he received after threatening to harm her if he was notpaid. He also frequently beat her. When her family stopped meeting his demandsfor money, he divorced Aqlima without her knowing until after the divorce hadalready been granted. “I didn’t file a case while I was married,but after divorce I filed a case for violence,” Aqlima said. “Buthe knows the local MP very well so they influenced the case and it got pushedaside.” The court denied Aqlima’s request for repayment of themoney her family had given to her husband, but ordered her husband to pay her mahr.[274]So far he has not paid it.[275]The special rapporteur cited the call ofadvocates for the development of policies to fully implement the act in areasincluding the duties of police and courts in cases of domestic violence,coordination on cases by different intervening authorities, case managementsystems, and data collection.[276]She also called on the Bangladesh government to “Strengthen theimplementation of relevant legislation applicable to violence against women,and ensure that appropriate sanctions are imposed on perpetrators and Stateagents who fail to protect and prevent.”[277]Difficulty Obtaining a Fair DivorceMany of the girls interviewed for thisreport had fled from or been abandoned by their husbands. A few had managed toobtain a divorce, usually with the assistance of an NGO, but others werestruggling to legally end their marriages and to obtain their mahr,child support, and other support due to them from their husbands. Hindu girlsmust grapple with the fact that Bangladesh law does not recognize divorce forHindus. These difficulties are all reflections of how Bangladesh’s lawsgoverning marriage, separation, and divorce explicitly discriminate againstwomen.Since independence in 1971, the bulk ofBangladesh’s laws are applicable to all citizens without discriminationbased on sex or religious belief, with one major anomaly: personal status laws.Personal status laws on marriage, separation, and divorce set separate rulesfor Muslims, Hindus, and Christians.[278] Some ofthese laws date to the 19th century; they remain largely frozen in time andhave not been reformed in decades. The separate personal status laws forBangladesh’s Muslims, Hindus, and Christians discriminate in overlappingbut distinct ways. They all grant men greater powers than women in marriage andaccessing divorce. Each erects barriers to divorce and economic equality duringmarriage and after, and none of the laws provides for women’s equal rightto marital property.Muslim personal status laws in Bangladeshare discriminatory in their embrace of polygamy for men, their greater barriersto divorce for women, and their limited provisions on maintenance.[279]Under the Muslim family laws in Bangladesh, women have no right to maintenancebeyond 90 days after notice of divorce (or birth of a child, if the woman ispregnant at the time of divorce).[280]In an earlier report, Human Rights Watch found that even the limited proceduralprotections for women under the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961, were oftennot implemented.[281]The Hindu personal status law alsodiscriminates against women.[282]It recognizes polygamy for men, and contains significant barriers for womenaccessing maintenance payments.[283]Hindu women can seek judicial separation, but the law does not recognizedivorce, making it impossible for Hindu women to legally separate from theirhusbands. In May 2012 the Bangladesh cabinet approved a bill providing Hindusthe option of registering marriages. The bill still falls short of the manydemands of women’s rights activists in the country who are campaigningfor a separate law governing Hindu marriages and divorce.[284]Necessary reforms not included in the bill include a prohibition on polygamy,allowing divorce, and compulsory marriage registration.[285]In the Christian personal status law,divorce is allowed on limited grounds for both men and women, but the groundsare far more restrictive for women.[286]Men can divorce if they allege their wife committed adultery. Wives, on theother hand, must prove adultery plus other acts to secure a divorce. Such actsinclude: conversion to another religion, bigamy, rape, sodomy, bestiality,desertion for two years, or cruelty. The requirement to demonstrate adultery bythe spouse can be humiliating for women in Bangladesh’s conservativesociety.[287]A gap in all the personal status lawsmentioned above is the absence of the equal right to marital property upondivorce, which means the extensive contributions that women make to theirmarital homes are ignored and divorce and separation leave women impoverished,with child brides and women married as children at particular risk. This gaphas been partially addressed by the domestic violence law discussed above,which gives women a right to reside in the matrimonial home. The domesticviolence law represents a vital step forward, but does not fully address theequal right to marital property, notably in cases where there is no domesticviolence.The few economic entitlements for womenrecognized under the law, namely maintenance and mahr, are often meagerand difficult to secure. As a result, rather than offer protection,Bangladesh’s personal status laws can trap women in abusive marriages orprevent them from separating from their husbands or propel them into povertywhen marriages fall apart. In many cases these laws directly contribute tohomelessness, hunger, and ill health for divorced or separated women and theirdependents.Nasima A. has been trying unsuccessfullythrough the court to obtain a divorce and repayment of her dowry from herhusband of two years who was physically abusive. Her husband has not attendedthe court dates and while there is a warrant for his arrest as a result, thecase is dragging on. “I just want him to return the money so I can use itfor something and live in peace,” said Nasima. “I can do somesewing work or keep the money in the bank for my future. I don’t want toget married again.”[288]IV. Bangladesh’s International Legal ObligationsThe government of Bangladesh has obligationsunder international human rights law to protect the rights of girls and women.These include the rights to equality and non-discrimination, to the highestattainable standard of health, to education, to information, to free and fullconsent to marriage, to choose one’s spouse, and to be free fromphysical, mental, and sexual violence. Those whose rights are violated areentitled to an effective remedy. Child marriage in Bangladesh can result in theinadequate fulfilment and protection of these rights, and the failure toprotect these rights can also increase the risk of child marriage.Bangladesh is a party to the coreinternational treaties that protect women’s and girls’ humanrights. Bangladesh has ratified the International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (ICCPR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social andCultural Rights (ICESCR), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women (CEDAW), and the Convention on the Rights of theChild (CRC).[289]International human rights law recognizesstate accountability for abuses by private actors and requires governments toshow due diligence in preventing and responding to human rights violations.According to the CEDAW Committee, which monitors government compliance withCEDAW, “States may also be responsible for private acts if they fail toact with due diligence to prevent violations of rights or to investigate andpunish acts of violence.”[290]Under international law, governments are obligated to work towards eliminatingharmful traditional beliefs, values, stereotypes, or practices that contravenehuman rights. They must not invoke “traditional values” to justifyviolations of human rights.[291]CEDAW explicitly acknowledges social andcultural norms as the sources of many women’s rights abuses, and requiresgovernments to take appropriate measures to address such abuses. Governmentsneed to “modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct of men andwomen, with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and customary andall other practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or thesuperiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men andwomen.”[292]The argument that some practices arecultural norms and thus impervious to alteration cannot justify a government’sfailure to address discriminatory practices. The Human Rights Committee, whichmonitors compliance with the ICCPR, affirms that governments “shouldensure that traditional, historical, religious or cultural attitudes are notused to justify violations of women’s right to equality before the lawand to equal enjoyment of all Covenant rights.”[293]Right to Equality and Non-DiscriminationBangladesh has obligations underinternational law to ensure women’s rights to equality andnon-discrimination. The ICCPR calls for “the equal right of men and womento the enjoyment of all civil and political rights,” including the rightto birth registration, to free and full consent to marriage, to equality ofrights and responsibilities of spouses during marriage and at its dissolution,to life, to liberty, and security of the person, and to freedom of expression.[294]The ICESCR includes similar provisions.[295] The CRCrecognizes the right of children to be free from discrimination, including onthe grounds of sex.[296]The CEDAW Committee has explained that“[I]nherent to the principle of equality between men and women, or genderequality, is the concept that all human beings, regardless of sex, are free todevelop their personal abilities, pursue their professional careers and makechoices without the limitations set by stereotypes, rigid gender roles andprejudices.”[297]Child marriage disproportionately affects girls, and negatively impacts therealization of many of girls’ and women’s other human rights. Theimpact of these violations is felt by women throughout their lives, and extendsto their families and societies.Since personal status laws in Bangladeshfor Hindus and Muslims permit polygamy, there is a risk that child brides couldbe forced into polygamous marriages, thereby undermining their right toequality and non-discrimination. CEDAW, in its General Recommendation No. 21 onEquality in Marriage and Family Relations, explains that “polygamousmarriage contravenes a woman's right to equality with men and can have suchserious emotional and financial consequences for her and her dependents”and ought to be discouraged and prohibited.[298]Right to Marriage, Choose a Spouse, and Minimum Ageof MarriageThe right to marriage based on “fulland free consent” of the spouses is recognized in several internationalinstruments.[299]CEDAW upholds the equal right of men and women to enter into marriage, and theConvention on the Consent to Marriage further specifies that each spouse mustgive his or her consent “in person after due publicity and in thepresence of the authority competent to solemnize the marriage and of witnessesas prescribed by law.”[300]The CRC Committee has repeatedly, including in reference to Bangladesh,addressed the need for countries to establish a definition of a child in alldomestic legislation that is consistent with the provisions of the CRC.[301]It has also taken a clear position on 18 as the minimum age for marriage,regardless of parental consent.[302]In 2009, the UN Committee on the Rights ofthe Child strongly recommended that Bangladesh, “Take necessary measuresto define the child as any person below 18 years old” in accordance withthe Convention on the Rights of the Child.[303] TheCommittee expressed its “concern that there is no uniform definition of thechild in the laws and policies of the State party and that understandings andlegal provisions vary according to civil law, the Convention, and sharia, asreflected in conflicting legal minimum ages of children for marriage.”[304]A new Children Act passed in Bangladesh in 2013 that dealt with the rights ofchildren who are crime victims or are in conflict with the law, sets the age ofadulthood at 18 for both girls and boys for the purpose of that act.[305]The UN Human Rights Committee clarified inGeneral Comment No. 19 that the marriageable age for both men and women shallbe based on the ability of both spouses to give their full and free consent.[306]In its General Comment No. 28, the committee affirms the obligation ofgovernments to treat men and women equally with regard to marriage.[307]CEDAW General Comment No. 21 on the right to marriage reiterates men’sand women’s equal right to enter into marriage, conditioned on their freeand full consent.[308]Consent cannot be “free and full” when one of the parties involvedis not sufficiently mature to make an informed decision about a life partner,or the meaning and responsibility of marriage.[309]The accounts in this report indicate thatmany girls felt that they had no ability to object to a marriage. Many werealso unaware of the implications of marriage and the responsibilities that comewith it. These forms of marriage generally disregard the free and full consentand wishes of the girls involved, thus placing them at high risk of violenceand other forms of abuse and exploitation.Right to EducationThe interviews conducted for this reportsuggested a strong link between school attendance and girls’ ability toavoid child marriage. International law provides that everyone has the right toeducation and the right to equal opportunity in education.[310]While the right to education under the ICESCR is subject to progressiverealization, governments also have core obligations that have to be fulfilledimmediately. In particular, governments need to “provide primary educationfor all, on a non-discriminatory basis” and ensure that primary educationis free of charge and compulsory.[311]The 2005 CRC Committee’s GeneralComment No. 7 on implementing child rights in early childhood interprets theright to education during early childhood as beginning at birth and closelylinked to young children’s right to maximum development.[312]With regards to secondary education, the ESCR Committee, which monitors statecompliance with the ICESCR, in its General Comment No. 13 on the Right to Educationhas stated that governments also have “an obligation to take concretesteps towards achieving free secondary and higher education.”[313]According to the ESCR Committee, secondary education must not be dependent on astudent's apparent capacity or ability, and should be distributed throughoutthe country in such a way that it is available on the same basis to all.[314]The CRC Committee has highlighted the needfor Bangladesh to do more to ensure access to education for children,especially girls. The Committee expressed concern over compulsory educationbeing limited to five years, disparities between different types of schoolsincluding non-government schools such as madrasas, “the hiddencosts of education,” and disparities in access to education in differentregions of the country. The Committee also raised concerns about sexualharassment of girls at school and on the way to school, and about the lowallocation for education in the government budget.[315]The UN Independent expert on the right towater and sanitation has noted that where schools do not have sex-segregatedtoilets, girls often drop out of school, notably at the age of menstruation.[316]The CRC Committee identified the issue in its 2009 review of Bangladesh.[317]The UN special rapporteur on the right to education has recommended thatstates, to increase the availability of schools, “establish efficientmechanisms for supplying sanitary towels to adolescent girls who so wish,especially in rural areas, and ensure they can always have the use of thesanitation facilities they need.”[318]Right to be Free from Physical, Mental, and SexualViolenceMany of the married girls interviewed forthis report had experienced physical, mental, and sexual violence followingchild marriage. Under international law, the government of Bangladesh has anobligation to prevent, investigate, prosecute, and punish violence againstgirls and women.[319]The responsibility is grounded in the rights of non-discrimination andequality, security of person, health, and freedom from torture and otherill-treatment provided in treaties that Bangladesh has ratified.The CRC obligates governments to protectchildren from physical, mental, and sexual abuse or exploitation throughlegislation and other social and educational measures. The obligation toprotect children from violence includes protection from parents or othercaregivers.[320]The CRC also sets out the obligation of governments to protect children fromsexual exploitation and abuse.[321]The CEDAW Committee has identified keysteps necessary to combat violence against women, among them: effective legalmeasures, including penal sanctions, civil remedies, and compensatoryprovisions; preventive measures, including public information and educationprograms to change attitudes about the roles and status of men and women; andprotective measures, including shelters, counselling, rehabilitation, andsupport services.[322]Violence targeting women prevents them fromenjoying a host of other rights. These rights include the right not to be subjectto cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, security of person,and at times, the right to life.[323]The CEDAW Committee has also noted that“gender-based violence is a form of discrimination that seriouslyinhibits women’s ability to enjoy rights and freedoms on the basis ofequality with men,” including “the right to the highest attainablestandard of physical and mental health.”[324]As this report shows, girls in Bangladesh who are subjected to child marriagemay experience violence from their spouses, in-laws, and other family members.This includes physical, verbal, sexual, and psychological abuse. Girls andwomen often do not report violence to the authorities due to a number ofcultural and legal barriers as noted. Nonetheless, some women do report abuse,including forced marriages, but they rarely get redress.Bangladesh’s obligations to prevent,investigate, prosecute, and punish violence against girls and women includesensuring that state actors, such as the police, the justice system, andcustomary processes, take all reasonable steps to provide everyone within itsterritory with effective protection against violence by private parties.Governments should also address the barriers that deter women and girls fromreporting abuse and accessing protection—to better prevent abuse in thefirst place—and to change discriminatory attitudes. This includeseffectively investigating such violence in a manner capable of leading to theidentification, prosecution, and punishment of those responsible.[325]The inaction of government authorities,police, prosecutors, and customary bodies in the face of violence against womencreates an atmosphere of impunity facilitating further abuse, and dissuadeswomen from seeking help. Their failure to act exposes girls and women tofurther violence.Right to HealthChild marriage—in Bangladesh andelsewhere—brings with it a great risk of health problems associated withearly pregnancy. The right to health is enshrined in numerous internationaltreaties. The ICESCR specifies that everyone has a right “to theenjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mentalhealth,” and obligates governments to implement the right withoutdiscrimination on the basis of sex, age, or other prohibited grounds.[326]The CRC recognizes children’s rightsto health and to access health services, and notably the right to be protectedfrom traditional practices prejudicial to the health of the child.[327]CEDAW obligates governments to take all appropriate measures to eliminatediscrimination against women in the field of health.[328]The Human Rights Council has said that if resource constraints prevent statesfrom immediately fulfilling women’s rights to sexual and reproductivehealth, the state “must demonstrate that it has used all the resources atits disposal to do so as a matter of priority.”[329]It also notes thatsome obligations, “including obligations related to a national plan of action,and the elimination of harmful practices and discrimination,” are“not subject to resource availability.”[330]The CRC Committee has called on governmentsto reduce child mortality and to raise the age of sexual consent to preventforced marriage and ensure the health of children.[331]The CRC Committee has expressed concern about inadequate access to reproductivehealth counselling and services for adolescents in Bangladesh and expressed“urgent concern” about health issues resulting from violenceagainst girls and early marriage.[332]The Committee recommended that Bangladesh “take urgent legislativemeasures to prohibit early and forced marriages and other traditional practicesharmful to the health and development of boys as well as girls.”[333]One of the factors leading to earlypregnancy and childbearing is the lack of accurate reproductive healthknowledge. The girls interviewed for this report appeared to have no access toinformation on reproductive health provided by the Bangladesh government, andonly the patchiest of assistance from other sources.Right of Children to Express Their Views FreelyMarried girls interviewed for this reportoften said that they had not wanted to marry, but they felt that they had noright to oppose a marriage chosen for them by their family. The right ofchildren to express their views is set out in the CRC, which provides that theyhave this right in all matters affecting them, according to their age andmaturity.[334]The CRC Committee’s General Comment No. 12 on the right of the child tobe heard affirms this right in any judicial or administrative proceeding affectingtheir well-being.[335]In its comment, the Committee goes on to set out the obligations of governmentsto establish reporting mechanisms, such as telephone help lines and supportmechanisms, to assist children in expressing their views. This includes accessto physicians and to teachers who can offer a safe space for children toexpress their views freely or to seek help in any matter related to theirwell-being.[336]The Impact of Natural Disasters onBangladesh’s Legal ObligationsThe challenges the Bangladesh governmentfaces due to natural disasters do not change any of its obligations underinternational law to prevent child marriage. The United Nations Office of theHigh Commissioner on Human Rights has specifically addressed the link betweendisaster and human rights in a message on disaster risk reduction, saying:All states have positive human rightsobligations to protect human rights. Natural hazards are not disasters, in andof themselves. They become disasters depending on the elements of exposure,vulnerability and resilience, all factors that can be addressed by human(including state) action. A failure (by governments and others) to takereasonable preventive action to reduce exposure and vulnerability and toenhance resilience, as well as to provide effective mitigation, is therefore ahuman rights question.[337]RecommendationsTo the Prime Minister of BangladeshSupport comprehensive reform of the ChildMarriage Restraint Act (CMRA) by the end of 2015, including:Setting the minimum age ofmarriage at 18 for men and women with no exceptions to this age limit;Expanding prevention;Making full consent acornerstone of marriage;Criminalizing marital rape;Providing legal assistanceand legal options for victims;Simplifying bringing a complaint;Extending the time periodin which child marriage can be challenged;Targeting penalties towardsofficials who are breaking the law;Building effectiveenforcement into the law and the plan for its implementation.Make achievement of thechild marriage targets you announced at the 2014 London Girl Summit (1. to, by2021, end marriage for girls under age 15 and reduce by more than one-third thenumber of girls between ages 15 and 18 who marry by 2021; and 2. to end allchild marriage in Bangladesh by 2041) a high priority for your government andensure that they are achieved through the following steps:Detailed planning withtimebound and measurable intermediary benchmarks to track progress towardsmeeting the 2021 and 2041 targets;Assign responsibilities forimplementation across all relevant ministries and ensure coordination betweenthem;Engage and consult with allstakeholders within and outside government;Allocate adequate resources—budgetary,human, and programmatic— to this effort;Facilitate coordinationwith and support from the United Nations and donors to the achievement of thegovernment’s timeline to end child marriage by 2041;Provide politicalleadership, including through public statements and support to the initiativesbelow.Produce a national plan ofaction to end child marriage and fully incorporate this plan of action into thegovernment’s seventh 5 year plan for fiscal years 2016 through 2020.Support a consultativeprocess, including with all relevant parts of government and with civilsociety, community leaders, and faith-based leaders to develop the plan ofaction;Ensure the plan of actionencompasses prevention of child marriage, protection and access to services,including for married adolescents, and accountability mechanisms;Include a monitoring andevaluation component to identify lessons learned from policy implementation,campaigns, and service provision, including effective models for replicationand expansion;Provide for targeting ofcommunities with the highest prevalence of child marriage, including thoseaffected by natural disasters and extreme poverty;Direct the Ministry ofForeign Affairs to withdraw Bangladesh’s reservations to article 2 andarticle 16(1)(c) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women, and make the necessary changes to domestic law toensure that Bangladesh is in full conformity with the Convention in relation tochild marriage;Implement recommendationsoutlined in UN General Assembly resolution 69/156 and the April 2014 OHCHRreport on preventing and eliminating child, early, and forced marriage;Ensure that all relevantministries are aware of the decisions taken at international forums, thecommitments Bangladesh has made to reform and advance progress on human rightsissues including child marriage, and their role in meeting these obligations;Support a target on endingchild marriage under goal 5 on gender equity and empowering all women and girlsin the post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals.Reformthe Child Marriage Restraint ActThegovernment should move forward in revising the CMRA and should ensure thatunder the new CMRA the best interests of children are the primaryconsideration of the law. The drafters should make every effort to ensurethat the law will cause no harm to children, or to adults who were married aschildren. The new law should be drafted through a consultative process thatbrings together all relevant government bodies and stakeholders in civilsociety to develop a comprehensive law with a strong focus on prevention, andformulate and implement an effective plan for enforcement of the new law.Specific issues the law reform process should address include:Setting the minimum age of marriage at 18 years for both women and men:Thereshould be no exceptions to this age requirement, including parentalpermission or permission from a court or other official.Expanding prevention: The CMRA’s present focus is solely onactions courts may take to prevent and punish child marriage. While these areimportant measures, and should be clarified and maintained, there is also agreat need for expanded social support to prevent child marriage. The revisedCMRA should include measures to increase prevention efforts, including publicawareness programming about the harms of child marriage, enforcing universalmandatory birth registration, establishing and enforcing universal marriageregistration, and further strengthening access to education and educationretention programs for girls. There should also be detailed provisions onprevention of a planned child marriage in an individual case, including meansfor monitoring and enforcing an injunction and assisting the at-risk child.Criminal justice and local government officials should receive training onchild marriage and their roles in preventing it and responding to violationsof the law.Making full consent a cornerstone of marriage:The CMRA, in additionto ensuring that both parties to all marriages are adults, should contain provisionsthat ensure that no marriage can go forward without the full, free, andinformed consent of both parties to the marriage. Revision of the CMRA shouldalso be accompanied by reform of personal status laws that discriminateagainst women and undermine full and free consent. The CMRA should explicitlyprohibit the substitution of parental consent for that of the parties to themarriage.Criminalizing marital rape: Marital rape is not a crime underBangladeshi law. Any revision of the CMRA should be accompanied by new legalprovisions that clearly state that sex without consent in the context ofmarriage amounts to rape and incurs punishments as severe as those for otherforms of rape.Providing legal assistance and legal options for victims: The law should providefor legal assistance and representation specifically targeted to assist womenand girls, and men and boys, who have been the victims of child marriage.They also need access to specialized social assistance, in the form of bothfinancial support and services, which should be provided for under a revisedCMRA. Bangladesh’s personal status laws governing marriage, separation,and divorce discriminate against women. A comprehensive reform of alldiscriminatory personal status laws is required to ensure women andgirls’ equality and protect them from abusive husbands. Girls and womenwho were married as girls, who are seeking to leave their marital homes,require a full range of fair options for how the legal status of theirmarriage will be resolved, including access to legal separation, annulment,and divorce, all with appropriate options for child custody, maintenance,division of marital property, and child support.Simplifying bringing a complaint: The CMRA provides that a personbringing a complaint about a child marriage may be obliged to pay a bond tothe court. The revised law should make it possible for any concerned personto bring a complaint regarding a child marriage and should remove the paymentof any fees and any other obstacle that may deter bringing such a complaint.The law should be revised to require that any complaint brought to the policeor a criminal court official triggers an investigation and, if appropriate,legal action. The law should establish a transparent system of trackingcomplaints, monitoring the disposition of complaints, and reporting publiclyon the handling of complaints in each local jurisdiction, to ensure thatpolice and courts are fully responsive.[338]Extending the time period within which a child marriage can bechallenged: The CMRA currently limits the time period during which a childmarriage can be challenged to one year after the marriage has taken place.This is an arbitrary period and poses a major obstacle to justice for girlswho have little ability to access the court system and should have access tohelp whenever they are ready and are able to seek assistance from thegovernment or the courts. The new law should provide a longer time periodaccompanied by a provision specifying that only a spouse who was a child atthe time that the marriage was contracted has the right to seek to void it onthe grounds that it was a child marriage. This requirement is to ensure thatany married girl who needs child support or other financial assistance cancontinue to go through regular divorce proceedings, since voiding themarriage would also eliminate any financial claim.Targeting penalties primarily toward officials who are breaking the law: The CMRA provides forthe same criminal punishment to be applied against anyone involved in a childmarriage—including the spouse, the parents, and any official conductingthe ceremony. In revising the CMRA, the government should give carefulconsideration to how the law can hold accountable those best able tosystematically prevent child marriage, including officials who conduct orregister marriages. The new law should put in place tough measures to detectand punish all officials who conduct or register child marriages or in anyother way deliberately, negligently, or through corruption, fail to act toprevent child marriages. The authorities should give careful consideration topotentially harmful consequences to girls of bringing criminal prosecutionsagainst parents and spouses.Building effective enforcement into the law and the plan for itsimplementation: The failure of the CMRA to end child marriage inBangladesh is not primarily a problem of an outdated law, but rather aproblem of enforcement. For all of the problems with the law, it does makechild marriage illegal, and the fact that Bangladesh has one of the highestrates of child marriage in the world in spite of the CMRA having been inplace for so long suggests that there has been no willingness on the part ofthe government to enforce the law. In the research for this report, HumanRights Watch heard of numerous cases where police had intervened to try toprevent a child marriage, sometimes by threatening arrest, but not a singlecase where anyone—official or family member—faced any sanctionsafter a child marriage had taken place.Fora new CMRA to adequately support the government’s goal of ending childmarriage completely by 2041, the law will need to be fully and vigorouslyenforced. In drafting the new law, the government should carefully examinewhat obstacles have led to poor enforcement of the existing law. Suchobstacles include: failure by law enforcement officials to take the lawseriously and pursue cases; lack of access to legal assistance for victims ofchild marriage; gaps in birth and marriage registration systems; lack ofconsequences for public officials who fail to use birth and marriageregistration systems to prevent child marriage; complicity of local officialsin child marriages; corruption; gaps in public awareness; and gaps in programsdesigned to retain girls in education. As part of the process of revising theCMRA, the government should make a plan for addressing each obstacle throughprovisions in the new law and through a detailed plan to implement the law.To Members of Parliament, the Cabinet Division, andthe Ministry of Law, Justice, and Parliamentary AffairsDraft and pass into a law areformed version of the CMRA as discussed above with special attention toensuring swift and full implementation of the new law.Make marriage registration compulsory for all religions. Create digital records that areaccessible throughout the country as proof of marriage.Conduct a comprehensiveassessment of how Bangladesh’s laws and policies affect adolescents and develop and implement a plan to reform laws and policies thatundermine the rights of adolescent girls and boys. Increase the role ofparliament in ending violence against women and girls through following thesteps outlined in the September 2014 Conclusions of the Regional ParliamentarySeminar on Ending the Cycle of Violence Against Girls in Asia-Pacific.[339]Enact a comprehensive law on social security, setting out clear criteria for eligibilityfor social assistance for divorced, separated, and abandoned women.Work toward comprehensivereform of Bangladesh’s laws on marriage, separation, divorce, and relatedmatters, in consultation with experts and civil society groups working onwomen’s rights including those working with minority communities. Launcha participatory process involving all affected communities to enact civil lawsthat do not discriminate based on religion and gender. In the interim, amendpersonal status laws to eliminate discriminatory aspects, and strengthenmechanisms for implementing laws.To the Ministry of Women and Children AffairsTake Steps to Prevent Child MarriageInitiate a nationwideawareness campaign against child marriage in a variety of media and in formatsaccessible to those with disabilities and limited literacy, emphasizing thehealth risks of early pregnancy, the benefits of girls’ education, thelaw prohibiting child marriage, the consequences forthose who break the law, and the mechanism for reporting child marriage andobtaining assistance.Provide funding to andpartner with nongovernmental organizations to implement programs to betterunderstand the root causes of child and forced marriage in Bangladesh, and tomonitor and evaluate the effectiveness of programs addressing child and forcedmarriage and to use this information to improve programming.Develop and implement, inpartnership with civil society organizations, nationwide programming to empowergirls to refuse child marriage. Build on best practices by designing programsthat equip girls with information about the harmfulness and illegality of childmarriage, awareness about sexual and reproductive health, including menstrualhygiene management, skills training, career guidance, and support networks.Establish a national censuson child marriage at regular intervals to provide reliable and detailed datathat can be used to track trends and identify regional variation in theprevalence of child marriage and inform prevention efforts (and targetassistance to victims).Assist Married GirlsProvide legal assistanceand counselling to married girls, both through shelters and through otherwalk-in programs.Step Up the Fight Against Violence Against Women and GirlsTake steps to fully enforcethe Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection) Act of 2010.Initiate a nationwide awarenesscampaign against domestic violence in a variety of media and in formatsaccessible to those with disabilities, emphasizing the rights to marital home,protection against economic loss, and temporary maintenance. Encourage women toseek remedies under the law against domestic violence.Increase the number ofwomen’s shelters, aiming for at least one shelter in every district.Ensure that girls seeking to escape child marriage and women and girls ineconomic need after separation or divorce, as well as those subjected todomestic violence, are eligible for temporary housing in shelters. Do publicoutreach to ensure that girls and women are aware of the existence of sheltersand know how to access them.Work with other ministriesto establish measures to help women transition from temporary emergency housingto affordable housing of their own, including through income-generation andother social assistance programs.To the Ministry of Primary and Mass Education andthe Ministry of EducationKeep Girls in SchoolCommit the resourcesnecessary to guarantee access to free, compulsory primary education for allgirls and boys.Provide school supplies anduniforms, if required, for free to students from low-income households, andremove barriers whereby attendance is conditional on having a uniform.Abolish all exam fees.Require that teachers teachthe entire curriculum in class. In particular:Ban “coaching”practices that unfairly disadvantage students who cannot or do not pay forcoaching;Take steps to reduce the use of supplemental “guidebooks” thatmust be purchased and prevent teachers from encouraging students to buy them.Ensure girls have access tosafe, private latrines and appropriate materials needed to manage theirmenstrual hygiene in school.Require every school andlocal education officers to do outreach to students who have poor attendance orhave dropped out to determine the cause of their absence and try to re-engagethem.Develop programs throughschools and communities to do outreach to, and seek to enroll or re-enroll,married children.Take steps to supportmarried and pregnant students so that they can remain and re-enroll in schooland are not discriminated against.Establish special awardsfor schools and colleges that achieve an equal gender ratio among theirstudents completing secondary and higher secondary education.Expand Access to Education Beyond Primary EducationTake concrete steps towardsachieving access to a quality secondary education for all children, without discrimination, including for all children who, withoutthe provision of free education or financial assistance, would otherwise beunable to access it.Prioritize ensuring equalaccess to education across the country by identifying communities withoutaccess to local schools and establishing schools to serve them.Expand stipend programs anddevelop new programs that specifically target girls from low-income householdsbased on need with adjusted and appropriate attendance benchmarks but withoutachievement requirements.Explore measures to offsetthe cost of sending girls to secondary school, especially for poor families,such as providing a hot meal to students or providing food to families throughschools.Increase the focus onskills training and pathways to employment for girls and help girls to train andplan for future employment.Mobilize Schools to Play a Leading Role in Fighting Child MarriageAdd to the compulsoryeducation curriculum comprehensive lessons on the harmfulness and illegality ofchild marriage, beginning when students are at an early age.Establish programs in allschools, including training of teachers and school administrators, to raiseawareness about the harm and illegality of child marriage, and to monitor thestudent body for girls at risk of child marriage, and immediately raise thiswith parents.Institute a policyrequiring every school to designate for students a specific staff memberresponsible for counselling and assisting individual students experiencingabuses, including risk of child marriage.Strengthen school responsesto sexual harassment, including by coordinating schools to monitor problems ofharassment of female students and intervene to prevent and end harassment,requiring schools to meet regularly with police in their area to facilitatecooperation on ensuring the security of students, and instructing school headsto contact the police in cases involving alleged criminal acts.Empower GirlsIncorporate a detailedmodule on sexual and reproductive health into the national curriculum as anexaminable, independent subject and ensure that it is taught in all schools.The module should include puberty education and methods of hygienic menstrualmanagement.Link students withcommunity healthcare providers through which they can access contraceptivesupplies, and ensure that each school has designated staff members available toassist individual students seeking information and counselling on sexual andreproductive health, or access to contraceptive supplies.To the Ministry of Health and Family WelfareWork with the Ministry ofPrimary and Mass Education and the Ministry of Education to develop andimplement education modules for all school children on sexual and reproductivehealth. These modules should be taught from early grades in school as part ofthe mandatory curriculum, should be linked with access to contraceptivesupplies, and should include the following topics:The detrimental effects ofchild marriage and health problems associated with early pregnancy;Puberty education;Methods of hygienicmenstrual management;Family planning and birthspacing;The importance of antenatalcare and skilled delivery.Expand community outreachteaching girls and women about sexual and reproductive health, including pubertyeducation and methods of hygienic menstrual management, and helping them toaccess free contraception, with a priority on poor communities and girls in, orat risk of, a child marriage.Expand community outreachefforts to specifically target married girls, educate them about the importanceof antenatal care and attended birth, and link them with antenatal services.Establish special healthservice units for young girls in government hospitals, district health centers,and at the lowest level administrative unit health complexes to provide sexualand reproductive health services and support to this population.Provide targeted andspecialized health services to women and girls who have been the victims ofviolence, including both medical care and counselling and treatment for trauma.To the Ministry of Home AffairsInvestigate all complaintsof child marriage promptly, intervene to prevent child marriage wheneverpossible, and refer for prosecution anyone who has committed a crime under theCMRA, including officials who solemnize child marriages and those who provideforged birth certificates to facilitate child marriages.Develop an improvedresponse to girls and women facing violence and abuse, including childmarriage. Launch a program to develop protocols and training for police ontheir duties in assisting female crime victims. Accompany this with an outreachprogram to ensure that girls and women know that the police will assist themwhen their rights are violated, and to inform them how to seek help.Where the evidence meritsit, arrest and criminally prosecute anyone suspected of violating the DowryProhibition Act.To the Local Government Division of the Ministry ofLocal Government and Rural Development and CooperativesProvide clear guidance tolocal government officials regarding their responsibility to proactivelyenforce the law prohibiting child marriage.Ensure that all UnionParishad offices have access to the online database of birth registrations andissue policies requiring that all officials issuing or accepting birthcertificates document that they have verified the information through thedatabase.Establish a mechanism toreceive and investigate reports of local government officials providing forgedbirth certificates. Dismiss and refer for prosecution any official found tohave forged a birth certificate.Monitor the implementationof social assistance programs, creating complaints mechanisms for corruptionand abuse of power by local government authorities.To the Ministry of Religious AffairsInstitute a mechanism toreceive and investigate complaints against kazis of registering andfacilitating child marriages or helping to obtain forged birth certificates,and take swift action to revoke the license of any kazi found to havedone so.Support this effort byadvising all kazis of this new zero tolerance for child marriage and byundertaking proactive investigations into the conduct of kazis in areaswith high rates of child marriage.Require all kazisconducting marriages to verify the age of the prospective spouses using thegovernment’s online database of birth registrations.To the Ministry of Social WelfareUndertake broaderdissemination of information in a variety of media and in formats accessible tothose with disabilities to improve awareness of existing social assistanceprograms, eligibility criteria, and application procedures among people inmarginalized and disaster-affected communities.Expand assistance programsto disaster-affected communities, and increase transparency regardingeligibility criteria and application procedures.Develop a targetedassistance program (including poverty reduction and disaster risk reduction andresponse) designed specifically to prevent child marriage by assisting thefamilies of at-risk girls.In consultation with theLocal Government Division, improve oversight of assistance programs to ensurethat disbursed funds reach the intended beneficiaries and to detect corruptionand misuse of funds.To Union ParishadsCoordinate with schools,community leaders, NGOs, and police to proactively identify and prevent plannedchild marriages before they happen, including identifying people who have comefrom other areas to get married because they have been prevented from marryingelsewhere.Work with police and schoolofficials to identify and stop harassment of school girls.Institute strict policiesto prevent and punish officials forging birth certificates.Work with local religiousleaders to raise their awareness about the harmful impact of child marriage andthe CMRA and engage them in helping to prevent child marriage.To International Donors and the United NationsUrge the Bangladesh Government to Take ActionEncourage the Bangladeshgovernment to develop a comprehensive national strategy to end child marriagethrough a broad consultative process, participate in its development, andsupport its implementation.Encourage the Bangladeshgovernment to pass a reformed CMRA in 2015 which complies with internationallaw and best practices.Include scrutiny ofBangladesh’s efforts to end child, early, and forced marriage in humanrights monitoring, reporting, and bilateral and multilateral dialogues.Support the Global Effort to End Child MarriageSupport a target on endingchild marriage under goal 5 on gender equity and empowering all women and girlsin the post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals.Establish or strengthenfinancing and technical support for ending child, early, and forced marriage inhigh-prevalence countries, including Bangladesh, and ensure it is integrated asa cross-cutting issue in other donor assistance, including on education,health, natural disaster management, and economic development.Fund Effective Programming on Preventing Child MarriageIntegrate strategies toprevent child, early, and forced marriage and to support married girls intoassistance programs. These could include incorporating attention to childmarriage in education, maternal health, poverty-alleviation, disasterpreparedness/response, climate change adaptation, and economic developmentprograms. Strategies include improving girls’ access to education,including those supporting married girls to return to school; enhancing accessto sexual and reproductive health information and services for adolescentgirls; expanding incoming-generating opportunities for girls and theirfamilies, including married girls; building community awareness about the harmsof child marriage and the importance of delaying marriage; and helping girls atrisk of, and in, forced marriages to access protection, justice, and redress.Urge and support theBangladesh government to take measures to increase access to education forgirls by taking all necessary measures to abolish associated costs; and ensuresuch measures are adequately resourced in future education sector plansfinanced by international education donors.Urge and support theBangladesh government to introduce a comprehensive sexual and reproductivehealth education curriculum, including puberty education and menstrual hygienemanagement, in primary and secondary schools that complies with internationalhuman rights standards; implement this curriculum as an examinable, independentsubject.Assist Victims of Child MarriageSupport the establishmentand maintenance of shelters for survivors of gender-based violence.Support the expansion oflegal aid services for women and girls in both rural and urban areas, with afocus on assisting those who have experienced gender-based violence.Support justice sectorreforms that pay particular attention to addressing discrimination againstwomen in law and practice.Support Research on What WorksSupport nongovernmentalorganizations to implement programs to better understand the root causes ofchild and forced marriage in Bangladesh and actions needed to address it, andto monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of programs addressing child andforced marriage, share information about effective approaches, and use thisinformation to improve programming.Support the replication andexpansion of programs and strategies proven to be effective.AcknowledgementsThis report was written by Heather Barr,senior researcher on women’s rights, based on research she conducted. Itwas reviewed within Human Rights Watch by: Liesl Gerntholtz, director of the Women’sRights Division; Bede Sheppard, deputy director of the Children’s RightsDivision; Richard Pearshouse, senior researcher on health and human rights;Amanda Klasing, researcher on women’s rights; Aruna Kashyap, seniorresearcher on women’s rights; Nisha Varia, advocacy director of theWomen’s Rights Division; Elin Martinez, researcher on children’srights; Katharina Rall, health and human rights fellow; Benjamin Ward, actingsenior legal advisor; and Tom Porteous, deputy program director. Thanks toRebecca Chowdhury and Rothna Begum for help with names and to Rebecca forresearch on donors.Production assistance was provided byAnnerieke Smaak, associate with the Women’s Rights Division and AlexandraKotowski, senior associate with the Women’s Rights Division.Multimedia conception and coordination wasprovided by: Veronica Matushaj, director of documentary video and photography;Elena Testi, senior producer of documentary video and photography/seniormanager of Human Rights Defenders Program; Jiahui Chen, production associatefor documentary video and photography; and Ivy Shen, officer for multimedia andcreative services. Emma Daly, Director of Communications, travelled toBangladesh and conducted interviews for the documentary video, working withphotographer, Omi, and videographer, Mariam Dwedar.We are grateful for helpful advice andreview comments from Dr. Farhana Ahmad of the White Ribbon Alliance, Samira Al-Zwaini of Plan Nederland, Sheepa Hafiza, Heather Hamilton andEllen Travers of Girls Not Brides, Khushi Kabir, and Aysel Sabahoglu of TerreDes Hommes. We also thank the many other experts in Bangladesh who providedinformation and advice, some of whom asked that their names be withheld.We gratefully acknowledge the Kendeda Fund,which supported the preparation of this report.Human Rights Watch would like to expressenormous gratitude to the many NGO colleagues and activists in Bangladesh whoplayed a crucial role in facilitating this research and shared their expertise andknowledge. We also want to specifically thank colleagues who providedtranslation and transportation assistance, and those who generously offeredaccommodation and good company during the course of the research. We regretbeing unable to list individuals and agencies by name, for fear of retribution,but we are deeply impressed by the hard and excellent work being done, even inthe most remote communities, by dedicated workers.Most of all, we would like to thank thecommunity members, especially the married girls, who generously shared theirstories.Annex 1Letter to Bangladesh Government Presenting HumanRights Watch Research Findings on Child Marriage in BangladeshFebruary18, 2015SheikhHasinaPrimeMinisterPeople’sRepublic of BangladeshPrimeMinister’s OfficeOldSangsad BhabanTejgaonDhaka-1215.E-mail: [redacted]Re:Child Marriage in BangladeshDearPrime Minister Hasina:Iam writing to you on behalf of Human Rights Watch regarding an issue of greatshared concern – the prevalence of child marriage in Bangladesh and yourgovernment’s efforts to end the practice.Mycolleagues and I were delighted to hear the commitments you made at the July2014 Girl Summit in London to end child marriage under age 15 and reduce childmarriage under 18 by more than one-third by 2021, and to end all child marriagein Bangladesh by 2041. We also welcome the specific steps you outlined at thattime for how you intend to achieve these goals, including through reform of theChild Marriage Restraint Act and the development of a national plan of actionto end child marriage.HumanRights Watch has recently undertaken research on child marriage in Bangladesh,including by interviewing many married girls and their families, as well ascommunity leaders and experts. I am writing to share with you the findings ofour research and to request responses from your government to our findings andrecommendations.Ourresearch largely focused on areas of Bangladesh that are affected by naturaldisasters, including remote villages. We interviewed many girls who hadrecently married at the ages of 12, 13 and 14-years-old; the youngest childbride we interviewed was 10-years-old, and a number of girls had married at age11. In many of these locations, child marriage appeared to be not only acceptedbut actually expected. We identified a number of factors that seemed to drivevery high rates of child marriage, including:Poverty: Many families madedecisions to marry their daughters simply because they were in such economicdesperation that they could not support all of their children. Some familiessuffered from serious food insecurity and malnutrition. None of the people weinterviewed were receiving regular assistance from any government aid programs,although many of them were in the most extreme poverty. Under thesecircumstances, parents often arranged marriages for young daughters to reducethe number of mouths they had to feed and in hopes that the girl’sin-laws would be better provide for her.Natural disasters: River erosion, floodingand cyclones played a major role in pushing many of the families interviewedinto poverty, or worsening poverty they already faced. In many cases, there wasa direct connection between natural disasters and decisions to arrange childmarriages, with families deciding, for example, that they needed to marry theirdaughters off before they lost their home to river erosion.Lack of access to education: In spite of thegovernment’s efforts to make education accessible through abolition ofschool fees and other measures, associated costs for education including examfees, school supplies, coaching and uniforms continue to put educationfinancially out of reach for many very poor girls. When girls leave school,they face a likelihood of marriage as soon as they reach puberty.Social pressure, harassmentand intimidation:Families with adolescent daughters often face a great deal of social pressureto marry their daughters early. In some cases families also face intimidationand threats, including threats to kidnap unmarried girls. These families do notreceive any meaningful assistance from police when crimes have been committedor from local government in improving community security.Complicity of localofficials:Across five different districts, families consistently described localgovernment officials as facilitating child marriages, often enrichingthemselves through corruption in the process. It appears to be common practicefor parents to obtain forged birth certificates from local officials for thepayment of a small fee and then to be able to marry girls who are far underageusing such forged birth certificates. Officials engaging in these offensesappear to face no risk of disciplinary or criminal sanctions.Inlight of these findings, we would be very grateful for your responses to thefollowing questions:Whatis the current status of the process of reforming the Child Marriage RestraintAct?Whatis the current status of the national plan of action to end child marriage?Doesyour government have any plans to try to reduce child marriage by providingfinancial, food or other forms of direct assistance to needy families ofat-risk girls?Doesyour government have plans to integrate child marriage prevention strategiesinto government responses to natural disasters and climate change?Whatsteps is your government taking to improve local government and law enforcementresponses to end harassment and intimidation of girls and to improve communitysecurity in remote areas?Whatsteps is your government taking to prevent and punish local officials fromselling forged birth certificates and knowingly participating in illegal childmarriages?Wealso welcome any other responses or information you wish to share on thistopic.Thefindings of our research will be published in the coming months in the form ofa Human Rights Watch report. We will gladly reflect your response in thatpublication, but in order to do so we would need to receive the response byMarch 13, 2015. Please feel free to contact me at [redacted]Wesincerely hope that you and your government are prepared to engage in adialogue with us about the crucial issue of child marriage. We would be verygrateful for the opportunity to work together with you to try to end childmarriage and improve the lives of Bangladeshi girls and women.Bestregards,LieslGerntholtzExecutiveDirector, Women’s Rights DivisionCC:Honorable StateMinister Meher Afroze ChumkiDepartment of Women and Children AffairsHonorableSecretary Dr. Akhtar HussainMinistry of Primary and Mass EducationHonorable StateMinister Asaduzzaman KhanMinistry of Home AffairsHonorableMinister Dr. Khandaker Mosharraf HossainMinistry for Health & Family WelfareHonorableMinister Syed Ashraful IslamLocal Government Division, Ministry of Local Government & RegionalDevelopment and CooperativesHonorable Minister MatiurRahmanMinistry of ReligiousAffairsHonorableMinister Syed Mohsin AliMinistry of Social WelfareHonorableMinister Anisul HuqMinistry of Law, Justice, and Parliamentary Affairs[1]Human Rights Watch interview with Beauty A., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[2]This ranking is based on data regarding the percentage of women currently aged20 to 24 years old who were married or in a union prior to age 18. The dataappears in UNICEF, “State of the World’s Children 2015: ExecutiveSummary,” November 2014,http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/SOWC_2015_Summary_and_Tables.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), pp. 84 and 89. When you look instead at thepercentage of women currently aged 20 to 49 years old who were married or in aunion prior to the age of 18, Bangladesh has the second-highest rate of childmarriage in the world. UNICEF, “Ending Child Marriage: Progress andProspects,” 2014,http://data.unicef.org/corecode/uploads/document6/uploaded_pdfs/corecode/Child-Marriage-Brochure-HR_164.pdf(accessed January 8, 2014).[3] Ibid.[4]This is based on data gathered regarding 20-24 year olds. UNICEF, “Stateof the World’s Children 2015: Executive Summary”, November 2014, http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/SOWC_2015_Summary_and_Tables.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), pp. 84 and 89. This finding was echoed by a PlanInternational study that found that 31 percent of girls marry when they are 12to 14 years old, and 59 percent marry when they are 15 to 19 years old. PlanInternational, “Child Marriage in Bangladesh: Findings from a NationalSurvey 2013,” undated, http://plan-international.org/files/Asia/publications/national-survey-on-child-marriage-by-plan-bangladesh-and-icddr-b(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 13.[5]Ibid.[6]Rachel B. Vogelstein, “Ending Child Marriage: How elevating the status ofgirls advances US foreign policy objectives,” Council on ForeignRelations, May 2013, (accessed March 18, 2015), http://www.cfr.org/children/ending-child-marriage/p30734,p. 6.[7]Plan International, “Child Marriage in Bangladesh: Findings from aNational Survey 2013,” undated,http://plan-international.org/files/Asia/publications/national-survey-on-child-marriage-by-plan-bangladesh-and-icddr-b(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 13.[8]Plan International, “Early and Forced Marriage in Bangladesh,”undated,http://www.plan-uk.org/because-i-am-a-girl/donate-to-girls-fund/bangladesh/(accessed February 13, 2015). In the interviews conducted for this report, thebrothers and husbands of girls who had married as children had usually married later,over the age of 18, but there were a number of exceptions where boys had alsobeen forced into child marriages. The Bangladesh Demographic and Health Surveyfound that Bangladeshi men on average marry over eight years later than women,with the median age at first marriage among women age 25-49 being 15.5 yearsold compared with 24.2 years old for men in the same age group. NationalInstitute of Population Research and Training, Bangladesh Demographic andHealth Survey 2011, Dhaka, 2013, http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR265/FR265.pdf(accessed March 18, 2015), p. 47.[9]United Nations Population Fund, “Marrying Too Young: End ChildMarriage,” 2012, http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), p. 64.[10]Ibid.[11]Ibid.[12]Margaret Alston et al., “Are climate challenges reinforcing child andforced marriage and dowry as adaptation strategies in the context ofBangladesh?” Women’s Studies International Forum 47 (2014):137-144, accessed April 19, 2015, http://artsonline.monash.edu.au/oxfam/files/2014/05/Are-climate-challenges-reinforcing-child-and-forced-marriage.pdf[13]General Economics Division (GED) Bangladesh Planning Commission, “MillenniumDevelopment Goals: Bangladesh Progress Report 2013,” August 2014, http://www.bd.undp.org/content/dam/bangladesh/docs/Publications/Pub-2014/MDG%20Report%20Last.pdf(accessed February 2, 2015), p. 15.[14]Ibid., pp. 15 and 16.[15]Ibid., p. 17.[16]“Bangladesh’s Economy: No Hiding Place,” The Economist,February 26, 2009, http://www.economist.com/node/13184953(accessed March 11, 2015).[17]Lucy Scott, “Resilient People, Fragile Governance: Bangladesh,” UnitedNations University, January 31, 2012, (accessed March 11, 2015), http://unu.edu/publications/articles/resilient-people-fragile-governance-the-success-of-bangladesh.html.In 2009, remittances were estimated by the World Bank at US$9.6 billion,constituting 12 percent of the GDP, a figure vastly largely than the 2.5percent of GDP provided by development assistance.[18]Ibid.[19]Ibid. At the time of writing, Bangladesh faces a political crisis triggered bycontested January 2014 elections and escalating as a result of protests andsubsequent violence beginning in January 2015. Ellen Barry, “TurmoilBetween Political Leaders Has Harmed Bangladesh’s People,” NewYork Times, April 12, 2015, (accessed April 19, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/13/world/asia/the-many-casualties-of-the-battle-of-the-two-ladies-in-bangladesh.html?_r=0.[20]Ibid.[21]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima A. and Ayesha L., Laxmipur, October28, 2014.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with Union Parishad member (name withheld),Khulna, October 30, 2014.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucky C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[24]Human Rights Watch interview with Shahana C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[25]Human Rights Watch interview with Ruhana M., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[26]Human Rights Watch interview with Shahnaz H., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[27]Human Rights Watch interview with Taslima A., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[28]For example, see Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, “DisasterRisk Reduction Plan for Bangladesh 2010-2012,” http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/apcity/unpan050296.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), p.3.[29]Ibid.[30]Ibid. World Bank, “Bangladesh ReducedNumber of Poor by 16 Million in a Decade,” June 20, 2013, http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2013/06/20/bangladesh-reduced-number-of-poor-by-16-million-in-a-decade(accessed February 17, 2015).[31]Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation,“Disaster Risk Reduction Plan for Bangladesh 2010-2012,”http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/apcity/unpan050296.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), p. 3.[32]Alliance Development Works, “World Risk Report 2013,” undated, http://collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU:2018/WorldRiskReport_2013_online_01.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), pp. 45 and 53.[33]The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the leadinginternational body for the assessment of climate change. It was established bythe United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World MeteorologicalOrganization (WMO) in 1988 to provide the world with a clear scientific view onthe current state of knowledge in climate change and its potentialenvironmental and socio-economic impacts. The IPCC is a scientific body underthe auspices of the United Nations. It reviews and assesses the most recentscientific, technical, and socio-economic information produced worldwiderelevant to the understanding of climate change.[34]IPCC et al., “Report on Bangladesh Launch of the Fifth Assessment Report(AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),” August2014, http://cdkn.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Report-on-IPCC-outreach-events-Bangladesh-.pdf(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 3. See also the main report of the IPCC,“Climate Change 2014,” 2014,https://ipcc-wg2.gov/AR5/report/full-report/ (accessed May 11, 2015). For thechapter on specific impacts on Asia, see IPCC, “Asia,” RegionalChapter, WGII AR5 Chapter / Annex Downloads, http://ipcc-wg2.gov/AR5/images/uploads/WGIIAR5-Chap24_FINAL.pdf.[35]IPCC et al., “Report on Bangladesh Launchof the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on ClimateChange (IPCC),” August 2014, http://cdkn.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Report-on-IPCC-outreach-events-Bangladesh-.pdf(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 5.[36]The World Bank, “Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts,and the Case for Resilience. A report for the World Bank by the PotsdamInstitute for Climate Impact Research and Climate Analytics”, June 2013, http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Full_Report_Vol_2_Turn_Down_The_Heat_%20Climate_Extremes_Regional_Impacts_Case_for_Resilience_Print%20version_FINAL.pdf(accessed April 13, 2015), p. 110.[37]Margaret Alston et al., “Are climate challenges reinforcing child andforced marriage and dowry as adaptation strategies in the context ofBangladesh?” Women’s Studies International Forum 47 (2014):137-144, accessed April 19, 2015, http://artsonline.monash.edu.au/oxfam/files/2014/05/Are-climate-challenges-reinforcing-child-and-forced-marriage.pdf[38]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO expert, Noakhali, October 25, 2014.[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Sultana C., Gaibandha, November 4, 2014.[40]Considerations about dowry and age are discussed later in this section.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Azima B., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[43]“‘Over 200 killed’ by Cyclone Aila,” BBC News,May 27, 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/8069458.stm((accessed April 19, 2015).[44]Human Rights Watch interview with Rahela S., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Anika M., Khulna, November 31, 2014.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Farhana B., Sirajganj, November 1, 2014.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Nafisa K., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Shapna A., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[49]UNICEF, “State of the World’s Children 2015: Executive Summary,”November 2014, http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/SOWC_2015_Summary_and_Tables.pdf(accessed January 12, 2015), p. 60.[50]Ibid. These numbers refer to the UNICEF indicator “Primary school netattendance ratio,” which UNICEF defines as the “Number of childrenattending primary or secondary school who are of official primary school age,expressed as a percentage of the total number of children of official primaryschool age.”[51]Ibid., p. 60[52]The World Bank, “Helping Bangladeshi girls go further,” undated, http://www.worldbank.org/ida/profile-gender.html(accessed January 12, 2015).[53]Anna T. Schurmann, “Review of the Bangladesh Female Secondary SchoolStipend Project Using a Social Exclusion Framework,” Journal of Health,Population and Nutrition 27:4 (2009): 505–517, accessed February 18,2015, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2928106/.[54]Ibid.[55]Mahbub-Ul Alam et al, “Menstrual hygiene management knowledge,facilities, and practices associated with school absence among Bangladeshiadolescent girls,” ICDDR,B and WaterAid, undated, http://whconference.unc.edu/files/2014/11/alam.pdf(accessed February 18, 2015).[56]S. M. Mostafa Kamal, “Decline in Child Marriage and Changes in Its Effecton Reproductive Outcomes in Bangladesh,” Journal of Health, Populationand Nutrition 30:3 (2012): 317–330, accessed February 17, 2015, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3489948/.[57]Ibid.[58]See p. 61.[59]HumanRights Watch interview with Bibi M., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Ruhana M., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[61]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Razia B., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Khadija A., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Musamat C., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[65]In Bangladesh, primary education ends at class five; a student in class fourwould normally be nine years old and above. Bangladesh Bureau of EducationalInformation and Statistics, “Educational Structure of Bangladesh,”undated, http://www.banbeis.gov.bd/es_bd.htm (accessedApril 19, 2015).[66]Human Rights Watch interview with Farida A. and Sanjida H., Noakhali, October27, 2014.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with community activists, Noakhali, October 27,2014.[68]A student in class five would normally be ten years of age or older.[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Mariam A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with community leader (name withheld), Noakhali,October 27, 2014.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with community activists, Noakhali, October 27,2014.[72]Human Rights Watch interview with Mariam A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with Sadia B., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Adnan M., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Rekha H., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Asma C., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Azima B., Laxmipur, October 29, 2014.[78]In the course of researching this report, Human Rights Watch interviewed onlyone girl, Mala D., who had chosen her own husband, in what she described as a“love marriage.” Human Rights Watch interview with Mala D.,Gaibandha, November 4, 2014.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Nafisa K., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with Hasina A., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Abida N., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Dipanjali B., Khulna, October 30, 2014. Followingher daughter’s marriage, Dipanjali has been working with an NGO as anactivist trying to prevent other child marriages.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Suresh M., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Parveen L., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Shahida A., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima A. and Ayesha L., Laxmipur, October28, 2014.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO activist, Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with civil society activists, Noakhali, October27, 2014.[89]In most cases, the social pressure was of the type described in this section.In one case, however, a mother told Human Rights Watch that she arranged forher son to get married when he was 15, to a 13-year-old girl, because “Hehas epilepsy. Bad air had hit him. A lot of people in the area said he shouldget married and it will cure him. It didn’t get rid of the seizures, buthe’s a little better now.” Human Rights Watch interview with SaimaA., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Laki B., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Marjina A., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Noor B., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Omar N., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Abida N., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[95]In 11 cases, girls or parents interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that adecision for a girl to marry had been the result of harassment or threats.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Sirajganj, November 1, 2014.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Reena F., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Musamat C., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Farida A. and Sanjida H., Noakhali, October27, 2014.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Rumi C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Rabiya A., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[102]Aliya B. said that she is 17 years old, but an NGO representative working inthe area said that she is 15 or 16 years old. During the interview her face wascovered by a veil, so it was not possible to estimate her age based on herappearance.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Aliya B., Gaibandha, November 4, 2014.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Rohima M., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Nabila C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[106]Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, “The DowryProhibition Act, 1980,” 2010, http://bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/pdf_part.php?id=607(accessed January 10, 2015).[107]For example, see Mohammad Abu Taher, “Dowry Practice in RuralBangladesh,” TheDaily Star, March 8, 2015,http://www.thedailystar.net/dowry-practice-in-rural-bangladesh-52912 (accessedApril 19, 2015).[108]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker (name withheld), Laxmipur, October28, 2014.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Farhana B., Sirajganj, November 1, 2014.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Dipanjali B., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Asma C., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[112]Human Rights Watch interview with Ruhana M., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Shilpa A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker (name withheld), Sirajganj,November 1, 2014.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Aaliya M., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with Soraya A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Alima A., Gaibandha, November 4, 2014.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Shilpa A., Sharmin K., and Adnan M.,Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[119]UNFPA, “Marrying too Young: End Child Marriage,” 2012, http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), pp. 4 and 11.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Saima A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014. Childmarriage is only one of a number of causes of children leaving school inBangladesh. Other common reasons, which affect both girls and boys, includefamilies being unable to afford education costs and children being sent towork.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Soraya A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Rabiya A., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with Kalpana B., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Reba B., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Tahmina L., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with Marufa B., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with Sabina B., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Sara A., Gaibandha, November 4, 2014.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafsa A., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[130]A total of 3 girls out of 59 interviewed.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Haniya M., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[132]UNFPA, “Marrying too Young: End Child Marriage,” 2012, http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015).[133]UNICEF, “Maternal Mortality,” undated, http://www.unicef.org/bangladesh/children_4856.htm(accessed February 17, 2015).[134]Bangladesh had a birth rate of 128 per 1000 girls aged 15 to 19 years oldduring the period from 1999 through 2012. UNFPA, “State of the WorldPopulation 2014”, 2014, http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/EN-SWOP14-Report_FINAL-web.pdf(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 104.[135]UNFPA, “Marrying too Young: End Child Marriage,” 2012, http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/MarryingTooYoung.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), p. 64.[136]World Health Organization (WHO), “WHO Guidelines on Preventing EarlyPregnancy and Poor Reproductive Outcomes Among Adolescents in DevelopingCountries,” 2011, http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2011/9789241502214_eng.pdf(accessed January 8, 2015), p. 2. Studies on other countries show that womenwho marry early have the highest proportion of unfavorable pregnancy outcomesat all stages throughout their childbearing years. S. Shawky and W. Milaat,“Early Teenage Marriage and Subsequent Pregnancy Outcome,”Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, vol. 6, issue 1 (2000): 46-54,accessed July 22, 2014, http://www.emro.who.int/publications/emhj/0601/06.htm.[137]Nawal M. Nour, “Health Consequences of Child Marriage in Africa,”November 2006, http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/12/11/06-0510_article.htm(accessed May 11, 2015).[138]World Health Organization, “Adolescent pregnancy, Factsheet N°364,” updated September 2014, http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs364/en/(accessed May 11, 2015).[139]Ibid.[140]Nawal Nour, “An Introduction to Maternal Mortality,” Journal ofObstetrics and Gynecology, Vol. 1, No. 2 (2008): 77-81,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2505173/ (accessed May 11, 2015).[141]Amy Tsui et al., “The Role of Delayed Childbearing in the Prevention ofObstetric Fistulas,” International Journal of Gynecology andObstetrics, vol. 99 (2007), p.98; World Health Organization,“Obstetric Fistula: Guiding Principles for Clinical Management andProgramme Development,” p.3; and UNFPA, “Marrying too Young: EndChild Marriage,” p. 22.[142]Engender Health, “Situation Analysis of Obstetric Fistula inBangladesh,” September 2003, http://www.engenderhealth.org/files/pubs/maternal-health/bangladesh-fistula-report.pdf(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 20.[143]Nashid Kamal Waiz et al., “Situation Analysis of Obstetric Fistula inBangladesh,” September 2003, http://www.engenderhealth.org/files/pubs/maternal-health/bangladesh-fistula-report.pdf(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 20.[144]UNFPA, “Obstetric Fistula,” undated, http://www.unfpa.org/obstetric-fistula(accessed March 16, 2015).[145]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Dr. Ishrat Jahan, director,Maternal & Child Health Training Institute, Dhaka, March 28, 2015 (on filewith report author).[146]Engender Health, “Situation Analysis of Obstetric Fistula inBangladesh,” September 2003, http://www.engenderhealth.org/files/pubs/maternal-health/bangladesh-fistula-report.pdf(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 8. The World Bank, “World DevelopmentIndicators: Reproductive Health,” 2014, http://wdi.worldbank.org/table/2.17 (accessedApril 28, 2015).[147]UNFPA, “State of the World Population 2014,” http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/EN-SWOP14-Report_FINAL-web.pdf(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 104.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Shapna A., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[149]S. M. Mostafa Kamal, “Decline in Child Marriage and Changes in Its Effecton Reproductive Outcomes in Bangladesh,” Journal of Health, Populationand Nutrition 30:3 (2012): 317–330, accessed February 17, 2015, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3489948/.[150]There were some exceptions— i.e. girls who were informed about and hadobtained access to contraception, but they were a minority. E.g. Human RightsWatch interview with Fatima A. and Ayesha L., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014; HumanRights Watch interview with Rumi C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Laxmipur, October 28, 2014; HumanRights Watch interview with NGO worker, Khulna, October 29, 2014.[152]UNFPA, “Education in Empowerment: Promoting Goals in Population,Reproductive Health and Gender,” December 2003, http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/education_empowerment.pdf(accessed April 28, 2015), p. 47.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Abida N., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with Farhana B., Sirajganj, November 1, 2014.[155]Kenneth R. Weiss, “Bangladesh: A Mecca for Health Research on Populationand Poverty,” Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting, March 11, 2014,http://pulitzercenter.org/reporting/asia-bangladesh-maternal-health-contraceptives-population-growth(accessed February 17, 2015).[156]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Khulna, October 29, 2014.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with Lakshmi S., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with Nabila C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Nafisa K., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with Rekha H., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Azima B., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[164]Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, “Special Rapporteur onViolence against women, its causes and consequences finalises country missionto Bangladesh,” May 29, 2013, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=13374&(accessed January 13, 2015). This figure is echoed by research cited here:Sajeda Amin et al., “Mapping Violence Against Women in Bangladesh: AMultilevel Analysis of Demographic and Health Survey Data,” p. 23 inICDDR,B and Population Council, “From Evidence to Policy: AddressingGender-Based Violence Against Women and Girls in Bangladesh,” January2013, http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/pdf/outputs/ORIE/VAWG_Bangladesh_Final_Report.pdf(accessed April 28, 2015).[165]This correlation was clear in all seven countries, but there was significantvariation between countries in the extent to which early marriage was linked togreater risk of spousal violence. For example, in India and the DominicanRepublic, the two countries with the strongest correlation, women who marriedbefore age 15 were more than three times more likely to have experiencedspousal abuse in the previous 12 months than women who had married over age 25(17.3 percent v. 4.4 percent in the Dominican Republic, and 13.6 percent v. 4.2percent in India). Sunita Kishor and Kiersten Johnson, “ProfilingDomestic Violence: A Multi-Country Study,” Measure DHS+ ORC Macro, http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/od31/od31.pdf(accessed January 13, 2015), p. 29.[166]Human Rights Watch interview with Rashida L., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafsa A., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with Ruhana M., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[169]In 14 cases, girls or their parents described physical violence inflicted byhusbands or in-laws. Four other girls described other forms of abuse, includingbeing denied food or confined to the house. Human Rights Watch did not ask allinterviewees about their experience of abuse, so this is likely anunderestimate. We did not ask about abuse when the interview was not private,or when there seemed to be a risk of retraumatization associated with asking theinterviewee to discuss this topic.[170]Human Rights Watch interview with Rashida L., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Laki B., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[172]Human Rights Watch interview with Shahina L., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[173]Human Rights Watch interview with Paramita B., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Bibi M., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[175]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafsa A., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Roshana M., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with Nasima A., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[178]Human Rights Watch interview with Musamat N., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[179]Human Rights Watch interview with Taslima A., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[180]Human Rights Watch interview with Masuma A., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with Suresh M., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Saima A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[183]While abandonment by a spouse can also happen to women who marry after age18—and to men and boys as well—married girls face particularobstacles in asserting their rights to divorce, alimony, and child support, andestablishing an independent life, based on their youth and lack of education.Some also faced a cold welcome when they returned to the parents who hadarranged their marriages.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Roshana M., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with Hafsa A., Sirajganj, November 2, 2014.[186]Human Rights Watch interview with Sediqa A., Gaibandha, November 4, 2014.[187]Sheikh Hasina’s efforts to follow through on the commitments she made atthe Girl Summit have already been marred by delay, including as a result of adebacle over a proposal to revise the CMRA by changing the age of marriage inBangladesh to 16 years old for girls and 18 years old for boys. This proposalwas vigorously opposed by civil society activists in Bangladesh, as well asinternational experts. At the time of writing, the government still appears tobe moving forward with this proposal, while the process of reforming the lawhas been delayed. For example, see “Bangladesh: Don’t LowerMarriage Age,” Human Rights Watch news release, October 13, 2014, http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/10/12/bangladesh-don-t-lower-marriage-age.[188]Mansura Hossain, “Age of marriage 18, but 16 with parentalconsent,” Prothom Alo, March 7, 2015, http://en.prothom-alo.com/bangladesh/news/60481/Age-of-marriage-18-but-16-with-parental-consent(accessed April 19, 2015).[189]UNDP, “Bangladesh’s progress on the MDGs,” undated, http://www.bd.undp.org/content/bangladesh/en/home/mdgoverview/(accessed January 12, 2015).[190]Syed A. Al-Muti, “Bangladesh’s Development Surprise: A Model forDeveloping Countries,” The Asia Foundation, June 25, 2014, http://asiafoundation.org/in-asia/2014/06/25/bangladeshs-development-surprise-a-model-for-developing-countries/(accessed January 12, 2015).[191]Plan International, “Child Marriage in Bangladesh: Findings from aNational Survey 2013,” undated, http://plan-international.org/files/Asia/publications/national-survey-on-child-marriage-by-plan-bangladesh-and-icddr-b(accessed February 17, 2015), p. 14.[192]Ibid.[193]Ibid.[194]UNFPA Bangladesh, “About Bangladesh,” undated, http://unfpabgd.org/index.php?option=page&id=49&Itemid=4(accessed March 13, 2015).[195]Bangladesh Awami League, “Uncompromising Stance On EmpoweringWomen,” July 23, 2014, https://www.albd.org/index.php/resources/special-reports/1415-uncompromising-stance-on-empowering-women(accessed March 13, 2015).[196]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker (name withheld), Gaibandha,November 4, 2014.[197]Human Rights Watch interview with Reshma L., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[198]Human Rights Watch interview with Saima Z., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[199]“Free” books are not necessarily really available or free. A WorldBank study found that “while only 15 percent of households withschool-going children had difficulty in getting books, 55 percent of‘very poor’ households and 67 percent of rural householdsexperienced problems, including delays, extra payments, and outrightpurchase.” Karen Tietjen, “The Bangladesh Primary Education StipendProject: A Descriptive Analysis,” Partnership for Sustainable Strategieson Girls' Education, November 2003,http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-1099079877269/547664-1099080014368/BangladeshStipend.pdf(accessed March 15, 2015), p. 18.[200]Altaf Hossein and Benjamin Zeitlyn, “Poverty and Equity: Access toEducation in Bangladesh,” Consortium for Research on Educational Access,Transitions and Equity, December 2010, http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/ImpAccess_RPC/PTA51.pdf(accessed January 12, 2015), p.1. While these researchers found that povertywas the most significant determinant of access to education, they alsoidentified barriers related to gender. “Despite increases in enrollment,girls in Bangladesh are still less likely to complete secondary school, gain anacademic qualification, study subjects that have a good marketable value, or tomove on to paid employment. Girls are still significantly less likely to beentered for secondary school exams or to pass them – so despite equalenrollment what happens in school is not equal.” p.2.[201]Ibid., p. vii.[202]Ibid., p. 4.[203]For example, see Anika Huq, “Bangladesh education worthless withouttutoring?” Global Post, November 27, 2010, http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/study-abroad/101116/bangladesh-education-bangladesh-schools(accessed January 10, 2015).[204]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Laxmipur, October 28, 2014. A2003 study on education in Bangladesh commissioned by a partnership includingthe World Bank found that, “A quarter of households surveyed indicatedthat teachers would inflict some sort of retribution (not teach in school, givepoor grades) if not engaged for private tutoring.” Karen Tietjen,“The Bangladesh Primary Education Stipend Project: A DescriptiveAnalysis,” Partnership for Sustainable Strategies on Girls' Education,November 2003, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-1099079877269/547664-1099080014368/BangladeshStipend.pdf(accessed March 15, 2015), p. 19.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher (name withheld), Sirajganj, November1, 2014.[206]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Khulna, October 29, 2014.[207]Human Rights Watch interview with community leader (name withheld), Noakhali,October 27, 2014.[208]If for no other reason, parents may be interested in continuing a girl’seducation because it will improve her marriageability. “I would havecontinued her education for longer if I had more money because then she couldhave married someone from a good background,” said Fatima A., of herdaughter who she married at age 15 to a man who had no education himself. HumanRights Watch interview with Fatima A. and Ayesha L., Laxmipur, October 28,2014.[209]Human Rights Watch interview with community activists, Noakhali, October 27,2014.[210]Altaf Hossein and Benjamin Zeitlyn, “Poverty and Equity: Access toEducation in Bangladesh,” Consortium for Research on Educational Access,Transitions and Equity, December 2010, http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/ImpAccess_RPC/PTA51.pdf(accessed January 12, 2015), p.18.[211]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[212]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher (name withheld), Sirajganj, November1, 2014.[213]Karen Tietjen, “The Bangladesh Primary Education Stipend Project: ADescriptive Analysis,” Partnership for Sustainable Strategies on Girls'Education, November 2003,http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-1099079877269/547664-1099080014368/BangladeshStipend.pdf(accessed March 15, 2015), p. 16.[214]Human Rights Watch interview with Hasina A., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[215]Ministry of Planning, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh,“Sixth Five Year Plan, FY2011-FY2015, Accelerating Growth and ReducingPoverty, Part 1, Strategic Directions and Policy Framework,” July 2011, http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr1363.pdf(accessed February 18, 2015), pp. 412-433.[216]Ibid., p. 420.[217]Ibid., p. 168.[218]Human Rights Watch interview with UP member (name withheld), Khulna, October30, 2014.[219]Human Rights Watch interview with community activists, Noakhali, October 27,2014.[220]Care Bangladesh, “Seminar Report: Social Protection Interventions inBangladesh: Key Challenges and Ways Forward for Enhancing Food Security, CareBangladesh,” May 22, 2014, http://www.carebangladesh.org/shouhardoII/reportStory/files_2014052920786.pdf(accessed April 20, 2015), p. 13[221]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatima A. and Ayesha L., Laxmipur, October28, 2014.[222]Human Rights Watch interview with Beauty A., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[223]Human Rights Watch interview with Musamat C., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[224]Human Rights Watch interview with Shahnara N., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[225]Human Rights Watch interview with Khadija A., Noakhali, October 27, 2014.[226]Human Rights Watch interview with Hasina A., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[227]Ministry of Food and Disaster Management, Government of the People’sRepublic of Bangladesh, “National Plan for Disaster Management2008-2015,” May 2008, http://www.preventionweb.net/files/9472_NationalPlanforDisastermanagement.pdf(accessed February 18, 2015), p.43.[228]Ibid.[229]Under article 12 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,countries are required to submit periodic national communications on theimplementation of their obligations. Least Developed Countries (LDCs) areinvited to submit a National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) in order toprovide information related to the climate vulnerability of the country and toidentify priority adaptation projects.[230]Ministry of Environment and Forests, Governmentof the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, “National AdaptationProgramme of Action (NAPA) Updated Version June 2009,” June 2009, http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/ban02.pdf,(accessed April 13, 2015), p. 34.[231]Ibid.[232]Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of the People’s Republicof Bangladesh, “Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan2008,” September 2008, http://www.sdnbd.org/moef.pdf (accessed April 13,2015), para. 49.[233]Human Rights Watch interview with Khushi M., Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[234]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO worker, Laxmipur, October 28, 2014.[235]Birth and Death Registration Act, 2004. An amendment to this act in 2013created the Office of the Registrar General, a government body responsible forbirth and death registration.[236]UNICEF Bangladesh, “Factsheet: Birth Registration,” May 2014, http://www.unicef.org/bangladesh/Birth_Registration%282%29.pdf(accessed January 12, 2015).[237]Human Rights Watch interview with community activists, Noakhali, October 27,2014.[238]“Bangladesh moving towards universal birth registration,”IRINnews,July 15, 2008, http://www.irinnews.org/report/79258/bangladesh-moving-towards-universal-birth-registration(accessed January 12, 2015).[239]UNICEF Bangladesh, “Factsheet: Birth Registration,” May 2014, http://www.unicef.org/bangladesh/Birth_Registration%282%29.pdf(accessed January 12, 2015).[240]Ibid.[241]Ibid.[242]Muslims and Christians are required to register their marriages; Hindus havethe option of registering their marriage. Human Rights Watch, “Will IGet My Dues…Before I Die?”: Harm to Women from Bangladesh’sDiscriminatory Laws on Marriage, Separation, and Divorce, September 17,2012, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2012/09/17/will-i-get-my-dues-i-die-0, p. 95.[243]Another issue is that while registration of births could be helpful inpreventing child marriages 10 or 15 years from now, children of the age likelyto be getting married now are not necessarily registered, or if registered arelikely to have registered recently with their ages dictated by their parents,making the birth register of limited use in preventing child marriages today.Human Rights Watch interview with community activists, Noakhali, October 27,2014.[244]Human Rights Watch interview with Soraya A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[245]Human Rights Watch interview with Farhana B., Sirajganj, November 1, 2014.[246]Human Rights Watch interview with Shilpa A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[247]Human Rights Watch interview with Saima A., Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[248]Human Rights Watch interview with Saima A. and her husband and daughter-in-law,Noakhali, October 26, 2014.[249]Human Rights Watch interview with Marufa B., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[250]Human Rights Watch interview with Rumi C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[251]Human Rights Watch interview with Karuna M., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[252]Human Rights Watch interview with Nabila C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[253]Human Rights Watch interview with Mala D., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[254]E.g. Human Rights Watch interview with community activist (name withheld),Gaibandha, November 4, 2014.[255]Human Rights Watch interview with community leader (name withheld), Noakhali,October 27, 2014.[256]Human Rights Watch interview with Latifa A., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[257]Human Rights Watch, “Will I Get My Dues…Before I Die?,” p.33.[258]Human Rights Watch interview with Laila B., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[259]Human Rights Watch interview with Anika M., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[260]Human Rights Watch interview with community leader (name withheld), Noakhali,October 27, 2014.[261]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucky C., Khulna, October 31, 2014.[262]Human Rights Watch interview with Dipanjali B., Khulna, October 30, 2014.[263]Human Rights Watch interview with UP member (name withheld), Khulna, October30, 2014.[264]Child Marriage Restraint Act, arts. 4 and 5. The law also provides forpunishment by imprisonment for parents or guardians of children who marry. art.6.[265]Human Rights Watch interview with UP member (name withheld), Khulna, October30, 2014.[266]Human Rights Watch interview with community activists, Noakhali, October 27,2014.[267]Among the amendments to the CMRA have been changes to the age of marriage. The1929 version banned the marriage of girls under 14. A law pertaining only toMuslims in 1961 raised the age of marriage for Muslim girls to 16, and a 1984amendment of the CMRA made 18 the minimum age of marriage for women of allreligions.[268]Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 28, para. 23.[269]Human Rights Watch interview with the executive director of an NGO (namewithheld), Dhaka, November 5, 2015.[270]Human Rights Watch, “Will I Get My Dues…Before I Die?,” p.80-81.[271]CEDAW Committee, “Concluding observations of the Committee on Eliminationof Discrimination Against Women, Bangladesh,” 48th session, January17-February 4, 2011, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw/docs/co/CEDAW-C-BGD-CO-7.pdf(accessed January 13, 2015), para. 19.[272]Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes andconsequences, Rashida Manjoo, Addendum, Mission to Bangladesh (May 20-29,2013), A/HRC/26/38/Add.2, p. 15.[273]Ibid., p. 16.[274]Mahris the sum of moneypromised by a husband to his wife as part of the marriage contract. The mahroften is not paid but remains a debt owed to the wife which she can collect ata later date. Mahr is typically paid at the time of divorce, though insome cases negotiations between families over a divorce may result in an agreedforfeiture of mahr.[275]Human Rights Watch interview with Aqlima C., Sirajganj, November 3, 2014.[276]Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes andconsequences, Rashida Manjoo, Addendum, Mission to Bangladesh, p. 15.[277]Ibid., p. 21.[278]These laws also set different—and often discriminatory —rules fordifferent faiths in the areas of guardianship and inheritance. The LawCommission, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh,“Report on a reference by the government towards the possibility offraming out of a uniform family code for all communities of Bangladesh relatingto marriage, divorce, guardianship, inheritance etc.,” July 18, 2005,http://www.lawcommissionbangladesh.org/reports/69.pdf (accessed February 18,2015).[279]Human Rights Watch, “Will I Get My Dues…Before I Die?,”p. 5.[280]Ibid.[281]Human Rights Watch, “Will I Get My Dues…Before I Die?,” pp.80-81.[282]Ibid, p. 40-42.[283]Ibid.[284]“Bangladesh: Discriminatory Family Laws Fuel Female Poverty,” HumanRights Watch news release, September 17, 2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/09/16/bangladesh-discriminatory-family-laws-fuel-female-poverty.[285]Bangladesh parliamentarians subsequently in September 2014 endorsed the needfor universal compulsory marriage registration, in the conclusions of aregional parliamentary seminar on violence against girls. The conclusions,prepared by the whip of the Bangladesh parliament, state that, “[L]egislationon child marriage should also include mandatory birth and marriageregistration.” Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and the Parliament ofBangladesh, “Conclusions of the Regional Parliamentary Seminar on Endingthe Cycle of Violence Against Girls in Asia-Pacific,” September 23, 2014,http://www.ipu.org/splz-e/dhaka14/conclusions.pdf(accessed March 19, 2015), p. 2.[286]Human Rights Watch, “Will I Get My Dues…Before I Die?,”pp. 43-44.[287]Ibid.[288]Human Rights Watch interview with Nasima A., Sirajganj, November 3, 2015.[289]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S.171, entered into force March 23, 1976. Bangladeshacceded to the ICCPR on September 28, 2000; International Covenant on Economic,Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res.2200A(XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 993U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3, 1976. Bangladesh acceded to theICESCR on October 12, 1999; Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women (CEDAW), adopted December 18, 1979, G.A. res.34/180, 34 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 46) at 193, U.N. Doc.A/34/46, entered intoforce September 3, 1981, acceded to by Bangladesh on November 6, 1984.Bangladesh currently has a reservation to articles 2 and 16(1)(c): "TheGovernment of the People's Republic of Bangladesh does not consider as bindingupon itself the provisions of article 2, [... and ...] 16(1)(c) as theyconflict with Sharia law based on Holy Quran and Sunna." The CEDAWcommittee has said that reservations to these articles are incompatible withthe object and purpose of the convention, and are therefore impermissible underinternational law and should be withdrawn. It has repeatedly called onBangladesh to withdraw its reservations. In 2010 the government said in itsreport to the CEDAW committee that “withdrawal of the reservations...wasunder consideration”; Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49)at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990,ratified by Bangladesh on August 3, 1990.[290]Committee on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (CEDAW Committee),General Recommendation No. 19, Violence against women, (Eleventh session,1992), Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted byHuman Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 at 84 (1994), (containedin document A/47/38), para. 9. See also, UN Human Rights Committee, GeneralComment 31, Nature of the general legal obligation on states parties to theCovenant, para. 8, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004); UN CommitteeAgainst Torture, General Comment No. 2: Implementation of Article 2 by StatesParties, 24 January 2008.CAT/C/GC/2. Regarding the responsibility of statesextending to all within their jurisdiction.[291]Human Rights Council Resolution 16/3, “Promoting human rights andfundamental freedoms through a better understanding of traditional values ofhumankind,” A/HRC/RES/16/3, April 8, 2011, http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/RESOLUTION/GEN/G11/124/92/PDF/G1112492.pdf?OpenElement(accessed September 23, 2014), p.2. See also, Sexual Rights Initiative, “SubmissionRegarding Best Practices In The Application of Traditional Values WhilePromoting And Protecting Human Rights And Upholding Human Dignity,”http://www.ohchr.org/documents/issues/hrvalues/sri%20.pdf (accessed September23 2014), p. 1.[292]CEDAW, art. 5.[293]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 28, para. 5. See also UN GeneralAssembly, Reportof the Special Rapporteur in the field of culturalrights. A/67/287. New York, UN General Assembly, August 10, 2012,http://www.unesco.lacult.org/docc/2012_Cultural_Rights_A_67_287_eng.pdf(accessed July 22, 2014), p. 4. The UN special rapporteur on cultural rightsreiterated in 2012 that: “Many practices and norms that discriminateagainst women are justified by reference to culture, religion andtradition,” and recommended that states ensure “The freedom ofwomen to refuse to participate in traditions, customs and practices thatinfringe upon human dignity and rights, to critique existing cultural norms andtraditional practices and to create new cultural meanings and norms ofbehavior.”[294]ICCPR, arts. 3, 6, 9, 19, 23, and 24.[295]ICESCR, art. 3.[296]CRC, art. 2.[297]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 28: the core obligations of statesparties under article 2 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women, 47th Sess., U.N.Doc. CEDAW/C/ GC/28, 2010, http://www.iwraw-ap.org/convention/details28.htm(accessed September 21, 2014), paras. 9 and 22.[298]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 21, Equality in Marriage and FamilyRelations, UN CEDAWOR, 13th Sess., UN Doc. A/47/38, (1994), para.14.[299]See Universal Declaration on Human Rights, adopted December 10, 1948, G.A. Res.217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948), art. 16, ICCPR, art. 23,and ICESCR, art. 10 (1).[300]CEDAW, art. 16. See also Convention on the Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age forMarriage, and Registration of Marriages, art. 1. Bangladesh acceded to theConvention on the Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage, andRegistration of Marriages on October 5, 1998 with the following declarationsand reservations: “The Government of the People's Republic of Bangladeshreserves the right to apply the provisions of articles 1 and 2 in so far asthey relate to the question of legal validity of child marriage, in accordancewith the Personal Laws of different religious communities of the country. TheGovernment of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, in acceding to theConvention will not be bound by the exception clause of article 2 viz. exceptwhere a competent authority has granted a dispensation as to age, for seriousreasons, in the interest of the intending spouses.”[301]CRC Committee, Concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of theChild: Bangladesh, UN. Doc. CRC/C/BGD/CO/4 (2009), para 30-31.[302]See, for example, CRC Committee, General Comment No. 4, Adolescent Health andDevelopment in the Context of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,(Thirty-third session, 2003), para. 20. There is an evolving consensus ininternational law that 18 should be the minimum age for marriage.[303]CRC Committee, Concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of theChild: Bangladesh, UN. Doc. CRC/C/BGD/CO/4 (2009), para 31.[304]Ibid., para. 30.[305]Children Act, 2013.[306]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 19 (The Family), Protection ofthe Family, the Right to Marriage and Equality of the Spouses, (Article 23),(Thirty-ninth session, 1990), Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty bodies, UN Doc. HRI/Gen/1/Rev.7(2004), para. 4.[307]General Comment No. 16 of the Committee on Economic, Social and CulturalRights, which oversees implementation of the ICESCR, para. 27, sets outobligations of governments to “ensure that men and women have an equalright to choose if, whom, and when to marry.”[308]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 21, Equality in Marriage and FamilyRelations, (Thirteenth Session, 1994), Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UNDoc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1(2004), paras. 16, 1 (a) and (b).[309]General Comment No. 16 of the Committee on Economic, Social and CulturalRights, which oversees implementation of the ICESCR, para 27, sets outgovernments’ obligations to “ensure that men and women have anequal right to choose if, whom, and when to marry.” It notes that“the legal age of marriage for men and women should be the same, and boysand girls should be protected equally from practices that promote childmarriage.”[310] ICESCR, art. 13, CRC, art.28, African Charter, art. 17, Maputo Protocol, art. 12, ACRWC, art. 11. ESCRCommittee, General Comment No. 13, The Right to Education (article 13 of theCovenant), E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 57. Providing primary education is acore obligation for governments.[311]ESCR Committee, General Comment No.13, The Right to Education, UN Doc.E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), paras. 10 and 57.[312]CRC Committee, General Comment No. 7, U.N. Doc. CRC/C/GC/7/Rev.1(2006), para. 28.[313]ESCR Committee, General Comment No. 13, The Right to Education (article 13 ofthe Covenant), E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 14.[314]ESCR Committee, General Comment No. 13, The Right to Education (article 13 ofthe Covenant), E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 13.[315]CRC Committee, Concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of theChild: Bangladesh, UN. Doc. CRC/C/BGD/CO/4 (2009), paras. 73-74.[316]Human Rights Council, Report of the independent expert on the issue of humanrights obligations related to access to safe drinking water and sanitation,July 1, 2009, UN Doc. A/HRC/12/24, para. 30.[317]CRC Committee, Concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of theChild: Bangladesh, UN. Doc. CRC/C/BGD/CO/4 (2009), para. 74.[318]Commission on Human Rights, Report of the special rapporteur on the right toeducation, February 8, 2006, UN Doc. E/CN.4/2006/45, para. 132.[319]Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of the general legalobligation on states parties to the Covenant (hereinafter "General Comment31"), para. 8, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004); UN CommitteeAgainst Torture (CAT), General Comment No. 2: Implementation of Article 2 byStates Parties, January 24, 2008.CAT/C/GC/2.[320]CRC, art. 19.[321]Ibid., art. 34.[322]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 19, Violence against Women,(Eleventh session, 1992), Compilation of General Comments and GeneralRecommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1(1994), paras. 9 and 24.[323]ICCPR, arts. 6, 7, and 9.[324]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No, 19, paras. 1 and 7 (g).[325]See generally, European Court of Human Rights, Kaya v. Turkey, judgment ofFebruary 19, 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998-I, p. 324; Jordan v.the United Kingdom, No. 24746/94, judgment of May 4, 2001; Finucane v. theUnited Kingdom, No. 29178/95, judgment of July 1 2003; Isayeva v. Russia,57950/00, judgment of July 27, 2004; Adali v. Turkey, 38187/97, judgment of March31, 2005.[326]ICESCR, art. 12.[327]CRC, art. 24; See also ESCR Committee, General Comment No. 14, para. 22.[328]CEDAW, art. 12(1).[329]Human Rights Council, Technical guidance on the application of a humanrights-based approach to the implementation of policies and programmes toreduce preventable maternal morbidity and mortality: Report of the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, A/HRC/21/22 (2009), para21.[330]Ibid.[331]CRC Committee, Concluding Observations: Costa Rica, U.N. Doc CRC/C/CRI/CO/4(2011), paras. 27, 28.[332]CRC Committee, Concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of theChild: Bangladesh, UN. Doc. CRC/C/BGD/CO/4 (2009), para 63.[333]Ibid., para. 68.[334]CRC, art. 12.[335]CRC Committee, General Comment No. 12, The Right of the Child to Be Heard, U.N.Doc.CRC/C/GC/12(2009), para.3.[336]Ibid., para. 49.[337]Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),“Organizational Profile,” PreventionWeb, December 12, 2013, http://www.preventionweb.net/english/professional/contacts/profile.php?id=1370(accessed February 18, 2015).[338]Such a tracking system can be a useful way of monitoringimplementation of a new law. For example, in Afghanistan, the 2009 Law on theElimination of Violence Against Women has been the subject of such monitoringby both the Afghan government and the United Nations.[339]Bangladesh Parliament and Inter-Parliamentary Union,“Conclusions of the Regional Parliamentary Seminar on Ending the Cycle ofViolence Against Girls in Asia-Pacific,” http://www.ipu.org/splz-e/dhaka14/conclusions.pdf (accessed March 19, 2015),This 134-page report is based on more than a hundred interviews conducted across the country, most of them with married girls, some as young as age 10. It documents the factors driving child marriage in Bangladesh – including poverty, natural disasters, lack of access to education, social pressure, harassment, and dowry. Human Rights Watch also details the damage that child marriage does to the lives of girls and their families in Bangladesh, including the discontinuation of secondary education, serious health consequences including death as a result of early pregnancy, abandonment, and domestic violence from spouses and in-laws.Region / CountryAsia BangladeshProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch