Growing Up Locked Down: Youth in Solitary Confinement in Jails and Prisons Across the United States | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportOctober 10, 2012Growing Up Locked DownYouth in Solitary Confinement in Jails and Prisons Across the United StatesA cell at the Pinellas County jail, an adult facilitywhere young people are held in solitary confinement. One girl interviewed for the report said she spent four months in isolation there.© 2008 AP Photo/Pinellas County Sheriff's OfficeSummaryBeing in isolation to me felt like I was on an island allalone[,] dying a slow death from the inside out.—Letter from Kyle B. (pseudonym), from California toHuman Rights Watch, May 3, 2012.Every day, in jails and prisons across the United States,young people under the age of 18 are held in solitary confinement.[1]They spend 22 or more hours each day alone, usually in a small cell behind asolid steel door, completely isolated both physically and socially, often fordays, weeks, or even months on end. Sometimes there is a window allowingnatural light to enter or a view of the world outside cell walls. Sometimes itis possible to communicate by yelling to other inmates, with voices distorted,reverberating against concrete and metal. Occasionally, they get a book orbible, and if they are lucky, study materials. But inside this cramped space,few contours distinguish one hour, one day, week, or one month, from the next.This bare social and physical existence makes many youngpeople feel doomed and abandoned, or in some cases, suicidal, and can lead toserious physical and emotional consequences. Adolescents in solitaryconfinement describe cutting themselves with staples or razors, hallucinations,losing control of themselves, or losing touch with reality while isolated. Theytalk about only being allowed to exercise in small metal cages, alone, a fewtimes a week; about being prevented from going to school or participating inany activity that promotes growth or change. Some say the hardest part is notbeing able to hug their mother or father.The solitary confinement of adults can cause serious painand suffering and can violate international human rights and US constitutionallaw. But the potential damage to young people, who do not have the maturity ofan adult and are at a particularly vulnerable, formative stage of life, is muchgreater.Experts assert that young people are psychologically unableto handle solitary confinement with the resilience of an adult. And, becausethey are still developing, traumatic experiences like solitary confinement mayhave a profound effect on their chance to rehabilitate and grow. Solitaryconfinement can exacerbate, or make more likely, short and long-term mentalhealth problems. The most common deprivation that accompanies solitaryconfinement, denial of physical exercise, is physically harmful to adolescents’health and well-being.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionestimate that in 2011, more than 95,000 youth were held in prisons and jails. Asignificant number of these facilities use solitary confinement—for days,weeks, months, or even years—to punish, protect, house, or treat some ofthe young people who are held there. Solitary confinement of youth is, today, aserious and widespread problem in the United States.This situation is a relatively recent development. It hasonly been in the last 30 years that a majority of jurisdictions around thecountry have adopted various charging and sentencing laws and practices thathave resulted in substantial numbers of adolescents serving time in adult jailsand prisons. These laws and policies have largely ignored the need to treatyoung people charged and sentenced as if adults with special consideration fortheir age, development, and rehabilitative potential.Young people can be guilty of horrible crimes withsignificant consequences for victims, their families, and their communities.The state has a duty to ensure accountability for serious crimes, and toprotect the public. But states also have special responsibilities not to treatyoung people in ways that can permanently harm their development andrehabilitation, regardless of their culpability.This report describes the needless suffering and misery thatsolitary confinement frequently inflicts on young people; examines thejustifications that state and prison officials offer for using solitaryconfinement; and offers alternatives to solitary confinement in the housing andmanagement of adolescents. The report draws on in-person interviews andcorrespondence with more than 125 individuals who were held in jails or prisonswhile under age 18 in 19 states, and with officials who manage jails or prisonsin 10 states, as well as quantitative data and the advice of experts on thechallenges of detaining and managing adolescents.This report shows that the solitary confinement of adolescentsin adult jails and prisons is not exceptional or transient. Specifically, thereport finds that:Young people are subjected to solitary confinement in jails andprisons nationwide, and often for weeks and months.When subjected to solitary confinement, adolescents arefrequently denied access to treatment, services, and programming adequate tomeet their medical, psychological, developmental, social, and rehabilitativeneeds.Solitary confinement of young people often seriously harms theirmental and physical health, as well as their development.Solitary confinement of adolescents is unnecessary. There arealternative ways to address the problems—whether disciplinary,administrative, protective, or medical—which officials typically cite asjustifications for using solitary confinement, while taking into account therights and special needs of adolescents.Adult jails and prisons generally use solitary confinementin the same way for adolescents and adults. Young people are held in solitary confinementto punish them when they break the rules, such as those against talking back,possessing contraband, or fighting; they are held in solitary confinement toprotect them from adults or from one another; they are held in solitaryconfinement because officials do not know how else to manage them; andsometimes, officials use solitary confinement to medically treat them.There is no question that incarcerating teenagers who havebeen accused or found responsible for crimes can be extremely challenging.Adolescents can be defiant, and hurt themselves and others. Sometimes,facilities may need to use limited periods or forms of segregation andisolation to protect young people from other prisoners or themselves. But usingsolitary confinement harms young people in ways that are different, and moreprofound, than if they were adults.Many adolescents reported being subjected to solitaryconfinement more than once while they were under age 18. Forty-nineindividuals—more than a third—of the seventy-seven interviewed andfifty with whom we corresponded described spending a total of between one andsix months in solitary confinement before their eighteenth birthday.Adolescents spoke eloquently about solitary confinement, andhow it compounded the stresses of being in jail or prison—often for thefirst time—without family support. They talked about the disorientationof finding themselves, and feeling, doubly alone.Many described struggling with one or more serious mentalhealth problems during their time in solitary confinement and of sometimeshaving difficulty accessing psychological services or support to cope withthese difficulties. Some young people, particularly those with mentaldisabilities (sometimes called psychosocial disabilities or mental illness, andusually associated with long-term mental health problems), struggled more thanothers. Several young people talked about attempting suicide when in isolation.Adolescents in solitary confinement also experienced directphysical and developmental harm, a consequence of being denied physicalexercise or adequate nutrition. Thirty-eight of those interviewed said they hadexperienced at least one period in solitary confinement when they could not gooutside. A few talked about losing weight and going to bed hungry.The report finds that young people in solitary confinementare deprived of contact with their families, access to education and toprogramming, and other services necessary for their growth, development, andrehabilitation. Twenty-one of the young people interviewed said they could notvisit with loved ones during at least one period of solitary confinement.Twenty-five said they spent at least one period of time in solitary confinementduring which they were not provided any educational programming at all. Sixteendescribed sitting alone in their cell for days on end without even a book ormagazine to read.But as a number of jail and prison officials recognize,solitary confinement is costly, ineffective, and harmful. There are other meansto handle the challenges of detaining and managing adolescents. Young peoplecan be better managed in specialized facilities, designed to house them,staffed with specially trained personnel, and organized to encourage positivebehaviors. Punitive schemes can be reorganized to stress immediate andproportionate interventions and to strictly limit and regulate short-termisolation as a rare exception.Solitary confinement of youth is itself a serious humanrights violation and can constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatmentunder international human rights law. In addition, the conditions that compoundthe harm of solitary confinement (such as lack of psychological care, physicalexercise, family contact, and education) often constitute independent,concurrent, and serious human rights violations. Solitary confinement cannot besquared with the special status of adolescents under US constitutional lawregarding crime and punishment. While not unusual, it turns the detention ofyoung people in adult jails and prisons into an experience of unquestionablecruelty.It is time for the United Statesto abolish the solitary confinement of young people. State and federallawmakers, as well as other appropriate officials, should immediately embark ona review of the laws, policies, and practices that result in young people beingheld in solitary confinement, with the goal of definitively ending thispractice. Rather than being banished to grow up locked down in isolation,incarcerated adolescents must be treated with humanity and dignity andguaranteed the ability to grow, to be rehabilitated, and to reenter society.Key RecommendationsTo the US Federal Governmentand/or State GovernmentsProhibitthe solitary confinement of youth under age 18.Prohibitthe housing of adolescents with adults, or in jails and prisons designed tohouse adults.Strictlylimit and regulate all forms of segregation and isolation of young people.Monitor andreport on the segregation and isolation of adolescents.Ratifyhuman rights treaties protecting young people without reservations.MethodologyThis report is the product of a joint initiative—theAryeh Neier fellowship—between Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union to strengthen respect for human rights in the United States.This report is based on interviews and correspondenceundertaken between December 2011 and July 2012 with 127 individuals who weredetained in jail or prison while under age 18 in Alabama, California, Colorado,Connecticut, Florida, Illinois, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, Mississippi,Missouri, Nebraska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, Utah, Wisconsin,and Virginia. Of those, Human Rights Watch and the American Civil LibertiesUnion interviewed in person 77 individuals who, collectively, had been held atmore than 50 jails and prisons in Colorado, Florida, Michigan, New York andPennsylvania while under age 18. Of these, 66 were male and 11 were female; 57of them were between 18 and 25 years old at the time of the interviews; 20 wereunder age 18. Of the 50 with whom Human Rights Watch corresponded, all weremale; 24 were between the ages of 18 and 25, and 10 were under age 18.In selecting jurisdictions for focused research, HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union prioritized states thatconsistently report holding youth under age 18 in adult jails and prisons, andcharging young people as if they are adults. Human Rights Watch and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union identified individuals who had been subjected tosolitary confinement in those jurisdictions through outreach to family members;contact with defense attorneys and advocacy networks; and through anadvertisement in Prison Legal News (which has broad circulation in jails and inprisons). Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union alsoidentified some individuals by writing to or seeking to interview alladolescents under age 18 at a particular facility or within a particularDepartment of Rehabilitation or Correction; all young people convicted ofcertain offenses likely to be associated with isolation (such as battery by aprisoner, assault on a corrections officer, or throwing or expelling bodilyfluids at or towards a public safety worker); or young people servingparticularly long sentences, such as life without parole.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionwere not able to conduct interviews in every state that confines adolescents inadult jails and prisons, nor in every county in the states visited. HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union did not seek individual administrative,disciplinary, or medical records for most individuals interviewed.All individuals interviewed about their experience providedinformed consent to participate in this research. Interviews in jails andprisons were conducted in private, with no jail or prison staff within earshot;interviews outside of jails and prisons were also conducted in private. Forsome of the interviews, the Human Rights Watch/American Civil Liberties Unionresearcher in charge of the project was accompanied by an attorney (includingsometimes the individual’s defense attorney), social worker, or NGOpartner whose presence as an observer was explained to the interviewee. Whenaccompanied by others, the Human Rights Watch/American Civil Liberties Unionresearcher led the questioning, using substantially the same semi-structuredquestionnaire for all interviews with those who had been held in jail orprison. The researcher repeatedly assured interviewees that they could end theinterview at any time or decline to answer any and all questions. Also, theresearcher gave no incentives to interviewees and took great care to avoidre-traumatizing them. One individual declined to be interviewed, and oneindividual refused to allow his or her testimony to be used for this research.Some interviewees asked that their names be used in thisreport so they could more directly participate in bringing attention to theirpersonal experience. But due to concerns over the safety of the manyinterviewees who did not want their identity disclosed, Human Rights Watch andthe American Civil Liberties Union decided to use pseudonyms to disguise theidentity of all interviewees who were held in jail or in prison, and ofindividuals whose cases Human Rights Watch and the American Civil LibertiesUnion learned of through attorneys or family members. In most cases, HumanRights Watch has also withheld certain other identifying information to protectan individual’s privacy and safety.Human Rights Watch sent surveys regarding the challenges ofdetaining and managing youth and the use of isolation to more than 590 countyjail facilities and received responses from or interviewed, collectively, morethan 98 county jail officials in Colorado, Florida, Kentucky, Massachusetts,Michigan, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Human RightsWatch also interviewed or corresponded with state prison officials in Colorado,Florida, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.The Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction refusedHuman Rights Watch’s request to interview young people under their caredue to the department’s “long-standing practice not to providemedia access to [the department’s] incarcerated juveniles” andbecause “there [were] legal concerns about whether the juveniles canconsent to interviews.”[2] It alsorefused to allow us to privately interview inmates who had entered its carewhile under age 18 who were now adults, stating that it would only allowinterviews of inmates who were screened “to determine if they areeligible and appropriate for participation” if “the PublicInformation Officer at [each] facility [were] to be present during th[ose]interviews.”[3]Following our standard research methodology in situations of confinement, wedeclined to submit to official monitoring or selection of interviews.The Wisconsin Department of Corrections also denied HumanRights Watch’s request to interview individuals in their care. It citedconcerns that interviewing young people identified through defense counsel and publicrecords, “may introduce bias” in the results; that, if the intentwas to obtain information about county facilities, interviews should beconducted “when the subject is in a county jail facility”; that thedepartment would not permit questioning about experiences in county facilitieswithout “written approval from the respective Jail Administration orSheriff”; and that it would not permit interviews without prior approvalof questions to be asked (about prolonged isolation) and any other“information necessary to take into account possible issues that couldlead to any possible negative effects that the interview may have on thesubject’s mental health status.”[4]Human Rights Watch interviewed officials at the USDepartment of Justice and state officials charged with collecting data andmonitoring compliance with federal law, such as the Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention Act.Finally, Human Rights Watch and the American Civil LibertiesUnion interviewed dozens (and had background discussions with scores) of thirdparties with relevant expertise or experience dealing with the consequences ofthe solitary confinement of adolescents, including prisoner’s familymembers; victims of crime and their family members; attorneys; as well as medical,corrections, educational, and psychological experts.This report, especiallyAppendix 1, contains substantial statistical data. Most of the descriptivestatistics utilized in this report were extracted from three Bureau of JusticeStatistics (BJS) data sources: the annual Prisoners in [Year] reports; theannual Jail Inmates at Midyear reports; and the raw Survey of Jails data files,which are used to generate the Jail Inmates at Midyear report. Furtherinformation on the statistical methodology used may be found in Appendix 1.I. Background: Kids in an Adult System[C]hildren are constitutionally different from adults… [J]uveniles have diminished culpability and greater prospects forreform … [and] are less deserving of the most severe punishments …[C]hildren have a lack of maturity and an underdeveloped sense of responsibility[;]… [c]hildren are more vulnerable . . . to negative influences and outsidepressures[;] … [a]nd … a child’s character is not as wellformed as an adult’s.—Millerv. Alabama, United States Supreme Court, 2012 (No. 10‐9646, slip op. at 8 (2012)).For much of the last century, people under the age of 18 whocame into conflict with the law in the United States were detained (whennecessary), tried or adjudicated, and held accountable in the juvenile justicesystem. In rare cases, and if in the best interests of the child and thepublic, juvenile court judges could waive a delinquency case into the adultcriminal justice system. But this was far from common.[5]Though they have since declined, in the late 1980s andthrough the mid-1990s, rates of some categories of juvenile crime, particularlyserious violent crime, increased significantly.[6] Concernabout this development led to a proliferation of new legal mechanisms forsubjecting children to criminal trial and punishment as if they were adults.[7]The stated goal of most of these policies was deterrence through retributivepunishment: “adult time for adult crime.”[8]As a result, each year tens of thousands of adolescents arenow treated as adults. How young people come to be charged, detained, andpunished as adults, however, is a function of a complex thicket of state andfederal law and policy. There is no single approach withinor among states. Yet the consequences for young people treated the same asadults are profound.YouthCharged as if AdultsNationally, young people held in adult facilities arecharged and convicted of offenses ranging from drug and property crimes to themost serious violent crimes. The most common mechanisms for imposing“adult time for adult crime” include offense-based exclusion fromthe juvenile justice system, prosecutorial “direct-file” of youthcases in the adult system, and “once an adult always an adult”laws.[9] For manyyoung people, entering the adult criminal justice system is a path of noreturn, as not all states have mechanisms to transfer or waive jurisdiction backto the juvenile system, or to impose a blended sentence of punishments in boththe juvenile and adult systems.[10] Yetsome evidence suggests that many adolescents charged as if adults are notactually sentenced to time in prison.[11]Racial and socioeconomic disparities are pervasive withinthe criminal justice system. As Human Rights Watch has documented, inCalifornia, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania, black adolescents aresignificantly more likely to be serving a sentence of life without parolethan white adolescents.[12]Other studies have found that minority adolescents receive harsher treatmentthan similarly-situated white adolescents at every stage of the criminaljustice system.[13]Within the juvenile and adult criminal justice systems, young people of colorare disproportionately represented at every stage, from arrest to sentencing.[14]People with scant financial means are also often unable toafford bail, and as a result end up spending lengthy periods in pre-trialdetention.[15]Consequently, economically disadvantaged adolescents, including those who arenever convicted, can endure substantial adult jail time. These racial andsocioeconomic disparities are interconnected: in New York City in 2010,blacks and Hispanics constituted 89 percent of all pretrial detainees held onbail of $1,000 or less.[16]Many of the young people interviewed for this report wereaccused, tried, or convicted for serious crimes, even homicide. Human RightsWatch and the American Civil Liberties Union interviewed more than a dozenyoung people serving life without parole for murder or felony murder.[17]But Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union also interviewedyoung people arrested, tried, or convicted of non-violent offenses, drug, andproperty crimes. For example, of the 26 young people interviewed in Floridaprisons, five were convicted of non-violent offenses, such as burglary or drugpossession.[18]Yet, regardless of their conduct, it is well establishedthat adolescents have a potential for development and rehabilitation that isdistinct from that of adults. In addition, adolescents deprived of theirliberty have significant developmental needs and rights that are distinct fromthose of adults.Youth Are DifferentThe cornerstone principle of the juvenile justice system inthe United States is the idea that young people are different from adults. Thisis a reflection of psychological and physiological facts about how adolescentsand their needs grow and change, as they become adults; it is also a principleof international and domestic law. The juvenile justice system seeks torehabilitate young people and facilitate their development so that they may bereintegrated into society. The adult criminal justice system, with its focus onpunishment, does not unequivocally prioritize rehabilitation, though the law ofsome states and international human rights law mandate it.[19]Young people have needs that differ in nature and degreefrom those of adults because they are still developing physically andpsychologically. These include specific physical needs for exercise and abalanced diet; as well as special psychological, social, and emotional needs.“As a transitional period,” reports one study, “adolescenceis marked by rapid and dramatic [individual] change in the realms of biology,cognition, emotion, and interpersonal relationships and by equally impressivetransformations in the major contexts in which children spend time.”[20]PhysiologicalDifferences and NeedsDuring adolescence, the body changes significantly,including through the development of secondary sexual characteristics. Boys andgirls gain height, weight, and muscle mass, as well as pubic and body hair;girls develop breasts and begin menstrual periods, and boys’ genitalsgrow and their voices change.[21] TheAmerican Academy of Pediatrics therefore recommends a spectrum ofage-differentiated examinations and assessments for adolescents related tophysical, dental, and vision care.[22] Thisincludes developmental screenings (and health care needs) that differ fromearly, middle, to late adolescence.[23]PsychologicalDifferences: Impulsivity, Capacity for Change, and Developmental NeedsRecent scientific findings revealing that the human braingoes through dramatic structural growth during teen years have overturnedearlier assumptions regarding the completion of brain development at earlyadolescence.[24] Thesefindings have significant implications for our understanding ofteenagers’ volition and culpability, their capacity to change anddevelop, and their psychological needs.The most dramatic difference between the brains of teens andyoung adults is the development of the frontal lobe.[25]The frontal lobe is responsible for cognitive processing, such as planning,strategizing, and organizing thoughts and actions. Researchers have determinedthat one area of the frontal lobe, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, is amongthe last brain regions to mature, not reaching adult dimensions until a personis in his or her twenties.[26] Thispart of the brain is linked to “the ability to inhibit impulses, weighconsequences of decisions, prioritize, and strategize.”[27]As a result, teens’ decision-making processes are shaped by impulsivity,immaturity, and an under-developed ability to appreciate consequences andresist environmental pressures.The malleability of an adolescents’ brain developmentimplies that teens through their twenties may be particularly amenable tochange and rehabilitation as they grow older and attain adult levels ofdevelopment.[28] Thismalleability also raises questions about the effects of stress and trauma onadolescent development during this formative period.As detailed in section II, the particular physical andpsychological characteristics of adolescents make solitary confinementparticularly detrimental to healthy development and rehabilitation.Adult Detention RegimesIn the United States, many of those accused or convicted ofcriminal offenses are held in jails or prisons. Prisons generally hold onlythose convicted of crimes and sentenced to more than a year of incarceration.Based on the available data, Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union estimate that in the last 5 years, more than 93,000 youngpeople under age 18 were held in adult jails and that more than 2,200 youngpeople under age 18 were held in adult prisons every year (see Appendix 1 fordetailed information and additional numbers). While some young people turn 18before they enter prison, others are not sentenced to spend time in prison,making the high numbers of young people held in jail particularly alarming.[29]State Law and Practice - JailsOnce charged in the adult criminal justice system,adolescents in many states are taken to adult jails.[30]Some states, such as Wisconsin, mandate that all individuals charged incriminal court be detained in adult jail pre-trial.[31]Once detained in adult facilities, some states require that young people under18 be kept separate from adults in pre-trial facilities (often mandatingseparation by “sight and sound”).[32] Otherstates leave it to individual facilities to sort out how and whether youngpeople need to be protected. Some facilities separate young people of certainages from adults. In some jails in Michigan (where 17 year olds are consideredadults in the criminal justice system), for example, 16 year olds are generallyseparated from adults while 17 year olds are held with adults.[33]Federal law—the JuvenileJustice and Delinquency Prevention Act (JJDPA)—creates financialincentives for states to treat young people differently from adults, includingby diverting young people subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile justicesystem (and certain categories of misdemeanants) from adult facilities.[34]Adolescents who are protected by the federal law musteither never be held in adult facilities (in the case of status offenders[35]) or be moved from adult facilities within 6 hours (andmust be sight and sound separated from adult inmates while there).[36]However, this law is not currently interpreted to coveradolescents who are charged with felonies in the adult system, leaving youthprotected only by state law.[37]State Law and Practice -PrisonsIn most states, young people who are convicted as if adultsand sentenced to more than a year of incarceration are then sent to prison.[38]Some state prison systems have special “youthful offender”facilities that serve some proportion of the youth admitted to prison who areunder a certain age (such as under the age of 22 in Pennsylvania).[39]In some states, such as Florida, judges and corrections officials can designateyoung people as “youthful offenders” for the purposes of admissionto these specialized programs; in other states, young people convicted of someserious offenses are sometimes excluded from eligibility.[40]In some states, a portion of young people under age 18 in the prison system areheld in the general adult population.In some states, adult criminal courts have the authority toblend the sentences of young people convicted of crimes such that they begintheir sentence in the state system designed to house juveniles, but can betransferred into adult prison in certain circumstances. The federal government,by contrast, makes arrangements to hold all adolescents post-conviction infacilities overseen by the relevant juvenile justice system.[41]Risks and Harm to Youth inAdult FacilitiesDoing time in jails and prisons is hard for anyone. Jailsand prisons are often tense and overcrowded facilities in which all prisoners struggleto maintain their self-respect and emotional equilibrium in the face ofviolence, exploitation, extortion, and lack of privacy; stark limitations onfamily and community contacts; and few opportunities for meaningful education,work, or other productive activities. But doing time in jail or prison isparticularly difficult for young people, who often constitute a very smallproportion of the population.Adult jails and prisons that house adolescents facesignificant obstacles to keeping adolescents safe and ensuring that theyreceive developmentally appropriate services—even the limited servicesthat some states mandate by law—when using staff trained and facilitiesdesigned to manage adults. Jail and prison recreation yards are designed foradults; doctors and mental health professionals are rarely specialized to treatchildren. The lack of age-appropriate services and facilities is furthercompounded by the limited availability of education or rehabilitativeprogramming available in jails and prisons.Young people held in the same facility as adults face a veryhigh risk of physical or sexual abuse.[42] Studiessuggest that adolescents who enter adult prison while they are still below theage of 18 are “five times more likely to be sexually assaulted, twice aslikely to be beaten by staff and fifty percent more likely to be attacked witha weapon than minors in juvenile facilities.”[43]Some have argued that the increased exposure of young people to violence inadult facilities may increase the likelihood that they will exhibit violentbehavior upon release.[44] Whilecausation is difficult to establish, some data suggests that recidivism ratesare significantly higher when young people are held with adults. A reportpublished by the Centers for Disease Control found that “[a]vailableevidence indicates that transfer to the adult criminal justice system typicallyincreases rather than decreases rates of violence among transferredyouth.”[45]II. How Solitary Confinement Harms YouthJails and prisons across the United States commonly respondto prison or inmate management challenges by segregating individuals from thegeneral population, often through prolonged physical and social isolation, forhours, days, weeks, or even years. Isolation for 22 hours per day or more, andfor one or more days, fits the generally accepted definition of solitaryconfinement, and this term is used throughout this report.[46]Solitary confinement is not a practice that jails andprisons restrict to adults; the solitary confinement of young people is notexceptional or transient. On the contrary, it is a serious and widespreadproblem.Jail or prison officials frequently subject young people tosolitary confinement to achieve one of three goals: to punish young people(this is often called disciplinary segregation); to manage them, either becausetheir classification is deemed to require isolation (often calledadministrative segregation) or because they are considered particularlyvulnerable to abuse (often called protective custody); or to treat inmates,such as after a threatened or attempted suicide (this is often calledseclusion).The conditions that inmates experience in solitaryconfinement vary little between different forms of segregation, and from countyto county, prison to prison, or state to state. [47]The different forms of solitary confinement are discussed in more detail insection III.Young people repeatedly described their experience insolitary confinement in the most haunting of terms, as in the case of one youngwoman in Michigan:I think [the cell] would … look like any other cell.You know, a box. There was a bed—the slab. It was concrete.… Therewas a stainless steel toilet/sink combo…. The door was solid, without afood slot or window…. It looked like a basement because all I could seewas brick walls. There was no window at all … I couldn’t see aclock … the only way I really associated any kind of time—I brokedown time: morning, afternoon, evening. I broke it down: breakfast, lunch, anddinner.… [I felt] doomed, like I was being banished … like you havethe plague or that you are the worst thing on earth. Like you are set apart[from] everything else. I guess [I wanted to] feel like I was part of the humanrace—not like some animal.[48]Another, in Florida, said,The only thing left to do is go crazy—just sit andtalk to the walls.… I catch myself [talking to the walls] every now andagain. It’s starting to become a habit because I have nothing else to do.I can’t read a book. I work out and try to make the best of it. But thereis no best. Sometimes I go crazy and can’t even control my angeranymore.… I can’t even get [out of solitary confinement] early if Ido better, so it is frustrating and I just lose it. Screaming, throwing stuffaround.… I feel like I am alone, like no one cares aboutme—sometimes I feel like, why am I even living?[49]While outside of the scope of this report, public andpress reporting suggests facilities in the juvenile justice system also use arange of segregation and isolation practices to detain and manageadolescents, including solitary confinement.[50] Segregation andisolation practices in juvenile facilities are sometimes divided betweenshort-term, immediate sanctions to interrupt what officials deem to bejuveniles’ “acting out” behavior and longer-term,administrative or disciplinary isolation. All best practice standards forjuvenile facilities propose maximum limits on various forms of isolation thatare far below the durations of solitary confinement experienced by youngpeople in adult jails and prisons interviewed by Human Rights Watch and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union.[51]Yet lengthy solitary confinement still occurs in juvenilefacilities. An audit of one California Division of Juvenile Justice facility,completed in 2011, found that of 93 young people placed in restrictedhousing, 16 were held for a total of 78 days, during which they were onlyprovided an average of 74 out-of-room minutes each day.[52]The segregation and isolation of young people in juvenile facilities,particularly when it constitutes solitary confinement, also raises serioushuman rights concerns.[53]Solitary confinement, and many of the deprivations that aretypically associated with it, has a distinct and particularly profound impacton young people, often doing serious damage to their development andpsychological and physical well-being. Because of the special vulnerability andneeds of adolescents, solitary confinement can be a particularly cruel andharmful practice when applied to them.While subjected to solitary confinement, young peoplereported to Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union that theywere deprived of a significant level of access to: physical and mental healthcare services; recreation or physical exercise; education, reading, or writingmaterials; visits, calls, correspondence, or contact with family members andloved ones; and other rehabilitative and developmentally-appropriateprogramming. Young people reported very similar experiences regardless of thepurpose for which solitary confinement was imposed.Psychological HarmThe use of solitary confinement risks causing orexacerbating mental disabilities or other serious mental health problems inadolescents.[54]Studies have found that numerous adults who have no historyof mental health problems develop psychological symptoms in solitaryconfinement.[55] Whilemany of those studies are open to questions about the mental health status ofindividuals before entering solitary confinement, there is agreement thatsolitary confinement can cause or exacerbate mental health problems.[56]Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionare not aware of any studies that look specifically at the effects of prolongedsolitary confinement on adolescents. But many experts on child and adolescentpsychology said that prolonged isolation, including in conditions asrestrictive as solitary confinement, can cause or exacerbate mentaldisabilities or other serious mental health problems.[57]Solitary confinement is stressful.[58]It “engender[s] significant levels of anxiety and discomfort.”[59]And young people have fewer psychological resources than adults do to help themmanage the stress, anxiety and discomfort they experience in solitaryconfinement.[60]For many adolescents in prison, developmental immaturity is compounded bymental disabilities and histories of trauma, abuse, and neglect. These factors,though experienced differently by different individuals, can exacerbate themental health effects of solitary confinement.Many of the young people interviewed spoke in harrowingdetail about struggling with one or more of a range of serious mental healthproblems during their time in solitary. They talked about thoughts of suicideand self-harm; visual and auditory hallucinations; feelings of depression;acute anxiety; shifting sleep patterns; nightmares and traumatic memories; anduncontrollable anger or rage. Some young people, particularly those whoreported having been identified as having a mental disability before enteringsolitary confinement, struggled more than others. Fifteen young peopledescribed cutting or harming themselves or thinking about or attempting suicideone or more times while in solitary confinement.Not all young people reported experiencing significantmental health problems in solitary confinement. However, these accounts vividlyportray the psychological pain and suffering that can be brought on by time insolitary confinement.Trying to CopeMany young people described wishing they could mentallyescape from solitary confinement, and using a variety of mechanisms todissociate from their experience. Some developed imaginary friends; some usedmake-believe or other imaginings to dissociate.Alyssa E. spent four months in protective solitaryconfinement when she was sixteen. She said,It may sound weird but I had a friend in there that I wouldtalk to. She wasn’t there, but it was my mind. And I would talk to herand she would respond.… She [would tell] positive things to me. It wasme, my mind, I knew, but it was telling me positive things.… It was astrange experience.[61]Carter P., who entered prison at 14, described usingmake-believe and games to help himself through the first of many times he washeld in punitive solitary confinement:I felt like I was going mad. Nothing but a wall to stareat. This was my tenth wall to stare at in my detention. I started to seepictures in the little bumps in the walls. Eventually, I said the hell with itand started acting insane. [I] made little characters with my hands and actedout [video] games I used to play on the out[side]—Dragon Ball Z, Sonic,Zelda—stuff like that. The [corrections officers] would stare atme—looking at me like I’m crazy.… I started talking to myselfand answering myself. Talking gibberish. I even made my ownlanguage—[corrections officers] didn’t know what I was talkingabout.[62]Another common strategy to escape solitary confinement wassleep. Jordan E., who reported spending nearly a year in protective solitaryconfinement when he was 15, described his focus on trying to sleep:I daydreamed, I slept a bunch. That’s how I wouldhandle 20, 18 hours a day. If I wasn’t sleeping, I was in bed trying tosleep. Get up, eat, back to bed—lay there and lay there, trying to sleep.[63]In spite of their best efforts, many felt that in thestruggle to cope with solitary confinement, they faced a losing battle withthemselves. As Marvin Q., who spent a week in protective solitary confinementwhen he was 17, described it,I wish I had better words—I was really, reallylonely.… I [would] try to put covers on my head—make … likeit’s not there. Try to dissociate myself … I don’t think theyshould do that to a juvenile. It’s impossible for any person to cope withanything like that. I couldn’t help myself.[64]Anxiety, Rage, and InsomniaYoung people described a variety of mental health problemsassociated with their solitary confinement. Some said they had their firstanxiety attack in solitary confinement; others said they lost themselves to anuncontrollable rage. Several had trouble sleeping. For some, these problemswere all experienced simultaneously. Phillip J., who spent approximately 113days in solitary confinement (including a single period of 60 days) before hiseighteenth birthday, said,I was stressed. At first I would sleep all day. I wouldfeel myself getting angry or aggressive. I would try to work out or dosomething, but I was literally going insane in that little spot. Theclaustrophobia set in and I would feel I was having anxiety attacks and wouldgo over and get water and try and calm down. I would hear the slightest noiseand be on guard.[65]Another young person described mood swings while in solitaryconfinement. Rafael O. said, “I [would] get depressed, if anything, thenhave extreme anxiety and feel like I [was] hyper-active, and then get depressedagain.”[66]Parents explained that their loved ones’ struggle wasvisible during visits (when they were allowed). One woman described visitingher grandchild, whom she identified as having a mental disability, while he wasin solitary confinement:His mind is going and coming when he is locked up byhimself all the time.… He is jumpy. He is startled when you talk tohim.… He can’t be still—like a nervous person!… He [wa]salways biting on his hands and wrist the whole time I talked to him. Biting hisfingers and wrists [and] both hands. He was also grinding his teeth. You can[sic] see his jaw constantly moving. He never did that before.[67]Some youth experienced anger or rage that they could notcontrol. As one said, “All I would want to do is fight.”[68]Another said, “I couldn’t sleep. I was having anger. My anger wascrazy. I was having outbursts.”[69] And athird said, “It makes you worse. It really brings the beast out of you tobe in there stressing. You start saying, ‘Fuck everything.’ …[It] makes you more wild; makes you feel like a lion in a cage.”[70]Kyle B. wrote,The loneliness made me depressed and the depression causedme to be angry [sic], leading to a desire to displace the agony by hurtingothers. I felt an inner pain not of this world.… I allowed the pain thatwas inflicted upon [me] from [my] isolation placement build up while inisolation. And at the first opportunity of release (whether I was being releasedfrom isolation or receiving a cell-mate) I erupted like a volcano, directingviolent forces at anyone in my path.[71]Adolescents who had trouble coping or sleeping weresometimes identified by mental health staff and prescribed medication. Anumber of young people described being prescribed sleeping medication. MasonP., who had spent the four days before he was interviewed in administrativesolitary confinement, said,I don’t sleep. They gave me sleeping pills‘cause I can’t sleep. I worry a lot.... I started taking themthree days ago. They asked if I felt like killing myself or hurting somebody,I said, “Naw,” but they told me if I was worrying they said theywere going to give me something.[72]A Philadelphia County Prison Official observed that manyyouth held in solitary confinement in the county jail were prescribedsleeping aids and other prescription medications while in isolation:“It was a way [for them] to cope and reduce anxiety.”[73]But some experts question the practice of treating sleepproblems directly. Dr. Cheryl Wills, a child psychiatrist who has diagnosedyouth in juvenile and adult facilities, argues that poor sleep patterns areoften indicative of another underlying problem:I am not a proponent of medicating sleep … thequestion is, what is it related to—a symptom of depression?Post-traumatic stress? ADHD? So you figure out what is going on and treatsleep as a part of the picture.… There are medications that help youthif they have issues, but you must treat it as a whole package, as part of atreatable diagnosis.… You don’t want to medicate a youth unlesshe or she really needs it.[74]Treating sleeplessness associated with mental healthproblems or disabilities is particularly complicated when those problems maythemselves be caused or exacerbated by being held in solitary confinement.Being alone with their thoughts, and especially thoughts ofhome, made it difficult for them to sleep:I don’t even want to sleep here because I can’twait till I get home. Every night before I go to sleep I think about home andcan’t sleep. I’m up until at least 5 a.m. which causes otheroutbursts because I’m just thinking.[75]Inability to sleep can itself cause or exacerbate othermental health problems, and can also indicate an underlying mental disability.Cutting and Self-HarmIn addition to the psychological pain and suffering thatyoung people reported experiencing while in solitary confinement, some youngpeople reported that they cut or otherwise physically harmed themselves. Amongyouth in jails and prisons, evidence suggests that this problem affects girlsat an even higher rate than boys.[76] Wefound both young men and young women who reported harming themselves insolitary confinement. Melanie H., who spent three months in protective solitaryconfinement when she was fifteen years old, described how cutting helped hercope with feelings of loss she experienced when alone with her thoughts:I became a cutter [in solitary confinement]. I like to takestaples and carve letters and stuff in my arm. Each letter means something tome. It is something I had lost. Like the first one was a [letter], which is thefirst letter in my mother’s name. And every day I would apologize to her.I don’t know—I felt like I had a burden I couldn’t carry andit made me feel good.[77]Other young women described using self-harm as a way to callfor help or get the attention of officials. Alyssa E. said,Me? I cut myself. I started doing it because it is the only release of my pain.I’d see the blood and I’d be happy.… I did it with staples,not razors. When I see the blood and it makes me want to keep going. I showedthe officers and they didn’t do anything.… I wanted [the staff] totalk to me. I wanted them to understand what was going on with me.[78]Psychological experts with experience monitoring health carein adult and juvenile facilities described self-harm as a typical reaction toisolation and an effort to force interaction with others. One psychologicalexpert said,I think the biggest detriment [in solitary confinement] islack of interaction. So typically youth become desperate for any interaction.So you see the incidents of self-harm increase. They find ways to hurtthemselves or hurt somebody else. Because it is more difficult to withstandlonger periods of isolation than an adult … they are going to find waysto hurt themselves or somebody else or cause problems.[79]Suicidal Thoughts and Attempts: “Thedeath-oriented side of life”Twelve young people told Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union in detail about times that they thought about orattempted suicide while in solitary confinement. Experts with experienceadvising jails and prisons on suicide prevention argue that it isuncontroversial that suicide and solitary confinement are correlated:[N]o one disagrees that the suicide rate is higher foryouth in both juvenile facilities, adult jails, and adult prisons.… Ithink it is safe to say that youth in an adult jail and prison are at higherrisk for suicide and youth in isolation in those facilities would also be athigher risk.[80]Paul K., who spent 60 days in protective solitaryconfinement when he was 14, described how he came to want to end his life:The hardest thing about isolation is that you are trappedin such a small room by yourself. There is nothing to do so you start talkingto yourself and getting lost in your own little world. It is crushing. You getdepressed and wonder if it is even worth living. Your thoughts turn over to themore death-oriented side of life.… I want[ed] to kill myself.[81]Twelve young people told Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union about having either thought about or attempted suicidewhile in solitary confinement; some had attempted suicide before they were injail or prison; some described witnessing attempted or successful suicides. LuzM. said suicidal thoughts came immediately after she went into solitaryconfinement:I just felt I wanted to die, like there was no wayout—I was stressed out. I hung up [tried to hang myself] the first day. Itook a sheet and tied it to my light and they came around.… The officer,when she was doing rounds, found me. She was banging on the window: “Areyou alive? Are you alive?” I could hear her, but I felt like I was goingto die. I couldn’t breathe.[82]Some young people have committed suicide while in solitaryconfinement.[83]According to a national expert on suicides in juvenile facilities, jails, andprisons, the evidence suggests that most suicides in juvenile (not adult)facilities occur while youth are confined alone to their room.[84]Struggling with Mental Disabilities and Past TraumaMany adolescents face theadditional challenge of coping with a mental disability while in solitaryconfinement.[85]Studiessuggest that youth under age 18 enter the adult criminal justice system withhigh rates of mental disabilities.[86] Approximately 48 percent of adolescentsbetween the ages of 16 and 18 in New York City Department of Correctionscustody in FY2012, for example, had a diagnosed mental disability.[87]But some mental disabilities do not manifest until youth reach their teenyears.[88]Some young people in solitaryconfinement likely struggle to cope simultaneously with the psychologicalvulnerabilities associated with their developing brains and the onset of mentaldisabilities, such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. As one expert,Dr. Cheryl Wills, a child psychiatrist with experience diagnosing youth injuvenile and adult facilities, described,Sometimes youth will have psychosis in flashes. It willcome out in the stress of being in [isolation] but not with other youth. I havepersonally seen youth who were not psychotic and you put them in [isolation]and they are psychotic. Was it going to happen? Yes. Did it happen faster in[isolation]? Possibly.[89]It is not often possible for young people themselves orcorrections professionals to identify adolescents with mental disabilitiesbefore they are subjected to solitary confinement because some serious mentaldisabilities do not manifest until late adolescence.[90]Some of the young people interviewed by Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union had been identified as having a mental disability at anearly age. Others reported experiencing various mental health problemsthroughout their youth and while in solitary confinement, without having beenidentified as having a mental disability. Some experienced mental healthproblems and were identified as having a mental disability for the first timeduring or after a period of solitary confinement.Landon A., who struggled with auditory and visualhallucinations before going to jail, described his experience in solitaryconfinement: “I would hear stuff. When no one was around it was harder tocontrol. When I was by myself, I would hear stuff and see stuff more.”[91]He said he was usually awake between 10 p.m. and 3 a.m., trying to manage thehallucinations. “I hear the most stuff at night,” he said,“so it’s the hardest time to sleep.”Young people with mental disabilities interviewed by HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union repeatedly described thepain and suffering associated with attempting—and failing—to copewith the mental health problems they experienced in solitary confinement. Askedabout struggling into the night with his hallucinations, Landon A. saidsolitary confinement is “not a place that you want to go. It’s likemind torture.”[92]Some also reported that solitary confinement triggeredmemories of past trauma, making it yet more difficult to cope with theexperience. Youth in the criminal justice system have histories of trauma andabuse at much higher rates than the general population.[93]And there is significant evidence to suggest that girls enter the criminaljustice system having suffered physical or sexual abuse at much higher ratesthan boys, and therefore struggle disproportionately with past trauma.[94]Melanie H., for example, was held in protective solitary confinement for threemonths when she was 15 years old. She said, “When I was eleven, I wasraped. And it happened [again] in 2008 and 2009.”[95]When she was isolated, the memories came back: “I was so upset …and a lot was surfacing from my past.… I don’t like …feelingalone. That’s a feeling I try to stay away from. I hate thatfeeling.”[96]As one defense attorney opined,If you isolate a kid [for whom] isolation was a form ofchild abuse, the jail doesn’t know how to deal [with that]. I haverepresented clients who have locked [their] kids in a closet and go[ne] out allnight long—closets are cheap baby sitters. [I] don’t think anyoneexplores those issues with those kids—there is no difference inprotocols, no accommodation [of past trauma].[97]Thirty-five interviewees spent more than one period insolitary confinement before they turned 18. This repeated isolation, accordingto experts, “leaves [youth] with a potential for a post-traumaticreaction.”[98] PhillipJ., for example, who was first held in solitary confinement for 36 days when hewas 16, described how isolation itself became a trigger for traumatic memoriesof solitary confinement:Once you are confined the way I was, then any otherconfinement just triggers that experience—loss of sleep, all thesedifferent flashbacks of different bad events. You try to harness it, but youdon’t know how or what’s going on or what’s happening.[99]Barriers to Accessing CareYoung people in solitary confinement do not get the helpthey need to cope or adequate access to treatment for mental health problems,whether preexisting or newly developed. Because of this lack of adequate careor access, their suffering can be worse than it may otherwise have been.Human Rights Watch has elsewhere documented the widespreadfailures of state prison systems to provide access to care for adultsexperiencing mental health problems, including those with mental disabilities.[100]On the contrary, prison systems sometimes react to prisoners experiencing acrisis by punishing them. Isaiah O., who entered jail at 17, told us,Sometimes, when I cut, having a razor or using it againstmyself, they would give me a [disciplinary violation] for making the roomunsanitary or, two, for having a weapon.… It felt like I was goingagainst myself and they was [sic] going against me. That’s when I startedgoing crazy. I mean, I felt with the depression and them going against me,that’s when I started catching assaults. I guess I was fighting twowars—myself and then the officers.[101]While some young people, like Isaiah O., described beingpunished for conduct related to mental health problems, others reported beingdiverted from one form of solitary confinement to another to protect them fromself-harm.[102]In some facilities, young people felt that the only way toget mental health care was through self-harm:Sometimes you have to [cut yourself] to go to [medicalsolitary confinement for suicide watch]… get psychological attention… because if you have a psychological emergency or you need to talk tosomebody they won’t let you. [So I] cut myself on my arm … [when] Ibe thinking in my head I need to talk to somebody before I do something Idon’t want to do.[103]A few young people described corrections staff telling themthat they did not believe their cries for help or their requests for mentalhealth care. An extremely complicated and toxic atmosphere can develop whencorrections staff feel they need to be gatekeepers to mental healthcare. It istoo easy for overworked and under-resourced medical and corrections staff todismiss as malingering a cry for help. Indeed, some may exaggerate theirsymptoms precisely because the solitary confinement is unbearable.But, as one expert psychiatrist who evaluates mentalhealthcare in detention, Dr. Cheryl Wills, said, mental health crises must betaken seriously:[Youth] need to be taken seriously whether or not they aremalingering. I have heard youth and adults say that [staff told them] that ifthey were going to do it [kill themselves], don’t do it on that staff member’s shift. The security staffis not expert in suicide risk assessment and some malingerers also are mentallyill. The psychiatric interview includes an assessment of suicide risk that isused to formulate a treatment plan. All threats of suicide should beassessed, especially in incarcerated individuals who lack the flexibility toleave the facility and to seek mental health services at a local emergencyroom.[104]Physical HarmSolitary confinement, and practices associated with it, cancause serious physical harm to youth.Young people held in adult jails and prisons are frequentlyfar from full-grown. Many of the young people we interviewed entered jail orprison inches and pounds away from adulthood. One young man described beingunable to fit in his orange jumpsuit: “I believe I was 5’4”or 5’5” … I weighed maybe 140 … in [solitaryconfinement] they gave you the [orange uniform]. It was too big for me. It keptfalling off my waist and everything.”[105]Jails and prisons are rarely equipped to appropriatelymanage or provide for those who are physically immature. Our research showedthat solitary confinement in adult facilities resulted in a deprivation ofexercise and adequate nutrition.Lack of Adequate ExerciseOne of the defining experiences for youth held in solitaryconfinement in many facilities is the hour out: one hour, each day, duringwhich adolescents are permitted, whether in a hallway, dayroom, or metal cage,to walk around or exercise. Some facilities allow a few minutes more or lessthan an hour, but an hour out is standard practice. However, Human Rights Watchand the American Civil Liberties Union found that few facilities actuallyprovide for or encourage physical exercise for youth in solitary confinement.Of the 77 young people we interviewed on their experience in solitaryconfinement, 15 reported spending at least one period in solitary confinementduring which they were allowed no recreation at all. Young people in Floridaprisons, for example, reported being denied recreation for the first thirtydays spent in disciplinary solitary confinement, pursuant to Department ofCorrections (DOC) policy.[106]Even when held in facilities that allowed outdoorrecreation, some adolescents in solitary confinement reported that they werenot always able to exercise. Jacob L. described having to wake, without a clockor alarm, to ask to go to recreation:You go to rec[reation] for an hour, but you have to be upat six in the morning to catch the yard. Before they serve breakfast—yougot to catch them before breakfast and [then] they take you after breakfast. Soif you don’t know how to wake up, you can’t go outside.That’s supposed to be mandatory [but] they don’t ask you—youhave to tell them.[107]Due to reduced staffing on weekends, some facilities onlyoffer recreation during the week.The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the US Departmentof Health and Human Services both recommend that youth between the ages of sixand seventeen engage in one hour or more of physical activity each day.[108]Both agencies recommend that youth regularly do a combination of activities,including vigorous aerobic activity, like running, at least three days a week;muscle-strengthening activity, such as gymnastics, at least three days a week;and bone-strengthening activity, such as jumping rope, at least three days aweek.[109]Most young people who did get to exercise outdoors, likeJacob L., did so in a small, individual, fenced-in cage, often barely largerthan their cell. Almost all young people spent their out-of-cell time alone. Itis hard to imagine that these conditions would permit adequate aerobic ormuscle-strengthening exercise, let alone an adequate contrast from time inone’s cell.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Uniondid not interview any young people who described a jail or prison recreationregime that ensured or encouraged strenuous aerobic physical activity. Manyyoung people described working out in their cells to cope with their time inconfinement. Jason L. described pacing his cell until he was exhausted:I kind of talked myself through it. Pace[d] the room. Ilearned that walking and talking takes you outside. So I would walk and talkfor about the first four days until I was dead tired, then sleep for aboutthree and do it over.[110]Physical Changes and Stunted GrowthYouth who are physically growing and changing needage-appropriate attention and care. Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union found that young people in solitary confinement are sometimesdenied access to this care in facilities that provide it, and are denied italtogether in those that do not. A number of young people reported going tosleep hungry night after night. Some told Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union that they experienced (or witnessed in other adolescents)other physical changes as a result of the stress of solitary confinement, suchas hair or weight loss.Several facilities reported that there are no differencesbetween the physical health and dental services available for youth and adults.[111]As one facility reported, “[A youth is] treated as an adult for medical,dental, mental health issues.”[112]Inadequate NutritionOne of the most common complaints of young people held insolitary confinement was that the food and meal schedule were nutritionallyinadequate, and that they were denied the opportunity to supplement theirnutrition by purchasing food items from the facility’s commissary orcanteen. Some young people described losing weight as a result.Caroline I., who spent approximately 41 days in punitivesolitary confinement while she was under 18, said, “They only give you alittle food, so that’s hard. You lose weight…. I went in 150 andcame out 132. That’s more than 15 pounds!”[113]A grandmother who visited her grandson in solitary confinement observed that he“definitely lost weight—he’s so little [now].” She estimatedthat he lost 15-20 pounds after he entered solitary confinement.[114]Some young people said that, during their time in punitivesolitary confinement, their diet was changed to a baked nutritional loaf as aform of additional punishment. Others described being fed a diet that consistedmostly of beans and processed foods.The US Department of Agriculture and the National Institutesof Health both recommend a balanced diet of nutrient-dense foods, includingvegetables, fruits, and whole grains.[115] Whilethe overall nutritional needs of youth and adults are similar in regards tocaloric intake, youth physical development, including bone development,requires additional amounts of some nutrients to ensure healthy growth.[116]Other Physical EffectsYoung people interviewed by Human Rights Watch and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union described experiencing other physical changes insolitary confinement. One young person reported, “I saw a guy who losthis hair in [solitary confinement]. He wasn’t like that before he gotlocked up.”[117]One female interviewee described that, during the months shewas in solitary confinement, she stopped menstruating. She recalled that shedidn’t start again until after she was transferred out of solitaryconfinement and to a juvenile facility:You know it is funny to say. I know I was having periods atthat time of my life. But I don’t have any memories of having one at thejail. I remember I went through a long period of time at the juvenile facilitywhere I didn’t have them. That was right when I came back [from jail]. Iknew it was a number of months because for a long time I was wondering why Iwasn’t having them. I remember because most women complain about them butwhen I got mine again I was glad. It made me feel human—or at leastfunctioning the way things were supposed to be.[118]Studies have linked changes in menstruation to stress andtrauma.[119]Social and Developmental HarmYoung people in solitary confinement are frequently deprivedof contact with their families and their own children, access to education, andto programming or services necessary for their growth, development, andrehabilitation.Denial of Family ContactLimitations on family visits are a common feature of allforms of solitary confinement. Many facilities deny adolescents contact withtheir families while they are in solitary confinement. For some, this means novisits, no phone calls, and no letters. Facilities often view these things asprivileges that young people in solitary confinement can be denied as a resultof their classification, or to punish them.Twenty-one teenagers told us they were denied the ability tovisit with loved ones during a period of solitary confinement. Nineteen spentat least one period in solitary confinement during which they were only allowedto visit with loved ones while in a cage, behind glass, or by video-conference.Eleven spent at least one period in solitary confinement during which they werenot allowed to write letters to loved ones, having been denied access to pen orpencil and paper.For some young people, family is the only thing that givesthem hope:I catch myself in the moment, attempting [suicide]. Butthen I think about my family and everyone on the outs[ide] and I think, if Ichose to do that, I can never come home. I think if it weren’t for myfamily, I would have chosen to commit suicide.[120]Jeffrey J., whom Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union interviewed in administrative solitary confinement while he wasawaiting a disciplinary hearing, feared losing contact if placed in punitivesolitary confinement:I hope they don’t take my visits or call away. Todayis going to make the third day I haven’t got a call.... My mom really,really cares about me so she wants to know what is going on.... As long as Ican talk to my family, I’ll be okay. I could be in a room all day if Icould talk to my family.[121]In some facilities, young people were allowed visits when insolitary confinement, but denied physical contact with their family members,forced to talk through glass or a metal screen. For some, this was as painfulas solitary itself: “The hardest part is being behind glass when yourfamily visits and you can’t hold your family.”[122]Young people cited the denial of hugs and kisses as a source of pain andsuffering. Another teenager said, “It was very depressing not to be ableto give them a hug. I would cry about that.”[123]Again and again, young people stressed the importance of physical touch. Oneyoung woman said, “[Visits] behind glass … [were] torture—Icouldn’t touch my family.”[124] A fewyoung parents reported that they were also prevented from receiving visits fromtheir own children while in solitary confinement.Denial of Adequate EducationYoung people in solitary confinement, including adolescentswith intellectual disabilities, commonly reported being denied access toadequate education. Youth in some facilities were regularly provided with apacket of educational materials for in-cell self-study, but often their completedwork went ungraded and their questions unanswered.For some jails and prisons, access to education ends themoment the solitary confinement cell door slams shut, regardless of the age ofthe inmate inside.[125] AsDarrell E., who spent approximately 20 days in protective solitary confinementin jail when he was 15, stated bluntly, “No, there was no school forinmates in isolation and there were no exceptions for me.”[126]Only 31 young people reported receiving educationalprogramming of any type during a period of solitary confinement. Fourteen youngpeople reported spending a period of time in solitary confinement during whichthey were provided only with a packet of materials to complete in their cell.Twenty-five young people reported spending a period of time in solitaryconfinement during which they were not provided any educational programming atall; sixteen described spending periods of time in solitary confinement withouteven a book or magazine to read.In a few states, education in jails is provided inconsultation (or even directly by) state or local departments of education (orschool boards). In some of these jurisdictions, the law only provides forlimited education, such as four hours per week in Colorado, and allows securityexceptions that are applied to youth in solitary confinement.[127]In other jurisdictions, youth in solitary confinement are taught through“cell study,” packets of materials dropped off at their cells.[128]Some young people reported eagerly—and quickly—completing any workpackets provided by jails or prisons. Others said they refused to study intheir cells. Jeremiah I. said,If you are enrolled in school, they slide a packet underyour door. I don’t do it. I don’t feel like doing work in my cell.If they would take me to school I would do it, but … they just keepgiving you work.[129]Some facilities take no further steps after an adolescent,like Jeremiah, refuses education. Sometimes, those who received cell-studymaterials were able to consult with a teacher. However, usually this was eitherthrough the cell door or by phone. One young woman described how “theofficer who does cell-study asks if you have anything and want to talk to yourteacher and then you talk on the phone.”[130]Some young people reported interrupted or infrequent contacts with educators.As discussed above, a number of young people reportedexperiencing serious mental health problems in solitary confinement. Some ofthose young people described diminished reasoning and learning abilities as aresult of solitary confinement. Jordan E. described feeling mentally slowerafter solitary confinement:[Solitary confinement] absolutely slowed down my thinkingskills. I would come out of [solitary] and be demonstrably slower. Followingconversations, doing math work, my brain slowed down quite a bit. I was farmore depressed. There were no real mental health services [in the jail].[131]Struggling with Intellectual DisabilitiesWhile adult facilities, especially jails, struggle toprovide any educational programming for youth, specialized programmingfor youth with intellectual disabilities is even rarer.[132]Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed 11 young people who reported that before entering jail or prisonthey had either been taught in special classes, having been identified ashaving a learning disability, or had an individual education plan.[133]Some facilities are unable to identify adolescents with intellectualdisabilities, relying on records provided by parents or schools in the community.One prison official reported,We are not allowed to identify [learning disabilities]. Asa department, we don’t identify those types of issues. If we get anindividual and we think they might be [in need of] special education—if aparent has paperwork—we can do that process. But as far as someone comingin off the street? If we don’t have paperwork, we can’t do that.[134]The provision of educational programming to young peoplewith intellectual disabilities can also be complicated by the checkered educationalhistory of many adolescents, even though they may never have been identified ashaving an intellectual disability.The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) isa federal law that governs the provision of appropriate special education andrelated services for youth with disabilities. IDEA was signed into law in1990 and was significantly amended in 2004. All states receive IDEA funds andare therefore subject to its provisions.[135] IDEA requiresthe provision of a free and appropriate public education to youth withdisabilities, in the least restrictive environment, according to theirindividual needs through age 21.[136]In defining the “least restrictive environment,” IDEA states,To the maximum extent possible, children withdisabilities, including children in public or private institutions or othercare facilities, are educated with children who are not disabled, and specialclasses, separate schooling, or other removal of children withdisabilities from the regular educational environment [emphasis added]occurs only when the nature or severity of the disability of a child is suchthat education in regular classes with the use of supplementary aids andservices cannot be achieved satisfactorily.[137]Withregard to detention facilities, IDEA states that governors or otherappropriate state officials may assign to any public agency in their statethe responsibility of ensuring that particular requirements are met withrespect to youth with disabilities who are convicted as adults and are incarceratedin adult prisons.[138]But statelaw exemptions for adult facilities leave many adolescents with disabilitieswithout the basic educational guarantees set forth in IDEA. Florida, forexample, allows for young people with disabilities who are convicted asadults and incarcerated in adult prisons to be exempted from certain IDEAprovisions regarding assessment and transition planning.[139]In addition, for young people withdisabilities in Florida’s adult prisons, the team devoted to astudent’s Individualized Education Program (IEP) may modify thatyouth’s program or placement based on certain security or penalinterests beyond the restrictions set forth in IDEA.[140]Youth with disabilities insolitary confinement are often prevented from receiving proper educationalservices, such as basic out-of-cell instruction.Failure to Provide for Rehabilitation or SocialDevelopmentSome of the deprivations that young people confront insolitary confinement differ little from the normal conditions of incarceration.Jails and prisons spend few resources on programming or services, with jailsspending even fewer resources than prisons. Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union found that it was exceedingly rare that facilitiesprovided programming or services aimed at rehabilitation or social developmentto young people under age 18 in solitary confinement. While this is a problemfor adolescents in adult facilities generally, the problem is acute for thosein solitary confinement. Youth enter jails and prisons—and solitaryconfinement—in the midst of a transition to adulthood.As one expert with experience in juvenile and adultfacilities told Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union,We are raising these kids. We need to teach them.…What we are doing is putting young men [and women] who are forming theiridentity in a situation where they are learning to do things—not in agood way.… So if we are going to send young men [and women] to prison, weneed truly specialized units where they can learn and grow. Because I think weall want them to be better off when they come out. The other thing they need isskills that will help them on the outside.[141]Young people who have not had the same life experience asadults need programming to facilitate their development. Those who have beenconvicted of a crime also require rehabilitative programming. All youthdeprived of their liberty need programming aimed at reentry into society. Thelonger young people are held in solitary confinement, the more egregious thedeprivation becomes.Almost all adolescents charged or convicted in the adultcriminal justice system are eventually released into the community. Youngpeople, as well as corrections and psychological experts, expressed concernsabout the long-term implications for youth, and public safety, of failing toadequately provide for youth development and rehabilitation. Todd D., whoentered jail when he was 17, said this about his own experience,I can’t speak for everybody but I know if I was giventhat opportunity I would be different right now. The good changes in my life, Ihad to learn by myself. But that road, it scars you in ways—it’sbad.[142]III. Youth in Solitary Confinement in AdultFacilities: Corrections Practices, Numbers, and DurationJails and prisons generally use solitary confinement for oneof three reasons: to punish inmates; to manage them (either to protect othersfrom them, or them from others); or to treat them. Yet the conditions thatyoung people in solitary confinement experience are essentially the same,regardless of the purpose for which it is being used. Young people held inadult facilities across the United States are subjected to all forms ofsolitary confinement, without accommodation for their age or developmentalneeds, and often for weeks and months.Solitary Confinement to Punish InmatesJails and prisons often maintain internal order through asystem of discipline, with solitary confinement among the most serious in arange of sanctions for violating facility rules. Facilities across the UnitedStates—whether they hold youth with adults, with other adolescents, or inisolation—frequently subject young people under age 18 to the samedisciplinary rules as adult inmates.[143] HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union have found that jails andprisons impose terms of solitary confinement of 15, 30, 60, 90 days, or longerfor each infraction committed within a facility, and frequently punish arange of inmate behaviors within isolation with additional terms of solitaryconfinement.[144]Corrections officials in many county jails reported thatyouth who violate facility rules can be placed in separation, or segregation,or special management cells.[145] HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union interviewed young peoplewho had been subjected to several— often prolonged—periods ofpunitive solitary confinement. Of the individuals interviewed by Human RightsWatch and the American Civil Liberties Union, 41 had spent time in at least 1period of punitive solitary confinement while under age 18; 22 of those youngpeople had spent a total of 2 months or longer in punitive solitary confinementbefore they turned 18.One young man who was held in punitive solitary confinementin New York said,The cell was hell. Hell.… Can’t talk tonobody.… I counted the bricks. There was a bed, a desk, a toilet, a sink,and a window. It was small because all the stuff was in there … [you can]see outside—busses, birds, fields, people in the yard. You could seefreedom, but you can’t get out. It makes your time hell.… [The]first thing I thought was, damn, I’m going to be here for 60 days.…I felt like shit. Damn! No contact with anyone for 60 days?[146]Following an alleged infraction, placement in punitive solitaryconfinement frequently begins with a notice describing the charges and ahearing.[147] Atthis hearing, individuals are generally entitled to call witnesses. However, itwas almost unthinkable, among the young people interviewed by Human RightsWatch and the American Civil Liberties Union, to actually call a witness, evenwhen young people asserted their innocence in the matter.[148]One of the rare young men who said he would have liked to call witnesses, toldHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union, “I could havehad witnesses, but you have to know their first and last names and [inmate]numbers.”[149] Morecommonly, young people reported that it was unsafe to speak out against othersto facility staff, so they had no choice but to appear alone. Some young menand women told Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union thatthey had admitted the charges against them during their hearing.[150]Hearings almost always result in a finding of guilt based onthe testimony of officials alone, and some interviewees described beingpunished on the basis of minimal evidence.[151] Forexample, a young man in one facility in Florida described officials punishing agroup of inmates for banging on their cell doors because officials could notdetermine which inmates were responsible:People were kicking the[ir] door[s] and yelling. Then [theofficials] said, “We are going to put you on lockdown! We are going toput you on lockdown!”… I [later] asked the [corrections officer]why we [were] on lockdown if we didn’t kick the door. He said,“Man, you know how it is. There is [sic] a thousand of you inhere—I can’t tell who is kicking the door.”[152]Once a prisoner is found guilty of a disciplinary offense,jail or prison officials usually punish him or her with a term of days based ona structured disciplinary code. Because most facilities subject youth andadults to the same rules and regulations as adults, both young people andadults are usually punished with the same amount of punitive solitary confinementwhen found to have violated facility rules. As one official told Human RightsWatch and the American Civil Liberties Union, “There is nodifferentiation. There are the rules. If you violate the rules you’ll gothrough the process and your hearing and any potential discipline is the sameregardless of age.”[153]Because jurisdictions often subject individuals to multiple,serial—rather than concurrent—periods of solitary confinement formore than one rule violation stemming from a single incident, periods ofsolitary confinement can be long.[154]Youth rarely reported that their age was discussed duringtheir disciplinary hearings. A few young people reported that officials notedtheir age only in passing—“[the officer] just said I was young andvery angry”—rather than to suggest mitigating the punishment.[155]One adolescent told Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionthat a mental health worker at the facility raised his youth at hisdisciplinary hearing, but that the hearing officer said, “That doesn’tmatter. He’s in prison now and needs to learn how to act. It’s hisfault.”[156]While a formal appeal process often exists, very few youngpeople reported appealing the decisions sentencing them to solitaryconfinement.[157] Asexperts have suggested, it is even more difficult for children to successfullynavigate a prison grievance system than for adult prisoners. One expert said,“On average, juveniles are more impulsive, less capable of planning acourse of action and taking steps, particularly when there are timelines fortaking those steps.... So they’re just less capable, on average, than anadult of doing that.”[158]More than adults, incarcerated teens often act out toprotect themselves or to fit into a culture of violence, including by fightingor committing other disciplinary infractions. The New York City Department ofCorrections reported that the most common disciplinary infraction foradolescents is fighting.[159] Ananalysis of data made available to independent researchers by the FloridaDepartment of Corrections suggests that rates of misconduct of adolescentsunder age 18 were significantly greater than adults between the ages of 18 and20, and many times greater than older adults.[160]Several young people told Human Rights Watch and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union that other adolescents or adults tested themwhen they arrived at a jail or prison, and that they felt they had to defendthemselves to avoid future abuse. Many young people reported that their firstperiod of solitary confinement was soon after they arrived at the facility.Ernesto D. told Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union,[I]f someone puts their hands on you, you must defend yourself. They want toknow that you will defend yourself. I seen [sic] people get hit and noweveryone hits them. You have to deal with it. Once you set the record straightyou can stay out of trouble.[161]The rules and regulations governing punitive solitaryconfinement are often structured such that officials have significantdiscretion about the length of time youth spend in solitary confinement. Whencharging, officials can generally choose whether particular conduct correspondsto a more or less serious infraction and choose from a range of penalties.Jordan E., who entered jail when he was 15 years old, told us that officialsresponded to seemingly any infraction with punitive solitary confinement:15 days for not making the bed; 15 days for not keeping thecell door open; 20 or 25 days for being in someone else’s cell. In thewrite-up book, they could have suspended privileges or anything. All they didis disciplinary seg[regation]. I would put my ear wax in the toilet in my celland flush it to watch it spin. I did [solitary confinement] time for that. Itwas crazy.[162]Some rules and regulations also give officials discretion toreduce the length of time youth spend in solitary confinement, either at thesentencing phase or before release. But that’s not true for all prisonrules, despite the fact that some officials say that, if they had discretion,they would generally be inclined to reduce isolation terms. The rules governingsolitary confinement in Pennsylvania, for example, allow officials to reduceperiods of solitary confinement imposed, but only for some infractions, notall. Officials in Pennsylvania reported that they feel their hands are tied.“Unfortunately, those are the policies that guide us,” one said.“We try to get them out when we can, but we can’t always get themout.”[163]Young people in punitive solitary confinement are oftenentitled to an hour outside of their cell each day, during which they can walkaround, alone, in an indoor area, make phone calls, or take a shower. In somefacilities they are taken to an outdoor exercise yard, often a small cage.[164]Facilities often severely restrict what can be inside a punitive solitaryconfinement cell, including for young people. For example, 12 young peopleacross various states and counties told Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union that they were unable to have a book in their cells (somefacilities made an exception for the Christian bible). As one young man said,“There were no phones, no visits, no books, no newspapers—just thebible.”[165] It wasrare for a facility to permit access to any out-of-cell programming to those inpunitive solitary confinement.Solitary Confinement to Manage InmatesJail and prison officials most commonly use two forms ofadministrative solitary confinement to manage inmates, including adolescents,who are at risk of victimization or who are too difficult to manage in thegeneral population.Protective SolitaryConfinementInternational law and the laws of a number of US statesrequire that young people be separated from adults when detained.[166]And many facilities also require such separation as a matter of policy.[167]Yet, Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union found that toachieve this purpose, some facilities resort to holding youth in permanentsolitary confinement. In other facilities, where youth and adults areintermingled or where many young people are held together, correctionsofficials sometimes use solitary confinement to protect particular adolescents.Some facilities use this practice for weeks or months.A number of corrections officials confirmed that they usedsolitary confinement to separate adolescents from adults.[168]In states with a lower age of criminal majority, such as Michigan or Wisconsin,where all young people age 17 are charged as adults, some facilities hold allthose age 17 and older together with adults, but separate those who areyounger.[169] HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union interviewed 27 young peopleacross the United States who had been placed in solitary confinement to protectthem or to segregate them from adults or other inmates. A recent University ofTexas survey of Texas jails found that 25 out of 41 jails that responded to asurvey held youth in protective solitary confinement by default.[170]The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) regulations requirejails and prisons to keep youth under age 18 separate from adults age 18 andolder in all common spaces.[171]Although they acknowledge the difficulties that corrections officials face intrying to keep youth segregated from adults, PREA regulations do not prohibitisolation or solitary confinement. Rather, they state that facilities“shall make best efforts to avoid placing youthful inmates inisolation.”[172]A separate regulation requires that inmates at high risk of sexualvictimization “shall not ordinarily” be placed in involuntaryprotective custody for more than 30 days.[173] But it isunclear how the two sets of regulations interact.In acknowledging that there should be a limit oninvoluntary protective custody, and that facilities should not use isolationto protect youth, the Department of Justice has recognized that long-termsolitary confinement is not an acceptable solution to the challenges ofhousing and managing vulnerable inmates. Yet, Human Rights Watch and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union found 21 cases in which young people held inprotective isolation reported spending months in solitary confinement.In some circumstances, facilities place young people inprotective solitary confinement after they request protection. Several youngpeople described preferring protective solitary confinement to the violencethey feared or faced in the general population.Sean F., for example, told Human Rights Watch and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union that after he had difficulty in protectivesolitary confinement, the facility moved him:They moved me to a pod with adults. These guys were mucholder. They were nowhere near 17. [I was there] about three weeks. Then Icouldn’t take it. Just the thought, every day, asking,“What’s going to happen?”… Maybe they are coming for menext. I got paranoid … [they transferred me back to isolation]. It wasbetter. You weren’t as scared because [I] knew no one was going to wakeup in the middle of the night and harm me.[174]Corrections officials acknowledge that adolescents seekingprotection sometimes commit disciplinary infractions so they will be taken outof the general population. Until recently, Colorado did not have any formalmechanism to accommodate inmates in protective custody. Officials reported thatadministrative solitary confinement was used as a substitute by some:“Sometimes people hang out in Ad[ministrative] Seg[regation] because theyare afraid. We have certainly seen that used to manage younger offenders whocannot live in general population without living in fear.”[175]Marcus S., who entered jail when he was 14 and was housed ina cell in a juvenile pod with two older adolescent cell-mates, said he wasplaced in protective solitary confinement after experiencing sexual abuse:[My 17 year old cell mate] kept on telling mestuff—like types of stuff you would say to females. And it escalated andwhen he approached me—I couldn’t defend myself against two of themin the room—and he sexually abused me. I went and told the officer and hesaid I had to do something to be taken out of the dorm.… [At mydisciplinary hearing, when I explained what had happened] the corporal said shedidn’t want to give me [a disciplinary violation]. She put me inprotective custody.… She told me she was going to give me some help andlet me stay in the isolation cell for a while.[176]Marcus S. said he spent six months in protective solitaryconfinement following the incident. In some facilities, as with Marcus S.,young people sometimes feel or are told that they have few options in order tokeep themselves safe. Young people are forced into a position where they arechoosing between solitary confinement and physical assault.Some facilities place lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,or intersex (LGBTI) inmates, and inmates who are perceived as LGBTI, inprotective segregation and isolation, including solitary confinement, toprotect them from the increased risk of sexual abuse that these inmates face.[177]Like young people in punitive solitary confinement, those inprotective solitary confinement were often permitted out of their cell for oneor two hours each day, frequently alone in an indoor dayroom. Some, but notall, facilities allowed outdoor recreation. Generally, young people wereallowed to make phone calls and take a short shower during their time out oftheir cells. Two interviewees reported being the only adolescent in a particularunit, and that, for at least part of their detention, they were thereforepermitted to spend much of their day in an empty common area, although theywere still alone.[178]Facilities regulate what can be inside a protective solitary confinement cell,including for youth. Some facilities permit more privileges for those inprotective solitary confinement than for those in punitive solitaryconfinement.Administrative SolitaryConfinementJail and prison officials frequently use solitaryconfinement to segregate individual inmates who they cannot otherwise managefrom the general population. In most facilities, some form of administrativesegregation can follow one or more terms of punitive solitary confinement andextend for months, or even indefinitely. It is generally the result of aninmate’s “classification” and an evaluation of aninmate’s perceived dangerousness or likely future conduct.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed 28 young people who had spent a period of time in administrativesolitary confinement while under age 18 in adult jails and prisons. Of thoseyoung people, six had spent six months or more in administrative solitaryconfinement. In addition, a number of the young people interviewed by Human RightsWatch and the American Civil Liberties Union entered administrative solitaryconfinement while under 18, but remained there for many years; at least 2 hadspent a total of more than 10 years in administrative solitary confinementafter they turned 18.As one young man described in a letter,Imagine that you’re locked in a small room like abathroom 23 hours a day. You’re handcuffed when you’re movedoutside of it. Your food is thrown under the door and you have five books perweek. It’s noisy outside with some [inmate] or another yelling,screaming, banging on his door at ALL HOURS; it smells worse than the monkeyhouse at the older zoos no matter how hard you clean your own cell.… Inseg[regation] you either implode or explode; you lose touch with reality, hearvoices, hallucinate, and think for hours about killing yourself, others, orboth. The anger and hurt gets so intense that you suspect everyone and trust noone and when someone does something nice for you, you don’t understandit.[179]Long-term administrative solitary confinement is generallyimposed on a prisoner as a classification or housing decision. Such decisionsto “administratively” isolate prisoners generally consider factorssuch as the individual’s criminal conviction and history, severity of anydisciplinary infractions, and other individual characteristics.[180]However, the criteria used in this “classification” of prisonersrarely include the age of an inmate.[181]Because some young people who spend time in state prison systems are convictedof serious offenses, they can be classified in a manner that leads to theirdirect placement in administrative solitary confinement.[182]Prolonged administrative solitary confinement is less common in pre-trialfacilities, but does occur, particularly in larger jails.[183]Another major factor in administrative solitary confinementdeterminations is conduct within a facility. As noted above, adolescents oftenmisbehave or commit disciplinary infractions to protect themselves or fit intoa culture of violence in jail and prison. Repeated disciplinary infractions canlead to administrative segregation, as it did with a number of young peopleinterviewed by Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union.Prison and jail officials sometimes say it is necessary toseparate an inmate, or groups of inmates, from others to ensure the security ofstaff and inmates in the general population. When this happens, some stateprison officials said that they have to use solitary confinement, as they arenot equipped to manage individual or small groups of prisoners in any otherway. But several prison officials often told Human Rights Watch that they wouldlike to have the ability to manage youth differently. As Tom Clements, theexecutive director of the Colorado Department of Corrections stated, “IfI had a wish list, it would be to have the flexibility to have more intensivecase management, mental health, and other programming to keep [youth] engagedin something that can build positive self-esteem.”[184]Officials in the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections said that, althoughthey try to divert youth from solitary confinement when possible, generally“4-5 percent of youth [in segregation] are those [who officials]can’t incorporate back into the population.”[185]In recent years, legislators and corrections officials in anumber of states have begun to reexamine the use of prolonged solitaryconfinement to manage inmates. The state of Mississippi recently reduced thepopulation of inmates in long-term administrative solitary confinement by 75.6percent, and closed the state’s super-maximum security prison.[186]The Mississippi Department of Corrections found that prison violence decreasedsignificantly as a result, and millions of dollars were saved in the process.[187]The Commissioner of Corrections, Chris Epps, recently testified before the USSenate that solitary confinement “created a situation where the norm wasto be disruptive as there were no incentives to change behavior.”[188]Colorado, Illinois, and Maine have also begun taking steps to reduce the numberof inmates confined in long-term isolation.[189] The USSenate Judiciary Committee recently held hearings on the issue for the firsttime in its history.[190] Thesereforms may reflect a growing consensus that reliance on solitary confinementto manage inmates is costly, cruel, and unnecessary.As with the experience of the young people in punitive andprotective solitary confinement, those in administrative solitary confinementare often permitted out of their cell for one hour each day. Some, but not all,facilities allow outdoor recreation.[191]Facilities often strictly limit what can be inside an administrative solitaryconfinement cell, including for young people. Some facilities permit moreprivileges to those in long-term administrative solitary confinement—suchas a radio or television, if the prisoner is able to afford to purchase suchitems from the facility—than they permit to those in punitive solitaryconfinement. But telephone and visitation privileges are sometimes morerestrictive, particularly in prisons.Solitary Confinement to Treat InmatesSome adult jails and prisons use a stark form of solitaryconfinement to manage perceived and actual psychological emergencies.[192]Some years ago, it was considered medically appropriate, in a range ofcircumstances, to use lengthy isolation, usually called seclusion, as atherapeutic intervention for adults and, sometimes, adolescents. The currentmedical consensus disfavors the use of stark and prolonged isolation,preferring an approach much more tailored to the mental health needs ofindividual patients. For example, one forensic child psychiatrist told HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union, regarding seclusion forsuicidal adolescents, “When you arefeeling suicidal, [isolation] may well make you feel worse.”[193]However, several young people, including young people withmental disabilities, told Human Rights Watch and the American Civil LibertiesUnion that they were subjected to medical solitary confinement for days at atime; in a few cases, young people reported being held in medical solitaryconfinement for weeks. Some young people also reported being placed in medicalsolitary confinement after experiencing acute difficulty and having threatenedor attempted to commit suicide in other forms of solitary confinement.Four young people described, in detail, time spent ininpatient mental health facilities within state prison systems. These youngpeople all reported spending long periods in isolation in these facilities,including periods of medical solitary confinement.Unlike the experience of the young people in other forms ofsolitary confinement, those in medical solitary confinement were often notpermitted out of their cell at all. Facilities often permit almost nothing tobe inside a medical solitary confinement cell. Frequently, young people werenaked except for a thin paper gown—called a “turtle suit” bysome because of its appearance—and were allowed only a single, thick,tear-resistant blanket.Christopher M. described his experience in medical solitaryconfinement in a letter:[I] was put in a pa[dd]ed room for 24 hours with a smockand hard blanket. [I] was served food in a paper tray[. I] was to eat withhands[. A]fter the meal [I] was not aloud [sic] to wash my hands[. I] was toshit and piss in the floor and not able to wipe my but[t] and not able to flushthe hole in the ground[I] was to talk to a person about my sueisideaul [sic]thoughts … [I] learned nothing from this person … was out in 24hours and put in isolation for 15 days which usually got extended [due] tobehavior issues … that was only one of some 50 times [I] was put inobservation for attempted sueiside [sic] or saying [I] was going to killmyself.[194]QuarantineSome facilities use solitary confinement to quarantineadolescents, often when they first enter a facility. Quarantine practices varysignificantly across facilities. Young people in some jails described beingheld separately at the beginning of their detention, pending the results of atuberculosis test. In other facilities, young people were not segregated, butheld with other incoming inmates. In some facilities, young people reported notspending any time in quarantine upon entry. Inmates who reported beingsubjected to medical solitary confinement for this purpose generally describedbeing held for one, two, or three days.[195] AsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union have arguedelsewhere, whether an inmate is placed in a temporary medical quarantine shouldbe based on whether it is medically necessary.[196]There are serious questions about whether medical solitary confinement isoverused for quarantine and not actually justified as necessary for public healthreasons.Seclusion and SAMHSAThe Substance Abuse and Mental Health ServicesAdministration (SAMHSA)—an agency of the US Department of Health andHuman Services—is devoted to addressing the social and fiscal impacts ofmental disabilities and substance abuse. SAMHSA has dedicated significantresources to reducing the use of seclusion and restraint in various forms ofmental health treatment. SAMHSA shapes policy through contracts and grants,using various national information and data. SAMHSA has found that the use ofseclusion for individuals with mental health issues has resulted in death,psychological trauma, and serious physical injury, including of young people.[197]SAMHSA has further noted that children are at a particularly high risk of deathand serious injury, as a result of the use of seclusion and restraint.[198]Through grant programs in a number of states, SAMHSA has worked to eliminatethe use of seclusion and restraint in treatment and rehabilitation, except as asafety intervention of last resort, and has formally recognized the detrimentaleffects of holding individuals in isolation, particularly children andindividuals with mental disabilities.[199]Rates of Solitary ConfinementNeither states nor the federal government publish systematicdata that show the number of youth held in adult jails and prisons who aresubjected to solitary confinement.[200] And itis impossible to determine the precise number of people under age 18 subjectedto solitary confinement. But the available data suggest that the practice isprevalent in particular jurisdictions and occurs nationwide.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionidentified facilities that hold 100 percent of youth in solitary confinement;large jail and prison systems that hold more than 10 percent of youth insolitary confinement at any given time; and facilities that avoid or rarely usethe practice.Jail officials in three states reported that all youngpeople under age 18 in their facilities were held in protective solitaryconfinement.[201] HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union interviewed six youngpeople in other facilities who reported spending the entire period of theirpre-trial detention in solitary confinement. Media and other reporting suggestthat this practice is widespread in some states.[202]Information gathered from one large prison system and onelarge county jail system suggests that, in those facilities, more than 10percent of youth held there are subjected to disciplinary solitary confinement.[203]Disciplinary data reported by the New York City Department of Correctionssuggests that 14.4 percent of adolescents between the ages of 16 and 18 spendpart of their pre-trial detention in solitary confinement.[204]This is significant because the department is one of the largest jail systemsin the country. The most common disciplinary infraction for adolescents betweenthe ages of 16 and 18 in the New York City Department of Corrections is forfighting.[205]Population data reported by the Pennsylvania Department ofCorrections, which holds adolescents and young adults in a single facilitythrough age 21, suggest that approximately 10.9 percent of inmates there areheld in solitary confinement.[206] LikeNew York City’s facility, the department mixes young people under age 18with young adults, but officials confirmed that approximately 10 percent ofadolescents are consistently held in a form of solitary confinement.[207]Pennsylvania is among the 15 states that hold the largest number of youngpeople under age 18 in adult prisons.[208]Many officials reported that they subject youth and adultsto the same disciplinary rules and that they subject youth to solitaryconfinement as a punitive sanction.[209] HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union interviewed 36 young peoplewho spent several periods in solitary confinement in jail or prison before theyturned 18.As previously noted, some research suggests that youth inadult prisons may commit disciplinary infractions at a rate that is higher thanyounger adult prisoners and much higher than older adults.[210]Disciplinary data made available to independent researchers by the FloridaDepartment of Corrections suggest that approximately one in every tenadolescents in Florida prisons is found guilty of an assaultive rule violation.[211]Florida houses more young people under age 18 in its prisons than any otherstate. In Florida prisons, as in most other adult facilities, assaultive ruleviolations can result in a sanction that includes solitary confinement.[212]While some large facilities reported high levels of solitaryconfinement, one facility in Erie County, New York, reported using disciplinarysegregation only rarely and as a last resort.[213]On the basis of our research and these partial, butsuggestive, statistics, Human Rights Watch and the American Civil LibertiesUnion believe that solitary confinement of young people under age 18 is aserious and widespread problem.Length of Time Spent in Solitary ConfinementThere are also no comprehensive national data on theduration of the solitary confinement of young people under age 18. The limitedevidence available suggests that adolescents in a significant number of jailsand prisons spend prolonged periods—weeks and months, rather than justhours and days—in solitary confinement.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed or corresponded with young people who reported spending lengthyperiods in solitary confinement. While not a representative sample, 49 of the127 young people asked said that they spent between 1 and 6 months in solitaryconfinement before they turned 18. Twenty-nine reported spending longer thansix months in solitary confinement.Officials in some jurisdictions have reported that youth inthe adult criminal justice system are less likely to be released on bail thanadults and therefore spend longer periods in pre-trial detention.[214]Human Rights Watch interviewed or corresponded with some young people who hadspent more than one year in detention awaiting trial before turning eighteen.In some cases, this may mean that young people are more likely to be subjectedto solitary confinement in jurisdictions where the practice is common.Table 1: Total time spent in solitary confinement reported by young peopleTotal Length of Time in Solitary Confinement1-7 days8-30 days31-180 days181-365 days365+daysExactDuration UnknownNumber of Youth11114921827Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed young men and women who had been sentenced to a range of time inpunitive solitary confinement. Young people in a few facilities reported beingsentenced to less than a week in solitary confinement for fighting; others, toweeks or months.[215] HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union did not independentlyverify accounts of the precise nature of the disposition, but young peopledescribed different penalties for similar infractions in different facilities,such as fights that did not result in bleeding or injury. Many young peoplespoke about being punished for defending themselves from an assault from anotherinmate.Not all interviewees recalled the precise number of daysthey had spent in punitive solitary confinement in jail or prison asadolescents. Some also said that they spent time in administrative solitaryconfinement pending their disciplinary hearing. While not a representativesample, for those young people who did report the specific time periods, themost common disciplinary sanctions to which they had been subjected werebetween 15 and 29 days.Table 2: Length of punitive solitary confinement sentences young peoplereported receivingLength of Each Punitive Solitary Confinement Period1-6 days7-14 days15-29 days30-59 daysGreater than 60 daysEach Period of Punitive Solitary Confinement826272120While most facilities reported subjecting young people tothe same lengths of punitive solitary confinement as adults, a representativeof one facility in Erie County, New York, said that young people there weresentenced to shorter periods of disciplinary segregation than adults.[216]Disciplinary rules, and the corresponding durations ofsolitary confinement, vary from state to state and jail to jail. Sanctions arecommonly graduated, with the maximum period of solitary confinement forindividual sanctions often increasing with severity, for example, from 7 to 15to 30 to 60 days, depending on the infraction. Jail and prison officials inmany jurisdictions reported that youth are generally subjected to the samelength of time in punitive solitary confinement as adults.[217]Some jurisdictions subject individuals to multiple, consecutive—ratherthan concurrent—periods of solitary confinement for multiple, one ruleviolations, stemming from a single incident.[218] Thiscan significantly increase the duration of solitary confinement when it isimposed as a disciplinary penalty.The New York City Department of Corrections reported that atypical period of punitive solitary confinement for fighting for adolescentsbetween the ages of 16 and 18 is 20 days.[219] Themedian period of punitive solitary confinement for adolescents, overall, is 29days; the average period of punitive solitary confinement is 43.1 days.[220]This suggests that some young people spend very long periods in solitaryconfinement.[221]Furthermore, young people generally spend more time in solitary confinementthan adults.[222]As with punitive solitary confinement, not all young peoplerecalled the precise number of days, weeks, or months they had spent inprotective solitary confinement in jail or prison while they were under age 18.While not a representative sample, for those young people who did report thespecific time periods, the most common duration was longer than six months.Four of them reported spending longer than one year in protective solitaryconfinement.Table 3: Length of protective solitary confinement reported by young peopleLength of Each Protective Solitary Confinement Period1-6 days7-14 days15-29 days30-59 days60-89 days90 to 179days180 daysor longerEach Period of Protective Solitary Confinement433451118There is rarely any absolute temporal limit onadministrative solitary confinement (solitary confinement as an administrative,management, or housing measure). Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union interviewed a number of young people who began multi-yearperiods of administrative solitary confinement in state prison systems whilethey were under 18.[223]The use of medical solitary confinement as a therapeuticintervention also varies across facilities. Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union interviewed young people who described spending a fewdays in isolation when in the midst of, or immediately following, a mentalhealth crisis. Four young people described spending more than a week in medicalsolitary confinement. A number of young people who described having greatdifficulty coping while in different forms of solitary confinement reportedspending several periods in medical solitary confinement. Others reported beingtransferred from medical solitary confinement to another form of solitaryconfinement.IV. Violations of Fundamental RightsInternational human rights law requires the US government toprotect all prisoners from mistreatment and to provide vulnerable inmates,especially children and persons with mental disabilities, with heightenedmeasures of protection. This body of law, as well as international standardsdeveloped to guide its implementation, establishes that people under age 18have a right to be treated in a manner appropriate to their age anddevelopment.While the solitary confinement of adolescents is not yetprohibited under US domestic law, the US Supreme Court has repeatedly suggestedthat young people in the criminal justice system are entitled to specialconstitutional protections in the context of crime and punishment because theyare developmentally different from adults.International Law andStandardsIn November 1959, the United Nations General Assemblyadopted the Declaration on the Rights of the Child, which recognized that“the child, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needsspecial safeguards and care, including appropriate legal protection, before aswell as after birth.”[224] TheUnited States was one of the 78 members of the UN General Assembly that votedunanimously to adopt the declaration. While the declaration is not binding law,since that time, the world’s governments, including the United States,have further elaborated, in treaties and other declarations, the rights ofchildren accused of crimes.The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR), to which the United States became a party in 1992, specificallyacknowledges the need for special treatment of children in the criminal justicesystem and emphasizes the importance of their rehabilitation.[225] Article 10 requires theseparation of child offenders from adults and the provision of treatmentappropriate to their age and legal status. Article 14(4), which wasco-sponsored by the United States, requires that criminal procedures for children charged withcrimes “take account of the age and the desirability of promoting theirrehabilitation.”[226] The ICCPR emphasizesage-differentiated, positive measures for child offenders and education,rehabilitation, and reintegration over punishment.[227]Both the ICCPR and the Convention against Torture and Other,Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT) prohibit“cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”[228]In addition, article 10 of the ICCPR stipulates, “All persons deprived oftheir liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherentdignity of the human person.”[229] For treatment to be humane, itmust be appropriate to age and legal status.[230] The vulnerability andimmaturity of juvenile offenders renders a wider range of treatment potentiallycruel, inhuman, or degrading, and such treatment, in turn, can have a much moreprofound effect on the body and mind of a developing child than on an adult.It is precisely because imprisonment is such an inherentlysevere sanction that governmental decisions to impose it are subject to humanrights constraints. The ICCPR recognizes that all persons (including youngpeople) deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity and withrespect for the inherent dignity of the human person.[231]When the United States ratified the ICCPR, it attached alimiting reservation providing thatThe policy and practice of the United States are generallyin compliance with and supportive of the Covenant’s provisions regarding treatmentof juveniles in the criminal justice system. Nevertheless, the United Statesreserves the right, in exceptional circumstances, to treat juveniles as adults,notwithstanding paragraphs 2 (b) and 3 of article 10 and paragraph 4 of article14.[232]The drafting history of this reservation indicates that itshould be interpreted narrowly. The reservation was intended to permit—onan “exceptional” basis—the trial of children as adults andthe incarceration of children and adults in the same prison facilities.The United States, as a co-sponsor of Article 14, was keenlyaware of the breadth and scope of its language. There is nothing in itsreservation to suggest that the United States sought to reserve the right totreat children as harshly as adults on a regular or frequent basis, or todisregard the special needs and vulnerabilities of children. To the extent thereservation is interpreted broadly, it risks creating a loophole for violationsof children’s basic rights. To be fully consistent with what it hasagreed to elsewhere regarding children’s rights, the United States shouldwithdraw the reservation, and refuse to use it to justify actions thatotherwise would violate the ICCPR.The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), which theUnited States has signed but not yet ratified, explicitly addresses theparticular rights and needs of children.[233]Underpinning several of the treaty’s provisions is the fundamentalrecognition of the child’s potential for rehabilitation. The CRC requiresthat a state’s decision to incarcerate a child “shall be used onlyasa measure of last resortand for the shortest appropriate period of time.”[234] A child who has committed acrime is to be treated in a manner that takes into account “thechild’s age and the desirability of promoting the child’sreintegration and the child’s assuming a constructive role insociety.”[235] States are to use a variety ofmeasures to address the situation of children in conflict with the law,including “care, guidance and supervision orders; counseling; probation;foster care; education and vocational training programmes and otheralternatives to institutional care.”[236] Thetreaty also anticipates the need for regular and accessible procedures in whicha child can “challenge the legality of the deprivation of his or herliberty.”[237]International human rights law also affirms the right offamily unity.[238] TheInternational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (which the UShas signed, but not yet ratified) guarantees all persons a right to educationand to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health.[239]The Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities(CRPD), which the Senate was actively considering for ratification as thisreport was published, also states that young people with disabilities,including mental disabilities (long-term mental health problems) orintellectual disabilities (sometimes called developmental disabilities), retainthe right to full enjoyment “of all human rights and fundamentalfreedoms, on an equal basis with other [youth],” including when deprivedof their liberty.[240]Various international standards provide additional detailregarding precisely how governments should ensure that this range of rights besafeguarded in practice.[241]With regard to solitary confinement, the United NationsGuidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (Riyadh Guidelines)describe punitive solitary confinement of young people under age 18 as cruel,inhuman, or degrading treatment.[242] TheCommittee on the Rights of the Child, which interprets the CRC, has alsosuggested that the punitive solitary confinement of young people under age 18is cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.[243] TheUnited Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Libertyreiterates this conclusion.[244] Anumber of treaty and regional bodies have suggested that the prolonged solitaryconfinement of both adults and children can constitute cruel, inhuman, ordegrading treatment.[245]Most recently, the special rapporteur on torture, in hisreport to the General Assembly, called for an absolute ban on solitaryconfinement for young people under age 18:The Special Rapporteur holds the view that the impositionof solitary confinement, of any duration, on juveniles is cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment and violates article 7 of the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights and article 16 of the Convention against Torture.[246]This proposed absolute ban reflects an agreement thatsolitary confinement is an affront to the humanity and vulnerability of anychild. The special rapporteur also called for an absolute ban on solitaryconfinement of those with mental disabilities because the adverse effects areespecially significant for persons with serious mental health problems.[247]Young people under age 18 with mental disabilities are therefore doubly vulnerable,given both their age and developmental needs and their disability.With regard to the other deprivations experienced by youngpeople in solitary confinement, international standards similarly provideadditional detail. The United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for theAdministration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules), among otherinternational standards, provide that while in custody, adolescents“shall receive care, protection and all necessary individualassistance,” which must extend to psychological, medical, and physicalcare and be differentiated by age and gender-specific needs.[248]These standards emphasize education, family contact, and access todevelopmentally-appropriate programming aimed at supporting growth and atreintegrating young people into society.Domestic professional standards suggest that adultfacilities should not house young people under age 18.[249]These standards also echo international standards with regard to access tophysical and mental health care, with the American Correctional Association(ACA) recommending that in jails, “[all] inmates have unimpeded access toa continuum of health care services,” including preventative care, andthat inmates should “have access to twenty-four hour emergency medical,dental, and mental health services.”[250] TheACA also recommends that adult facility classification systems andprogramming should “meet the physical, social, and emotionalneeds” of young people and explicitly highlights the importance oftraining and specialization in the areas of “educationalprogramming,” “adolescent development,” “crisisprevention and intervention,” “cognitive-behavioralinterventions,” and “social-skills training.”[251]Human Rights ViolationsOur research establishes both that young people under age 18are subjected to solitary confinement, often for prolonged periods, and thatthe conditions that accompany solitary confinement frequently fail to meet thepsychological, physical, social, and developmental needs of adolescents. Thesefailures constitute violations of fundamental rights in a number ofcircumstances.Any prolonged physical and social isolation of young peopleraises serious human rights concerns. Whether and when a particular caseviolates international human rights law is based on an individual analysis ofthe characteristics and needs of a particular young person and the conditionsand duration of confinement. The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and other UNbodies have stated that the solitary confinement (physical and social isolationof 22-24 hours per day for 1 day or more) of young people under age 18, for anyduration, constitutes cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionrecognize that in any particular case, an analysis of the individualcircumstances and conditions of confinement may be impractical. Given thenature of incarceration, as well as the needs, characteristics, andvulnerability of young people, we endorse the view that there is noreason—administrative, protective, punitive, or medical—to hold ayoung person for 22-24 hours per day for 1 day or more in social and physicalisolation, even when it is necessary to separate a young person from thegeneral population.Such treatment violates the obligation to treat young peopledeprived of their liberty with humanity and respect for their inherent humandignity and status as children under the ICCPR and the CRC, and can amount totorture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment under the ICCPR, CAT, and theCRC.Even if the solitary confinement of young people were notconsidered an inherent violation of the rights of young people under age 18,and even in cases where it may not amount to cruel, inhuman, or degradingtreatment, the conditions and deprivations that often accompany it entailviolations of other fundamental rights.Young people told us graphically how they felt solitaryconfinement aggravated or precipitated anguish and mental health problems.Officials often fail to provide mental health services and care to young peoplein solitary confinement, whether they are experiencing stress, mentaldisability, or even acute or repeated crises. They also often fail to intervenein these circumstances to end solitary confinement. These failures constituteviolations of the rights of young people to be treated with humanity andrespect for the inherent dignity of the human person, the rights of adolescentsto the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, and therights of young people to be free from torture or cruel, inhuman, or degradingtreatment. Failures of officials to maintain adequate preventative,age-differentiated health services, or to intervene to prevent a foreseeablesuccessful suicide, would additionally constitute a violation of the right tolife.[252]Young people in solitary confinement are frequently onlyallowed out of their cell for one hour each day. In some facilities, they areonly allowed to “exercise” indoors in a hallway or common area. Inother facilities, they have access to a small fenced exercise area outdoors. Ina few facilities, young people reported they were unable to access any physicalexercise. Young people also reported difficulty accessing adequately nutritiousfood to support physical development. Young people also reported experiencing arange of physical changes while held in solitary confinement. Failure to fosterconditions of confinement that promote healthy growth and physical development,or conditions of confinement which cause deterioration of physical health, canalso violate the right of young people deprived of their liberty to be treatedwith humanity and respect for their inherent dignity, as well as the right tobe free from torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.Young people in many facilities cannot contact theirfamilies regularly while in solitary, either literally by touch, or in otherways. Youth are often denied adequate or appropriate education, or sometimesany educational programming at all. Programming to promote social developmentis also sometimes entirely absent. These deprivations pertain also to youngpeople in solitary who have mental disabilities. These failures on the part ofofficials can amount to a denial of the rights to be treated with humanity andrespect for one’s human dignity, the right to family unity, the right toeducation, and the right to rehabilitation.US LawUS constitutional law does not currently prohibit solitaryconfinement, including for young people. Nearly every court to consider thesolitary confinement of adults with serious mental disabilities has found thepractice to be unconstitutional.[253] The USDepartment of Justice, when it has investigated the isolation and segregationof adolescents in adult facilities, has suggested that there are constitutionallimits related to the physical and social isolation of youth with regard toconditions, duration, and process.[254] Butthere is no jurisprudence that specifically analyzes and finds unconstitutionalthe solitary confinement of young people in adult jails and prisons.[255]However, in almost all jurisdictions, there are a variety of legal doctrinesthat distinguish between young people under age 18 and adults. As the SupremeCourt has explained,The law has historically reflected the same assumption thatchildren characteristically lack the capacity to exercise mature judgment andpossess only an incomplete ability to understand the world around them. Likethis Court’s own generalizations, the legal disqualifications placed onchildren as a class— e.g., limitations on their ability toalienate property, enter a binding contract enforceable against them, and marrywithout parental consent—exhibit the settled understanding that thedifferentiating characteristics of youth are universal.[256]In the past decade, the United States Supreme Court hasrepeatedly acknowledged that in the criminal justice context, youth areentitled to greater constitutional protections than adults. In four recentdecisions regarding the death penalty, interrogations, and life without parole,the court has affirmed that people under age 18 are still developing andare inherently less culpable than adults.[257] Thisreasoning applies with equal force in the context of solitary confinement.Federal courts have already recognized that for certainvulnerable populations, such as those with severe mental health problems,solitary confinement constitutes a violation of the Eighth Amendment as a crueland unusual punishment. There is also a growing body of law stating that youngpeople are such a vulnerable population because of the unique challenges theyface when subjected to solitary confinement. And the Supreme Court has alreadyrecognized that the punishment of children must take into account their age andspecial developmental needs and capacity for change. Taking all this intoaccount, solitary confinement should not be inflicted on youth in the same waythat it is applied to adults. Failure to take age into account, and subjecting youngpeople to solitary confinement, should therefore be found to violate theconstitutional prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment.V. Alternatives to the Solitary Confinement ofYouthYoung people in conflict with the law can be among the most complexand demanding group of individuals to house, manage, protect, and care for. Thechallenge is all the more daunting for officials with limited budgets and infacilities designed, and with staff trained, to house and manage adults. Someofficials respond in the same way to every form of misconduct: throughpunishment. Solitary confinement can sometimes appear to be a simple solutionto keeping everyone safe in overcrowded, short-staffed facilities that havelittle programming to offer inmates. But the imposition of solitary confinementis never necessary in the management of people under age 18 and can have direconsequences.Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionhave found accord between the views of some corrections and mental healthexperts that facilities can, and should, manage and detain adolescents withoutsubjecting them to any form of solitary confinement.Getting Kids Out ofAdult FacilitiesA significant number of adult facilities across the UnitedStates rely on solitary confinement when detaining and managing young people.An initial important step to reducing the numbers of adolescents harmed by thepractice would be to move people under age 18 out of adult facilities and intojuvenile facilities.Although there is evidence to suggest that some facilitiesin the juvenile justice system still use various forms of prolonged isolation,including solitary confinement, when detaining and managing young people, thereare other systems that rarely use prolonged isolation. For example, a recentstudy of the Missouri juvenile system found that it used isolation hundreds oftime less often than juvenile facilities in Ohio.[258]Additionally, every set of best practice standards for juvenile facilitiesproposes maximum limits on various forms of isolation that are far below thedurations of solitary confinement experienced by the young people interviewedfor this report and by young people in adult facilities across the nation.[259]The vast majority of facilities in the juvenile justicesystem are staffed and resourced to provide for adolescent needs in a much morecomprehensive way because they are designed to house and manage young people.Reviewing and ReformingManaging youth in thejuvenile justice system will always be the best option. But in somejurisdictions, where reform of state law is necessary before all young peoplecan be returned to the juvenile justice system, adult facilities cantake significant measures to reduce the prevalence, duration, and harmfulconsequences of solitary confinement without embarking on sweeping reforms.Jails and prisons can review existing policies andpractices, including disciplinary procedures, and modify them to reflectdifferences in how they apply to youth and adults. Officials can instruct andtrain staff to view and treat youth differently from adults, including indesigning and implementing services and programming, as well as in assessment,diagnosis, and classification.Training and StaffingOfficials repeatedly described to us the importance ofmentorship and adequate supervision to maintain order and protect all inmates.Facilities must have appropriate numbers of properly trained and adequatelysupervised staff.[260] Toprovide for the full range of the needs and vulnerabilities of young people,staffing must include specialized service providers, like social workers andmental health professionals.As one corrections official,who manages a prison for youthful offenders in the adult system, described,If we do what we do and do it well here, we are able toprovide some of the mentorship they wouldn’t be able to get at anotherfacility because we are staffed heavier. In a typical adult jail, they wouldhave about half of the staff that we do here on a unit. We have enough staff tointeract with them as much as possible—to provide that type of mentoringand leadership.… We have twice the complement of case managers. We havetreatment specialists; two to three times the amount of corrections officers.One of the things we do well is just the amount [of staff].”[261]Another stated,[Youth] are high maintenance. Half the battle [is] you haveto know about them; about their family, what kind of history they have. Whenthey understand that, it is half the battle.… Just the fact that you knowtheir name and know something about them, there is no substitute for therapport building.[262]Programming and ActivitiesWhether housed in small or large groups, one way toeffectively manage young people is by providing significant levels of programmingand activities in which they can invest their energy and attention. Forexample, although officials at the Pine Grove youthful offender facility inPennsylvania described using solitary confinement to manage some youth, theydescribed high levels of activities as one of the important elements ofmanaging other youth in their facility. As one official stated, “If youdon’t create something for them to do, their minds race at 90 miles anhour; they are harder to manage if you don’t keep them busy.”[263]The New York City Department of Corrections has recentlyannounced plans to reform the programming it provides to adolescents held ingeneral population on Rikers Island.[264] TheDepartment’s current goal is,… [T]o create a wrap-around environment. The questionis, after the school day, how do we sustain the focus on problem-solving? Thisis a cognitive skills program … we have trained members of the schoolstaff. We have also trained our correctional staff and our adolescents so thateveryone has the same language and expectations for problem-solving. There aregroup sessions that happen in the evenings in the housing units so thingsdon’t fester—to develop more pro-social problem-solving skills. Theprogram also features a component on using leisure time wisely. So …[youth are] learning to make good choices throughout the whole of the day.[265]It remains to be seen whether additional reforms at Rikerswill address the developmental needs of youth held in solitary confinementthere. Young people who had experienced solitary confinement across the UnitedStates, and who had spent months or years in adult facilities while under age18, frequently identified idleness as the primary source of conflict, and hencerule violations, in jails and prisons.Assessment, Diagnosis, and PlanningExperts stress the importance of assessing youth coming intoand staying in adult facilities (and of being able to recognize mental andintellectual disabilities) to provide appropriately for individual young peopleand ensure rehabilitation. As one psychiatric expert with experience in adultand juvenile facilities described, this can take the form of repeatedre-classification:“[The] risk and needs [of teenagers] change overtime. With teenagers, they need to have a good risk and needs assessment andthey need that every six months to a year. Then a behavior plan that matchestheir risk and needs. What you want to do is target their highest criminalrecidivism risk and then target their highest needs. Maybe this kid has an emergingmental illness; maybe they have a low I.Q.; maybe they malinger a lot. If wecould do that, then we could really help this person grow and progress.”[266]Disciplinary MeasuresSolitary confinement is also not necessary as a disciplinarymeasure, and experts have pointed to alternatives, including through theestablishment of a system of graduated sanctions. Such a system would requirechanges though. As the former Commissioner of Corrections of New York City andthe state of Pennsylvania stated,There aren’t a whole lot of tools to deal withadolescents as things stand. So there aren’t a whole lot of things tocontrol. If there were activities, then something coveted to participate in,you could take that away.… Restricting a kid from going to the movie tonightmay have as powerful an impact on controlling their behavior … therearen’t a sufficient number of activities that are viewed as desirablethat could be used as an intermediate sanction where sanctions are necessary.[267]To be effective, experts also point out that disciplinarymeasures must be immediate and proportional to the behavior, and connected toprogramming. Even officials who described using solitary confinement in somecontexts, described being able to avoid it in other contexts. As one stateprison official described,We have trained our staff to go to immediate sanctions,logical sanctions, immediate and programmatic sanctions. What we have found isthat if you address the issue immediately and if the consequence is immediate,we can change behavior. We have focused a lot on that with our youngeroffenders.[268]Even some officials who reportedfrequently using solitary confinement as a disciplinary response identifiedvery different alternatives:If you can get in quick enough, it would be the equivalentof “go to your room.” A lot of these [conflicts] start small. Ifyou have one youth who is monopolizing the channel-changer [for the housingarea television], the option now … if he does not respond is to infracthim [which results in punitive segregation]. What I prefer is “go to yourroom young man” and then to create a mechanism for review—so everytwo hours you double back and it wouldn’t go any longer than six hours (sothat it doesn’t go beyond a de facto punitive segregation in yourhousing unit). So when you are ready to come out, all is forgiven.[269]Borrowing from Juvenile FacilitiesThe most progressive and innovative alternatives to solitaryconfinement that respond better to adolescent needs and development come fromthe juvenile justice system. As one expert describes, “[Corrections officials in adult facilities] haven't thought aboutdifferent ways to deal with these acting out behaviors, to realize they arenormal behaviors and are teachable moments to teach [youth] to react in adifferent way to stimuli.”[270] Officials feel that some of the best practices fromjuvenile facilities could work for youth in adult facilities.Rewarding Positive BehaviorOne fundamental shift that would help is to move frommanaging youth solely through punitive disciplinary measures to focus onteaching and reinforcing positive behaviors. As one official at a juvenilefacility described,What we have found in all our programs is that the best wayto influence behavior is positive reinforcement. You encourage good behavior byincentivizing. What we have found as part of our philosophy [of] behaviormanagement is that the most important thing is to get kids to acceptresponsibility for their actions and think about it and change. If you put akid in isolation of any kind, what you are essentially doing is letting the kidoff the hook. He can spend all of his time blaming you.… If you want toget kids to do something that you want them to do, reinforce good behavior.…We don’t have any punishments in our program. If you do something bad youare held accountable. That might mean you pay back the community in some way orit might mean that you continue in program longer than you expected because youare not getting it. So the behavior is the report card.… The last thing you want to do to kids who arestruggling with some very hard issues is make them be alone. That’s juststupid. I don’t know any other way to put it. Putting them in a place bythemselves is just stupid. And it’s harmful.[271]Another official at an adult jail stated,If you deal with these teenagers at all, you know that themore you lock them up and the less they have to do, the most trouble they getin. Locking them up becomes counterproductive. So we try to use other, creativeways to exercise discipline, as opposed to locking them up and letting them sitidle.[272]Small Group LivingOne technique that experts often identify as important toreinforce positive behaviors in young people, is to create a small community inwhich youth can raise concerns and have them addressed. In Missouri, forexample, this process is structured around a discussion circle:[A]t any time, youth are free to call a circle—inwhich all team members [residents] sit or stand facing one another—toraise concerns or voice complaints about the behavior of other group members(or to share good news). Thus, at any moment, the focus can shift from theactivity at hand—education, exercise, clean up, a bathroom break—toa lengthy discussion of behaviors and attitudes. Staff members also callcircles frequently to communicate and enforce expectations regarding safety,courtesy, and respect, and also to recognize positive behaviors.[273]Limited Appropriate Uses of Segregation andIsolationThere is no question that corrections officials have a dutyto protect the safety and wellbeing—and to safeguard the humanrights—of staff and the entire inmate population. In some cases, certainforms of short-term segregation and isolation may be a valid tool forcorrections officials to use in pursuing this particular goal. Yet, any use ofsegregation and isolation of young people must be tightly regulated, monitored,used for the shortest duration possible, and only to the extent strictlynecessary to maintain the immediate safety of the young person or others.[274]At all times, the goal of any form of protective isolationshould be to return an individual to general population. Steps should be takento limit social and physical isolation. Facilities must ensure that youngpeople are not denied access to developmentally appropriate treatment,services, or programming. Under no circumstances should practices be extremeenough to constitute solitary confinement.If officials find they are using segregation and isolationfrequently for particular adolescents, they should work with them to identifyand address the underlying causes and find alternative solutions.Interrupting DisciplinaryCrisesLimited segregation and isolation can also be an appropriateintervention to prevent harm to an individual young person, to otheradolescents, or to staff. But experts stress that whenever youth are isolated,there must be a therapeutic goal and intervention. As Dr. Cheryl Willsdescribed,Once the crisis has been de-escalated, you start therehabilitation again. So just because [the youth] had a crisis does not justifydepriving them of treatment and rehabilitation. The containment serves apurpose of containing the behavior, but then you start again. So the key is therehabilitation. Whether or not a person has a mental illness, they needrehabilitation. If you just do the restraint and retribution, but not therehabilitation, they are not going to change their behavior.[275]Short-term Protective Segregation and IsolationEven in specialized facilities designed to hold young peopleunder age 18, some form of short-term segregation and isolation may benecessary to protect individual adolescents from others. But, as Human RightsWatch and the American Civil Liberties Union have stated elsewhere, suchisolation must be for as brief a period as possible and not subject toextensions, lasting only until an alternative placement can be arranged.[276]Diverting Youth to Specialized FacilitiesPsychological experts stressed the importance of identifyingthe underlying causes of behaviors that lead to misconduct or a need tosegregate or isolate. Some experts also emphasized that when those causesinvolve mental health problems or a mental disability, and when facilitiescannot manage adolescent behavior, transferring young people to a specializedmental health facility may be appropriate. The American Academy of Child andAdolescent Psychiatrists recently issued a policy statement urging a ban onsolitary confinement and promoting the intervention of a qualified mentalhealth professional after 24 hours.[277] As oneof its drafters told us,There really should be no reason that a child should be inany type of solitary confinement for any duration. In my opinion, if they arein solitary for more than a day [24 hours] you need to find another facilityfor them or [implement] some kind of mental health intervention.[278]RecommendationsThe federal government and state governments should end thepractice of subjecting young people to solitary confinement. Legislative actionis crucial; but even in the absence of legislation, a range of actors,including jail and prison officials, can and should take significant stepstowards this goal.Ending the solitary confinement of young people requiresbroad reforms in five areas. First, the solitary confinement of people underage 18 should be prohibited in law and policy. Second, young people should notbe held in adult jails and prisons or managed with policies and practicesdesigned for adult inmates. Third, all forms of segregation and isolation of youngpeople, even those not long enough to constitute solitary confinement, shouldbe strictly limited and regulated, regardless of where they are held. Fourth,all facilities that detain young people should publicly report on the use ofsegregation and isolation. Finally, the US government should ratify humanrights treaties protecting young people without reservations.The following detailed recommendations address each of thesepolicy areas:At the State LevelState LegislaturesProhibitthe solitary confinement of young people under age 18 in adult and juvenilefacilities for any purpose.Endthe practice of trying, sentencing, and incarcerating youth under 18 in theadult criminal justice system; where this is not immediately feasible, mandatethat all people under age 18 be held in the juvenile justicesystem—before trial and after conviction or adjudication—no matterhow they are charged; and appropriate funds, as necessary, to provide forchanges in population in juvenile facilities.Strictlylimit segregation and isolation of young people under age 18, even if for periods not long enough to constitute solitaryconfinement.Requirethat people under age 18 held in any form of segregation and isolation,including solitary confinement, and particularly young people with mental orintellectual disabilities, be treated in a manner consistent with theirmedical, psychological, developmental, educational, social, and rehabilitativeneeds; appropriate funds, as necessary, to provide for changes in services andprogramming.Requireperiodic monitoring and review of solitary confinement, segregation, andisolation policies, practices, and procedures at every correctional facility byan independent and qualified reviewer; ensure that the reports generated fromthese reviews are available to the public.Requireadult and juvenile facilities to monitor and publicly report:The rates anddurations of any form of segregation and isolation, including solitaryconfinement.The reasonswhy youth are subjected to any form of segregation and isolation, includingsolitary confinement.Informationabout the quality and availability of age-differentiated programming andservices for young people under age 18, including young people with mental orintellectual disabilities, held in any form of segregation and isolation,including solitary confinement.State Prison Systems andCounty JailsProhibitthe solitary confinement of young people under age 18 for any purpose.Establishspecialized facilities or sections of facilities to house young people underage 18, including young people at high risk of victimization, so that they arenot held in prolonged segregation and isolation, including solitaryconfinement.Concludememoranda of understanding or contracts with state juvenile facilities to houseyoung people under age 18; and with state juvenile or other medical or mentalhealth facilities to house young people under age 18 who require specializedmedical or psychological care.Developspecialized disciplinary rules for young people under age 18 that avoidprolonged segregation and isolation, that expressly take age and needs intoaccount, and that provide a range of behavioral management techniques,including positive behavioral management and differentiated and proportionalsanctions.Strictlylimit the segregation and isolation of young people under age 18, even if for periods not longenough to constitute solitary confinement.Ensurethat all young people under age 18, and particularly young people with mentalor intellectual disabilities, in any form of confinement, including segregationand isolation, have access to:Adequate and age-differentiated medical and mental healthservices.Adequatephysical exercise, including outdoor exercise and aerobic, muscle-strengthening,and bone-strengthening exercise.Meals withadequate and developmentally-appropriate nutritional value.Means ofcontact with their family, including contact visits, telephone, and writtencommunication.Adequate andage-differentiated educational programming and services.Adequate andage-differentiated social, developmental, and rehabilitative programming andservices.Developmentally-appropriatelevels of social interaction with other young people and adults.Ensureadequate staffing levels to manage young people under age 18.Providespecialized training to all staff on managing adolescents, and particularly onthe use of verbal de-escalation techniques, and on identifying and assistingyoung people with mental or intellectual disabilities and histories of traumaand abuse.Provideadditional training to staff who manage young people in segregation andisolation on identifying and assisting young people with mental or intellectualdisabilities and histories of trauma and abuse.Providespecialized training to medical and mental health staff who care for youngpeople under age 18.Makedata on rates and durations, and justifications for the use of segregation andisolation, including solitary confinement, publicly available.Publishall disciplinary rules, policies, and procedures related to young people underage 18 in a publicly available forum.Concludememoranda of understanding with state juvenile, medical, and mental healthfacilities, education systems, and between county and state facilities, toensure transfer of data regarding physical and mental health histories,identified mental or intellectual disabilities, and histories of trauma andabuse.Notifyand consult with family members, as well as counsel for represented youth, whenyoung people under age 18 are placed in any form of segregation and isolation,including solitary confinement, or have a significant medical or mental healthevent.State Departments of EducationIssueclear guidance mandating the provision of adequate and age-differentiatededucational programming and services to all young people under age 18 insegregation and isolation in adult jails or prisons, including those withmental or intellectual disabilities.State Departments of HealthIssueclear guidance mandating the provision of adequate and age-differentiatedphysical and mental health care, as well as social, developmental, andrehabilitative programming and services to all young people under age 18,particularly those with mental or intellectual disabilities, in segregation andisolation in adult jails or prisons.State Juvenile and AdultCriminal Court JudgesHold ahearing on conditions and use of segregation and isolation, including solitaryconfinement, in the place of detention when considering transfer ofjurisdiction to the adult criminal justice system and before sentencing.Declineto transfer young people to the jurisdiction of the adult criminal justicesystem.Affirmativelyorder that young people be held in the juvenile justice system pre-trial orpost-adjudication or conviction.Requireprosecutors to submit data on the use and duration of segregation andisolation, including solitary confinement, before sentencing.Beforesentencing, require a medical and mental health evaluation of the effects ofany periods of segregation and isolation, including solitary confinement,experienced by young people.State ProsecutorsDeclineto exercise authority to charge young people as if adults or to request ororder detention of young people under age 18 in adult jails or prisons.Affirmativelyrequest that young people be held in the juvenile justice system pre-trial orpost-adjudication or conviction.Seekdata from the pre-trial detention facility on the use and duration ofsegregation and isolation, including solitary confinement, and disclose thisinformation to the court and defense counsel.Seeka medical and mental health evaluation of the effects of any periods ofsegregation and isolation, including solitary confinement, and disclose thisinformation to the court and defense counsel.Defense AttorneysAttrial, raise the use of segregation and isolation, including solitaryconfinement, in the place of pre-trial and post-conviction or post-adjudicationdetention.Challengethe solitary confinement of young people, including through administrativeappeals of the imposition of solitary confinement, and conditions litigation.Filea motion that young people be detained pre-trial and post-conviction oradjudication in the juvenile justice system.Requestto be notified when young people are placed in any form of segregation andisolation, including solitary confinement.At the Federal LevelUS CongressProhibitthe solitary confinement of young people under age 18 for any purpose in federalcustody.Holdhearings on the solitary confinement of young people.Usethe appropriations process to encourage standard-setting and capacity-buildingaround the treatment of young people, and to press for prohibitions of solitaryconfinement of young people under age 18 nationwide.Appropriatefunds and direct the Department of Justice’s Civil Rights Division toinvestigate the solitary confinement of young people under age 18 in adultjails and prisons as a violation of US domestic law and US human rights treatyobligations.Amend theJuvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act to close the loopholes thatleave young people under age 18 charged as if adults without federalprotections; define “juvenile” to include any young person underage 18.Amendthe Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act to prohibit the use ofsolitary confinement for young people under age 18.Appropriatefunds and direct the Department of Justice’s Office of Justice Programsto monitor the conditions of confinement of young people under age 18 held inany form of segregation and isolation in adult facilities; and to ensure thatyoung people under age 18 are not held in solitary confinement in an effort tocomply with the Prison Rape Elimination Act or the Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention Act.Appropriatefunds, such as through amendments to the Individuals with DisabilitiesEducation Act, and direct the Department of Education to monitor the provisionof educational programming to all young people under age 18, and in particular,to young people with mental and intellectual disabilities, held in segregationand isolation in adult jails or prisons.Appropriatefunds, such as through amendments to the Children’s Health Act, anddirect the Department of Health and Human Services to monitor the provision ofmental and physical health services to all young people under age 18, and inparticular, to young people with mental disabilities, held in segregation andisolation in adult jails or prisons.US Department of JusticeBureau of PrisonsModify existing contracts with secure juvenile facilities toprohibit the solitary confinement of young people under age 18.Office of Justice ProgramsPublish a policy document supporting a prohibition of thesolitary confinement of young people under age 18 and promoting best practicesfor the detention and management of young people without use of prolongedsegregation and isolation.Developgrant-making and capacity-building tools, and particularly those aimed atimplementation of the Prison Rape Elimination Act, to assist facilitiesimplementing protections for youth while also limiting segregation andisolation and prohibiting solitary confinement of young people under age 18.Expand the scope of information-gathering for state compliancemonitoring under the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act to includedata about the imposition of segregation or isolation, including solitaryconfinement, on young people under age 18.Civil Rights DivisionDeclare the solitary confinement of young people under age 18 inadult prisons and jails, as practiced, as unconstitutional and a violation ofinternational human rights law and urge prohibition of the solitary confinementof young people for any purpose.Bureau of Justice StatisticsAmend current and future Bureau of Justice Statistics data collectionsto include questions about when and whether young people are placed insegregation and isolation, including solitary confinement, in adult jails andprisons.Department of EducationIssueguidance or rules clarifying the application of the Individuals withDisabilities Act to young people with mental and intellectual disabilities heldin segregation and isolation, including solitary confinement.Developgrant-making and capacity-building tools to promote facilities providingage-appropriate and out-of-cell educational programming to young people underage 18 held in segregation and isolation, including solitary confinement.Department of Health and HumanServices and the Centers for Disease ControlIssueguidance clarifying the physical and mental health consequences of segregationand isolation, including solitary confinement, on young people.Developgrant-making and capacity-building tools to promote facilities providingage-appropriate and out-of-cell physical and mental health services to youngpeople under age 18 held in segregation and isolation, including solitaryconfinement.US Senate and Executive BranchThe President should submit to the Senate and the Senate shouldgive advice and consent to:The ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons withDisabilities without reservation.The ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Childwithout reservationA formal notification of the withdrawal of reservations to theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, including ICCPR Article10, and to the Convention against Torture.State and National Medical,Mental Health, Corrections, and Jail Associations and Standard-Setting BodiesIssuepolicy statements supporting a prohibition of the solitary confinement of youngpeople under age 18.Amendstandards for juvenile and adult facilities to prohibit the solitaryconfinement of young people under age 18.Promotebest practices and resources for facilities that detain and manage young peopleunder age 18 focused on the development of specialized policies and proceduresthat:Avoidprolonged segregation and isolation, that expressly take age and needs intoaccount, and that provide a range of behavioral management techniques.Mandate thatyoung people under age 18 held in any form of segregation and isolation,including solitary confinement, and particularly young people with mental orintellectual disabilities, be treated in a manner consistent with theirmedical, psychological, developmental, educational, social, and rehabilitativeneeds; appropriate funds, as necessary, to provide for changes in services andprogramming.Requiremonitoring and reporting of the rates and durations of any form of segregationand isolation, including solitary confinement, and the quality and availabilityof age-differentiated programming and services for young people.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Ian Kysel, Aryeh Neier fellow with the US Program at HumanRights Watch and the Human Rights Program at the American Civil LibertiesUnion. Jo Becker, senior advocate with the Children’s Rights Division atHuman Rights Watch, participated in one of the research missions. Much of thedata analysis for this report was done by Brian Root, Quantitative Analyst in theUS Program at Human Rights Watch. Significant research assistance was providedby Samantha Reiser and Vikram Shah, associates in the US Program atHuman Rights Watch; as well as Elana Bauer, Elana Bildner, Ruth Monteil,Zachery Morris, and Halina Shiffman-Schilo, interns in the US Program at HumanRights Watch; and Zoha Khalili, Tom McDermott, and Ariel Werner, interns in the HumanRights Program, National Prison Project, and Advocacy Division of the AmericanCivil Liberties Union.This report was edited by Alison Parker, US Programdirector; Maria McFarland, US Program deputy director;Antonio Ginatta, US Program advocacy director; Jamie Fellner, US Program senioradvisor; Elizabeth Calvin, Children’s Rights Division senioradvocate; Meghan Rhoad, Women’s Rights Division researcher; Amanda McRae,Health and Human Rights researcher; Dinah PoKempner, general counsel; and TomPorteous, deputy program director for Human Rights Watch; as well as StevenWatt, Human Rights Program senior staff attorney; David Fathi, National PrisonProject director; Amy Fettig, National Prison Project senior staff attorney;and Tanya Greene, advocacy and policy council for the American Civil LibertiesUnion. Layout, graphics, and production were coordinated by Anna Lapriore, creativeoutreach manager, Brian Root, Grace Choi, publications director, and FitzroyHepkins, mail manager for Human Rights Watch; as well as Rachel Myers, seniorcommunications strategist for the American Civil Liberties Union.Most importantly, Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union wish to thank each of the individuals who shared theirexperiences growing up in adult jails and prisons, and who spoke with courageand dignity about the challenges they faced when subjected to solitary confinement.We are deeply indebted to the many who felt, like Nicholas M., that, “Ifmy story can stop another kid from coming [to solitary confinement], thenthere’s a small piece of it. Hopefully my pain serve[s] somepurpose.”[279]Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionwould like to thank the American Civil Liberties Affiliates in Colorado,Florida, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Wisconsin for theirsupport and assistance in making this research possible. This report wassignificantly enhanced by the advice of experts at the Campaign For YouthJustice, and the Center on Children’s Law and Policy. We are alsograteful to the Law Offices of Deborah LaBelle, The Colorado Juvenile DefenderCoalition, Florida Institutional Legal Services, the Children’s LawCenter, Inc.; and to public defenders in Florida, Michigan, New York, Ohio,Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, who shared their invaluable expertise and timewith Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union. We particularlyappreciate the assistance of family members, social workers, attorneys, andadvocates who provided Human Rights Watch with invaluable information,insights, and expertise.Human Rights Watch would also like to thank those state andlocal jail and prison officials, corrections experts, and psychological andpsychiatric experts and officials who spoke candidly about the challenges theyface when managing and detaining young people in adult facilities, and theirperspectives on the prevalence and effects of solitary confinement.Appendix 1: Mapping Youth in Adult Jails andPrisonsNeither most states nor the federal government track orreport comprehensive data on youth held in adult jails and prisons. In the United States, there are three main criminaldetention systems: the local (state) jail system, the state prison system, andthe federal prison system. Data from each of these systems is gathered anddisseminated separately by the US Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS).StateJailsThe BJS produces nation-wideestimates of young people under age 18incarcerated in state and local jails in the Jail Inmates at Midyear report.[280] The report provides an estimate of the number of youngpeople under age 18 held in the system on June30.[281] In any given year, young people under age 18 make up approximately 1 percent of theinmate population of local jails, according to BJS estimates. The majority of youngpeople held in local jails are being held as ifadults, and are subject to charge and trial in the criminal justice system.Typically, only 14 to 25 percent of the young people in local jails are being held as juveniles, pending adelinquency adjudication or transfer to a juvenile facility (see below). While,as discussed below, Human Rights Watch and the American Civil LibertiesUnion have found that young people under age 18 held as adults typically spend longperiods in detention, it is likely that those held as juveniles may spend onlyvery short periods in adult facilities: a few hours or a day.[282] 2011 saw the fewest number of young people under age 18 in jails in recent years, with 5,900young people under age 18 held at midyear.Table 1: Young people in jail at mid-yearJailInmates at Midyear[283]20002005200620072008200920102011[284]Youthunder age 18[285]7,6156,7596,1026,8337,7037,2187,5605,900Heldas adults[286]6,1265,7504,8355,6496,4105,8465,6474,600Heldas juveniles1,4891,0091,2681,1841,2941,3731,9121,400The BJS produces nocomprehensive data on the number of young people under age 18 that are admitted to local jail facilities over the courseof a year. But based on the best available data, Human Rights Watch hasproduced estimates of the total number of young people under age 18 that are annually admitted to localjails in the US. We estimate that 93,947 adolescents were admitted into localadult detention facilities in 2011 (See Table 2, Figure 1).[287]Table 2: Estimated annual number of young people in jails[288]Click to expand ImageFigure 1: Young people held in adult jailsClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageTable 3: States that hold the most young people in prison[289]Inmates in state prisonsserve median sentences of approximately two years and release rates andexpected time served are very “stable,” according to the BJS.[290]Therefore, the June 30 inmate counts may be used asbaseline estimates for the total number of juveniles entering state prisonswithin the year. Combining these estimates with the annual estimates ofjuveniles in local jails produces an overall estimate of 139,495 juvenilesadmitted to adult correctional facilities in 2010.[291]StatePrison SystemsThe BJS also produces data onyoung people under age 18 held in the federaland state prison systems at mid-year (June 30) and disaggregates this data bystate and gender.[292]In themost recent year for which data is available (2010), 2,295 young people under age 18 were being held in adult facilities instate prison systems on June 30. Florida and New York held the highest numberof young people under age 18, with over200 juvenile inmates imprisoned in each state (though Florida’s numberswere significantly higher) (Connecticut also held over 200 young people under age 18 in a combined prison-jail system).Map 3: Youth in adult prisonsThis map shows the relative distribution of youth in adultprisons across the United States.Click to expand ImageTable 4: Estimated annual number of young people in adultjails and prisonsClick to expand ImageThe Legal LandscapeAs detailed in the report,whether young people are held in solitaryconfinement depends in part on the legal landscape, and how and at what ageyouth are charged or held as if adults.States charge young people under age 18 as if adults througha variety of legal mechanisms. Youth charged as if adults—and held atadult facilities—are sometimes subjected to solitary confinement for arange of reasons discussed throughout the report. Youth detained in states thatmandate protection for some young people held in adult facilities (such as sightand sound separation requirements) are sometimes subjected to protectivesolitary confinement to achieve this goal.Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageStatisticalMethodologyHuman Rights Watch analyzed six years (2006—2011) ofthe BJS’s Annual Survey of Jails data to develop quantitative estimatesregarding young people in local jail facilities. The Survey of Jails asksfacilities to answer three questions regarding young people held on June 30thof each year: number of male inmates under age 18; number of female inmatesunder age 18; and total number of young people under age 18 held as adults. TheBJS then computes a new variable to estimate “Juveniles Held asJuveniles” in this way: “JUVM” + “JUVF” –“ADLTJUV.” The methodology should ensure that every person countedin the “ADLTJUV” variable should also be counted in the“JUVM” or “JUVF” variables, and the sum of those twovariables should always be greater than the “ADLTJUV”variable.However, facilities sometimes incorrectly fill out BJSsurveys and do not include young people under age 18 held as adults in theirtotal counts for all inmates under the age of 18. Therefore, in these states,the “Juveniles Held as Juveniles” variable (“JUVM” +“JUVF” -“ADULTJUV”) results in a negativenumber. For these facilities, Human Rights Watch used the larger count ofjuveniles held as adults (“ADLTJUV”) as the total count. We countedthese inmates as males under the age of 18 because we could not determinegender and males account for roughly 94 percent of juvenile jail inmatesannually.[293]We also generated annual estimates of young people under age18 admitted to local jails by using data on the number of young people underage 18 held in jails on June 30th of a given year, as well asadmissions data for the last week of June. We multiplied the percentage of allinmates on June 30th that were young people under age 18 by thenumber of weekly inmate admissions to estimate the number of young people underage 18 admitted during the week. These estimates allowed for additional upperand lower percentages of all inmates that were under age 18. This figure wasthen multiplied by the number of weeks in the year to estimate the number ofannual admissions, as follows:Percentage of all inmates that are young people under age 18(on last day of June) times the number of admissions during last week of Juneequals the estimated number of young people admissions during last week times365 (days) divided by 7 (days) equals the estimate of the number of youngpeople under age 18 admitted during the year. We produced confidence intervalsby using the annual standard error for young people under age 18 to produceupper and lower bounds for the number of young people in jail on June 30th(z-score = 1.96, confidence interval = young people under age 18 count +/-standard error * 1.96).We are making two major assumptions with this estimate.First, we assume that the percentage of inmates that are young people under age18 on June 30th of every year are representative of the percentageof inmates that are admitted during the last week of June that are under age18. There is evidence that the percentage of inmates that are under age 18 doesnot fluctuate greatly. In the most recent seven years that the BJS hascollected this data (from 2005 to 2011) the percentage of inmates under age 18in the facilities sampled has not fluctuated more than 2/10ths of a percent.Year in and year out, young people under age 18 make up 0.8 to 1.0 percent ofinmates on June 30th. Our second assumption is that the data onweekly admissions, which comes from the last week of June, is representative ofa typical week and can be used to estimate annual admissions. The BJS used the2004 Survey of Large Jails to track monthly movements over the course of theyear and has determined that June admission data is a reliable source tocalculate a nationwide annual admission estimate.[294]We also analyzed the Survey of Jails data to gain a greaterunderstanding of the distribution of youth inmates across the United States. Wegenerated the estimates by examining six years (from 2006 to 2011) of Survey ofJails data to identify unique facilities that housed young people under age 18.The Survey of Jails is a nationally-representative survey of all local jails,whether they have held youth or not, and is not a sample of only thosefacilities that have held young people under age 18. Therefore it is possiblethat in any given year, a jail facility with inmates under age 18 may not havebeen selected in the sample. Examining only a single year of the survey wouldtherefore skew the distribution of young people under age 18 towards largerfacilities, as 268 facilities are included in the sample with certainty(annually) due to the size of their daily population.Therefore, we examined six years of surveys and extractedcounts of young people under age 18 held for the most recent year that each facilitywas surveyed. We extracted data for 577 unique facilities (312 from 2011, 85from 2010, 71 from 2009, 43 from2008, 40 from 2007, and 26 from 2006). It isimportant to note that this distribution analysis is not an estimate of theoverall distribution of young peopleunder age 18 in jail systems, but adistribution of unique facilities that reported housing inmates under age 18during the last six years of the Annual Survey of Jails. The distributionanalysis did not utilize the BJS facility-level weighting variable to weightthe count of young people under age 18. It examined the distribution of inmatesunder age 18 reported in surveys by facility, county, and state.Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionhave found that some Colorado jails and prisons use solitary confinement todetain and manage young people under age 18 in a range of circumstances. HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union corresponded with orinterviewed 20 individuals who reported being subjected to one or more periodsof solitary confinement while under age 18 in jails in Adams, Arapahoe, ClearCreek, Denver, El Paso, Jefferson and Park Counties; and in a number of stateprisons.[295] Thoughnot investigated by Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union,officials in Larimer, Pueblo, Washington, and Weld Counties have reporteddetaining young people under age 18 in the last six years.[296]Human Right Watch also interviewed or corresponded with state jail and prisonofficials.The Law and Policy LandscapeColorado law and policy governing jails and prisons permitholding young people in various forms of prolonged isolation or segregationthat can constitute solitary confinement.[297]Colorado JailsBy statute, young people under age 18 charged as if adultsby prosecutorial “direct file” can be held in jails, thoughunder legal changes that took effect after Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union visited the state, the default place of detention is injuvenile facilities.[298] Youngpeople under age 18 can be detained in adult jails only if a state districtcourt finds that an adult jail is the appropriate place of confinement afterweighing a number of factors, including whether the youth would be deprived ofcontact with others in order to separate him or her from adults.[299]The state requires that youth held in adult jails be physically segregated fromadults.[300] Butthere is no prohibition in state law against holding young people in solitaryconfinement in adult jails.[301]Between July 2010 and June 2011, Colorado jails reportedholding 42 young people under age 18 in 7 jails for an average period of 116days.[302] Jailofficials in Denver, El Paso, and Adams counties reported that youth are subjectto the same disciplinary rules as adults when confined in their facilities.[303]Officials in El Paso and Denver Counties told Human Rights Watch that youngpeople under age 18 can be sentenced to time in segregation for disciplinaryinfractions, during which they are permitted out of their cell for one houreach day.[304] Suchconditions constitute solitary confinement.Colorado PrisonsThe Colorado Department of Corrections (CO DOC) holds youngpeople who are convicted of criminal offenses and sentenced while under age 18.Youth and adults under age 21 who have been sentenced as “youthfuloffenders” are detained in the Youthful Offender System (YOS); someyouth—including many of those sentenced for particularly seriousoffenses—are held in mainline prisons.[305] Thereis no prohibition in state law against holding youth in solitary confinement inColorado prisons. While the CO DOC code of penal discipline does provide forconsideration of “mitigating factors” in findings of guilt forpurposes of disciplinary segregation, it does not require consideration of age,mental disability, or other special needs, in evaluating guilt or in assessingsanctions.[306]CO DOC officials reported that, while they sometimes try to avoid placing youngpeople in punitive solitary confinement, it is still used as a sanction.[307]Regarding YOS, officials reported:We do everything we can not to placeyoung offenders in solitary confinement or disciplinary segregation. At YOS, wehave the code of penal discipline available to us. But we have trained ourstaff to go to immediate sanctions, logical sanctions, immediate andprogrammatic sanctions. What we have found is that if you address the issueimmediately and if the consequence is immediate, we can change behavior. Wehave focused a lot on that with our younger offenders. Topunish—certainly there is a need to punish. The longest time we can putsomeone in segregation is 60 days for a class 1 offense. We try not to use it;there are reviews every 28 days. The goal is to get them back to programming.[308]Research FindingsColorado JailsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed or corresponded with 15 young people who reported being held inprotective solitary confinement while in pre-trial detention in Colorado jails.A number of those young people reported spending the significantperiods—or the entire period of their pre-trial detention—inprotective solitary confinement. Ten young people said they had spent fivemonths or longer in protective solitary confinement while under age 18. HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union interviewed three youngpeople who reported being held in punitive solitary confinement while inpre-trial detention in Colorado jails. Two of those young people said theyspent more than one period in punitive solitary confinement of 15 days or more.Young people held in solitary confinement in Colorado jailsgenerally described being allowed out of their cell one hour each day into aday room or common space, generally alone, during which they could shower andsometimes make phone calls to loved ones. Young people reported being able toreceive visits from loved ones, but four young people told us they were unable tohave contact visits. Three young people said they were unable to access anyreading materials and one youth reported being unable to access writingmaterials in his or her cell while in solitary confinement. Three young peoplesaid they had considered suicide; two reported having attempted suicide whilein solitary confinement.Colorado PrisonsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed or corresponded with nine young people who reported being held inpunitive or administrative solitary confinement while in state prison inColorado. A number of those young people told us they had spent significantperiods in administrative solitary confinement, with three young peoplereporting having spent four months or longer in administrative solitaryconfinement while under age 18. Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union interviewed six young people who told us they were held inpunitive solitary confinement while in Colorado prisons. Three of those youngpeople reported spending more than one period in punitive solitary confinementof 20 days or more.Young people held in solitary confinement in Coloradoprisons while under age 18 generally described being allowed out of their cellone hour each day, generally into an indoor recreation room, and beingpermitted a daily shower. Young people reported being able to receivenon-contact visits from loved ones. One young person told us he or she wasclassified directly into long-term solitary confinement while under age 18; othersreported beginning periods of administrative solitary confinement while underage 18 that continued for many years. Young people in long-term administrativesolitary confinement said they were never permitted outdoors.Avenues for ReformIn spite of these challenges, the legal and policy landscapein Colorado is shifting in a positive direction. In 2012, Colorado enactedlegislation requiring that youth charged as if adults be held in juvenilefacilities, unless a judge orders otherwise.[309] Thestate has not yet reported on how this has affected the population of youth inadult facilities. The director of the CO DOC has also ordered a review of thosein prolonged solitary confinement in prison, resulting in a significantreduction of numbers held.[310] The CODOC acknowledges that youth are different, and has signaled openness toadditional reform:The challenge for us is, as we manage [inmates] when theyare younger, how do we manage them … in a way that takes intoconsideration where they are at in terms of their age, their impulsivity, theirmental health issues.… Our true goal is to manage inmates so they behavedifferently because 97 percent are going to walk out the door and besomebody’s next door neighbor.… If I had a wish list, it would beto have the flexibility to have more intensive case management, mental health,and other programming to keep [youth] engaged in something that can buildpositive self-esteem and positive values. At that young age, it is important todevelop a positive view and see a light at the end of the tunnel.[311]To continue down the road toreform, Colorado must ensure that young people under age 18 are never subjectedto solitary confinement in jails or in prisons.[312]Click to expand ImageHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union havefound that some Florida jails and prisons use solitary confinement to manageyoung people under age 18 in a range of circumstances. Human Rights Watch andthe American Civil Liberties Union corresponded with and interviewed 38individuals who had been subjected to solitary confinement while under age 18in jails in Bay, Citrus, Clay, Duval, Escambia, Highlands, Hillsboro, Jackson,Lee, Leon, Miami, Okaloosa, Okeechobee, Orange, Palm Beach, Pinellas, Polk, andSt. Lucie Counties; and in a number of state prisons. Though not investigatedby Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union, officials inAlachua, Brevard, Broward, Charlotte, Collier, Franklin, Gadsen, Hamilton,Hernando, Lake, Levy, Manatee, Marion, Monroe, Osceola, Pasco, Putnam, Volusia,Walton, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, and Wakulla Counties have reporteddetaining young people under age 18 in the last six years.[313]Human Right Watch also interviewed or corresponded with jail and prisonofficials in the state.The Law and Policy LandscapeFlorida law and policy governing jails and prisons permitholding young people in various forms of prolonged isolation or segregationthat can constitute solitary confinement.[314]Florida JailsBy statute, young people under age 18 charged as if adults mustbe held in adult jails.[315] Thestate requires that young people held in adult jails be prevented from havingsight and sound contact with adults and be held in a separate section of thejail.[316] Arecent legal change, signed into law in 2011, also allows young people underage 18 not charged as if adults to be held in Florida jails, though fewjails have yet to exercise this authority.[317] Butthere is no prohibition in state law against holding young people in solitaryconfinement in adult jails.[318]In January 2012, Florida jails reported holding 579 youngpeople under age 18 statewide.[319] Jailofficials in Hernando, Pinellas, and St. Lucie counties reported that youth aresubject to the same disciplinary rules as adults when confined in theirfacilities.[320]Officials in Duval county told Human Rights Watch that young people under age18 can be sentenced to time in segregation for disciplinary infractions, duringwhich they are permitted out of their cell for less than two hours each day.[321]Such conditions constitute solitary confinement.Florida PrisonsThe Florida Department of Corrections (FL DOC) holds youngpeople who have been convicted of criminal offenses and sentenced while underage 18. Youth and adults under age 21 who have been sentenced or designated as“youthful offenders” are detained in the youthful offenderfacilities (where young people and adults under age 19 are separated from olderyouthful offenders); some youth—including many of those sentenced forparticularly serious offenses—are held in mainline prisons.[322]In fiscal year 2010-2011, the FL DOC reported holding 276 young people underage 18 (although 398 young people under age 18 were admitted to FL DOC custody)and 1,640 youthful offenders; the youngest was 14 years old and serving asentence for robbery with a gun or deadly weapon.[323]There is no prohibition in state law or FL DOC policies or regulations againstholding young people in solitary confinement in Florida prisons.FL DOC officials reported that both youthful offenders andnon-youthful offenders can be placed in confinement, including for disciplinaryand other management purposes.[324]Inmates in FL DOC custody who are held in disciplinary confinement (DC) oradministrative confinement (AC) are entitled out of their cell three times perweek to take a shower and—but only after thirty days—anadditional three hours per week to exercise.[325]Inmates in “Close Management, Level I” status (CM-1) are entitledout of their cell three times per week to take a shower and an additional sixhours per week to exercise.[326]Conditions in AC, DC, and CM-1 constitute solitary confinement. FL DOCofficials confirmed that there are no differencesbetween the disciplinary rules for managing the behavior of young people underage 18 and those for managing the behavior of adults over age 18; that thereare no age-specific limits on the use of close management, AC, or DC for youngpeople under age 18; and that there are no restrictions on housing young peoplealone in AC, DC, or close management in DOC facilities.[327]Research FindingsFlorida JailsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed or corresponded with four young people who reported being held inprotective solitary confinement while in pre-trial detention in Florida jails.All of these young people reported spending three or more months in protectivesolitary confinement while under age 18. Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union interviewed 21 young people who reported being held inpunitive solitary confinement while in pre-trial detention in Florida jails.Seven of those young people said they spent more than one period in punitivesolitary confinement of 15 days at a time or longer. Fourteen young peoplereported being held in administrative solitary confinement, generally whenaccused of committing a disciplinary infraction, while in pre-trial detentionin Florida jails. Five young people reported spending one or more period inmedical solitary confinement, three of them after they attempted or spoke abouthaving considered attempting suicide.Young people held in solitary confinement in Florida jailsgenerally described being allowed out of their cell one hour each day, or fortwo hours, two or three times per week. Generally, young people were permittedto shower regularly and sometimes make phone calls to loved ones. Ten youngpeople described spending a period of time in solitary confinement during whichthey were only allowed out of their cell for showers; seven reported beingunable to call or visit with loved ones. Seven young people said they spent aperiod in solitary confinement during which they were unable to access anyreading or writing materials in their cell. Four young people said they hadattempted suicide while in solitary confinement.Florida PrisonsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed or corresponded with six young people who reported being held inadministrative solitary confinement while under age 18 in state prison inFlorida. Three of those young people reported having spent three months orlonger in administrative solitary confinement (in either CM-1 and AC status)while under age 18. Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed six young people who told us they were held in punitive solitaryconfinement while in Florida prisons. Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union also interviewed seven young people who told us they spent timein DC with a cell-mate.[328]Young people in solitary confinement in Florida prisonsreported spending prolonged periods (sometimes longer than 30 days) without anyout-of-cell exercise. Those who did get out-of-cell exercise described beingable to exercise alone in a small fenced-in area.Young people reported being able to shower regularly, butnot every day. Some young people under age 18 with intellectual disabilitiesreported receiving in-cell study packets; other young people under age 18reported receiving no educational programming while in solitary confinement.Click to expand ImageHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionhave found that some Michigan jails and prisons use solitary confinement todetain and manage young people under age 18 in a range of circumstances. HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union corresponded with orinterviewed 15 individuals who reported being subjected to one or more periodsof solitary confinement while under age 18 in jails in Berrien, Calhoun,Ingham, Kent, Oakland, Wayne, and Saginaw counties; and in a number of stateprisons. Though not investigated by Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union, officials in Alcona, Bay, Branch, Cass, Clinton, Genesee,Jackson, Kalamazoo, Macomb, Roscommon, Washtenaw, and Wexford Counties havereported detaining young people under age 18 in the last six years.[329]Human Right Watch also interviewed or corresponded with state jail and prisonofficials.The Law and Policy LandscapeMichigan law and policy governing jails and prisons permitholding young people in various forms of prolonged isolation or segregationthat can constitute solitary confinement.[330]Michigan JailsMost Michigan young people under age 18 who are charged asif adults are treated this way because criminal majority begins at 17 (althoughyounger young people can also be charged as adults).[331]Young people under age 17 may be detained in adult jails with thepermission of the county sheriff (this includes both young people charged as ifadults and, for up to 30 days, certain juvenile delinquents who violateprobation).[332] Thestate requires that young people under age 17 held in adult jails be heldphysically separate from 17 year olds and adults.[333]But there is no prohibition in state law against holding young people insolitary confinement in adult jails.[334]Jail officials in Bay, Benzie, Cass, Cheboygan, Gladwin,Houghton, Lapeer, and Oakland counties reported that young people under age 18are subject to the same disciplinary rules as adults when confined in theirfacilities.[335]Officials in Cheboygan, Gladwin, Houghton, Muskegon, and St. Joseph countiestold Human Rights Watch that young people under age 18 can be sentenced to timein segregation for disciplinary infractions, during which they are permittedout of their cell for less than two hours each day.[336]Officials in Oakland and Macomb counties reported that while young people age17 are housed with adults, young people under age 17 are generally held inmedical cells to keep them separate from adults; officials in Oakland Countyreported that such young people spend less than two hours per day outside oftheir cell.[337] Suchconditions constitute solitary confinement.Michigan PrisonsThe Michigan Department of Corrections (MI DOC) holds youngpeople who are convicted of criminal offenses and sentenced while under age 18.Young people and adults between age 17 and 20 can be sentenced as“youthful trainees,” except those who commit certain, generallyserious, offenses.[338] Bypolicy, young people under age 17 and youthful trainees are held in specializedfacilities (either at the Thumb Correctional Facility or the Women’sHuron Valley Correctional Facility).[339] Youngpeople under age 17 are, to the extent practicable, kept sight and soundseparated from 17 year olds and adults.[340]However, the department can designate any young person under age 18 for housingand placement at a mainline prison (including if the person is deemed to pose arisk to others, or if requires psychiatric care).[341]There is no prohibition in state law or MI DOC policies or regulations againstholding young people in solitary confinement in Michigan prisons.MI DOC officials declined to comment on MI DOC disciplinarypolicies with regard to young people under age 18, though the officials didindicate that the MI DOC classification system does not consider age as afactor in inmate classification.[342]Inmates in MI DOC custody who are held in temporary, punitive, oradministrative segregation are entitled out of their cell three times per weekto take a shower and shave and a minimum of one hour per day, five days perweek, to exercise.[343] Suchconditions constitute solitary confinement.Research FindingsMichigan JailsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed or corresponded with seven young people who reported being held inprotective solitary confinement while in pre-trial detention in Michigan jails.Five young people said they had spent two months or longer in protectivesolitary confinement while under age 18. Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union interviewed or corresponded with six young people whoreported being held in punitive solitary confinement while in pre-trialdetention in Michigan jails. Three of those young people said they spent ten daysor more in punitive solitary confinement while under age 18. One young personreported being held in administrative solitary confinement for approximatelyone month while under age 18.Young people held in solitary confinement in Michigan jailsgenerally described being allowed out of their cell one hour each day, or forone-and-a-half or two hours a few times each week, in a day room or commonspace, generally alone, during which they could shower and sometimes make phonecalls to loved ones. Young people generally reported being able to receivevisits from loved ones, but four young people told us they were unable to havecontact visits. Young people generally said they were able to access readingmaterials. One young person said he or she was only able to receive readingmaterials sent by others directly from the publisher. Two young people saidthey received a Christian bible and no other reading materials while insolitary confinement. Three young people reported receiving no educationalmaterials or programming while in solitary confinement. Two young people saidthey had considered suicide while in solitary confinement.Michigan PrisonsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed or corresponded with eight young people who reported being held insolitary confinement while in state prison in Michigan. Human Rights Watch andthe American Civil Liberties Union interviewed five young people who told usthey were held in punitive solitary confinement while in Michigan prisons. Threeof those young people reported spending more than one period in punitivesolitary confinement of one month or longer.Click to expand ImageHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionhave found that some New York jails and prisons use solitary confinement todetain and manage young people under age 18 in a range of circumstances. HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union interviewed sevenindividuals who reported being subjected to one or more periods of solitaryconfinement while under age 18 in jails at Rikers Island. Though notinvestigated by Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union,officials in Albany, Erie, Madison, Monroe, Nassau, Niagara, Onandaga, Orange,Orleans, Seneca, Steuben, Suffolk, Sullivan, Washington, and WestchesterCounties have reported detaining young people under age 18 in the last sixyears.[344] HumanRights Watch also interviewed or corresponded with state jail and prisonofficials.The Law and Policy LandscapeNew York law and policy governing jails and prisons permitholding young people in various forms of prolonged isolation or segregationthat can constitute solitary confinement.[345]New York JailsMost New York young people under age 18 who are charged asif adults are treated this way because criminal majority begins at 16 (althoughyounger adolescents can also be charged as adults).[346]Young people under age 18 who are charged as if adults can be held in adultjails.[347] Thestate requires that adolescents under age 19 held in adult jails be heldphysically separate from adults age 19 and older.[348]But there is no prohibition in state law against holding young people insolitary confinement in adult jails.[349]Between 45,000 and 50,000 young people under age 18 arearrested each year in New York and prosecuted as if adults.[350]A significant proportion of those young people are held in adult jails: in2010, 16 jails reported to the US Department of Justice that on a single day inJune, they held 942 young people; New York City alone held 786 adolescents in fiscalyear 2012.[351] Jailofficials in Erie, Fulton, Lewis, Monroe, Orange, and Rensselaer counties andin New York City reported that adolescents are subject to the same disciplinaryrules as adults when confined in their facilities.[352]Officials in Orange county and New York City told Human Rights Watch that youngpeople under age 18 can be sentenced to time in segregation for disciplinaryinfractions, during which they are permitted out of their cell for less thantwo hours each day.[353] Suchconditions constitute solitary confinement.New York PrisonsThe New York Department of Corrections and CommunitySupervision (NY DOCCS) holds young people who are convicted of criminaloffenses and sentenced while under age 18. Young people under age 18 and adultsunder age 21 in DOCCS custody are detained in specialized facilities.[354]On January 1, 2012, the NY DOCCS held 181 young people under age 18; 11 of themwere 16 years old.[355] Thereis no prohibition in state law or NY DOCCS policies or regulations against holdingyoung people in solitary confinement in New York prisons. Young people underage 18 in NY DOCCS facilities are subjected to the same disciplinary rules asadults.[356]Young people under age 18 in NY DOCCS custody can be held inSpecial Housing Units (SHUs), a form of segregated isolation, for disciplinaryor administrative purposes; however, between a third and half of all peopleheld in SHUs are held two per cell (or “double-celled”).[357]Officials confirmed that in certain circumstances, young people under age 18are held in conditions that constitute solitary confinement.[358]On January 1, 2012, the NY DOCCS held 83 young people between age 16 and 18 inSHUs.[359]Research FindingsNew York JailsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed seven young people who reported being held in solitary confinementwhile in pre-trial detention in jail in New York City. A number of thoseadolescents reported spending significant periods in punitive solitaryconfinement. Five young people said they had spent a total of longer thanthirty days in solitary confinement while under age eighteen; two of thoseadolescents said they had spent longer than six months in solitary confinement.New York City jail officials reported to Human Rights Watchthat 14.4 percent of adolescents between age 16 and 18 at Rikers Island spendat least one period of time in punitive segregation.[360]Officials also reported that in FY2012, 48 percent of all adolescents had beenidentified as having a mental disability (or “a diagnosed mentaldisorder,” as defined in the American Psychiatric Association Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders).[361]Officials confirmed that young people in punitive segregation spend less thantwo hours per day outside of their cell; thus, the practice constitutessolitary confinement.[362]Officials also provided data that shows that adolescents areheld in solitary confinement as the result of a range of disciplinaryinfractions.[363]Table 1: Infractions leading to a term of punitive segregation in NewYork CityDisciplinary InfractionPercent of Punitive Segregation TermsInvolving Each InfractionFighting resulting in injury19%Assault on inmate18%Assault on staff14%Fighting11%Contraband-weapon7%Physically resisting staff members6%Assault with a weapon3%Destruction of city property3%Making threats to staff3%Assault—spitting/throwing2%Other14%Officials provided data that suggests that adolescents aresubjected to longer periods of time in solitary confinement than adults; andgenerally spend longer than a month in solitary confinement, with someadolescents spending significantly longer periods in solitary.[364]Table 2: Time spent in punitive segregation in New York CityClick to expand ImageFinally, officials provided data that suggests thatadolescents subjected to solitary confinement are broadly representative of thegeneral population of adolescents in terms of the offense with which they arecharged.[365]Table 3: Charges of adolescents in segregation in New York City compared togeneral populationClick to expand ImageYoung people held in solitary confinement in New York Cityjails described being allowed out of their cell for one hour each day in acaged recreation area, but two young people told us that they were only allowedexercise if they woke up before breakfast and requested it. They also reportedbeing let out of their cell for a short shower once per day. Young peoplereported being able to receive regular visits from loved ones. Three youngpeople said they were able to access reading and writing materials while insolitary confinement, but that the only educational programming they werepermitted were in-cell study packets. One young person said he or she hadattempted suicide while in solitary confinement.Avenues for ReformIn spite of these challenges, the legal and policy landscapein New York is shifting in a positive direction. New York lawmakers haveintroduced legislation that would raise the age of criminal majority to 18.[366]New York City recently announced a new program that may deliver additionalservices to young people held in solitary confinement; and a new disciplinaryapproach to minor infractions, involving short-term disciplinary roomconfinement.[367] Jailofficials in Erie County and New York City have acknowledged that young peopleare different, and have signaled openness to additional reform. CaptainHartman, of Erie County, told us,[I] [c]an tell you with absolute certainty that there is apoint with everybody, but with these minors that point is much sooner, whensolitary confinement goes from being an effective management tool and goes tobeing counterproductive. And when it goes to being counterproductive, it getsvery rapidly, rapidly worse.… Teenagers live for now and today anddon’t take consequences into account. Whether it’s hormonal,emotional—regardless of the reason—fact is fact. [There] [n]eeds tobe [an] environment that understands that and takes that into account—andchannels all that stuff so it’s not coming out violently.… Inmateswho are successful in managing [their] own behavior in jail should be rewardedand provided incentives for continuing. There should be tangible consequencesfor not doing that, but something to look forward to if they do, but [by] usingdifferent amounts of privilege, living conditions, all that sort of stuff.[368]Commissioner Schriro of the NewYork City Department of Corrections told us,If you can get in quick enough, [the ideal] would be theequivalent of ‘go to your room.’ A lot of these [conflicts] startsmall. If you have one youth who is monopolizing the channel-changer [for thehousing area television], the option now [] if he does not respond is toinfract him [which results in punitive segregation]. What I prefer is ‘goto your room young man’ and then to create a mechanism forreview—so every two hours you double back and it wouldn’t go anylonger than six hours—so that it doesn’t go beyond a de facto punitivesegregation in your housing unit. So when you are ready to come out, all isforgiven.[369]To continue down the road toreform, New York must ensure that young people under age 18 are never subjectedto solitary confinement in jails or in prisons.[370]Click to expand ImageHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unionhave found that some Pennsylvania jails (also called county prisons) andprisons use solitary confinement to detain and manage young people under age 18in a range of circumstances.[371] HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union interviewed or correspondedwith 11 individuals who reported being subjected to one or more periods ofsolitary confinement while under 18 in jails in Alleghany, Dauphin, Lackawanna,Lebanon, Lehigh, and Philadelphia Counties; and in state prison. Though notinvestigated by Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union,officials in Beaver, Blair, Berks, Bucks, Carbon, Chester, Crawford,Cumberland, Delaware, Erie, Fayette, Franklin, Juniata, Lancaster, Luzerne,Monroe, Montgomery, Northampton, Schuylkill, Union, Westmoreland and York,Counties have reported detaining young people under age 18 in the last sixyears.[372] HumanRights Watch also interviewed or corresponded with state jail and prisonofficials.The Law and Policy LandscapePennsylvania law and policy governing jails and prisonspermit holding young people in various forms of prolonged isolation orsegregation that can constitute solitary confinement.[373]Pennsylvania Jails (also called county prisons)By statute, young people under age 18 charged as if adults maybe held in jails.[374] Undera legislative reform passed in 2010, young people charged as if adults can be“transferred” back into the juvenile justice system.[375]But even young people awaiting transfer may be held in adult jails. The staterequires that young people under age 18 held in adult jails be separated bysight and sound from adults.[376] Butthere is no prohibition in state law against holding young people in solitaryconfinement in adult jails.[377]Pennsylvania jails reported—in a dailysnapshot—holding 215 young people under age 18 in 66 jails on January 31,2012.[378] Jailofficials in Carbon, Chester, Clinton, and Mifflin counties reported thatadolescents are subject to the same disciplinary rules as adults when confinedin their facilities.[379]Officials in Clinton and Chester Counties told Human Rights Watch that youngpeople under age 18 can be sentenced to time in segregation for disciplinaryinfractions, during which they are permitted out of their cell for less thantwo hours each day.[380] Suchconditions constitute solitary confinement.Pennsylvania PrisonsThe Pennsylvania Department of Corrections (PA DOC) holdsyoung people who are convicted of criminal offenses and sentenced while underage 18. Young people and adults under age nineteen-and-a-half are housed atSecure Correctional Institution Pine Grove (SCI Pine Grove) when enteringdepartment custody and participate in the Young Adult Offender Program throughage 21.[381] As ofJuly 31, 2012, there were 899 inmates under age 22 at SCI Pine Grove.[382]There is no prohibition in state law or PA DOC policies or regulations againstholding young people in solitary confinement in Pennsylvania prisons.PA DOC officials reported that, while they seek to avoidplacing young people in punitive or administrative solitary confinement, youngpeople are housed in this way.[383]Officials reported that the inmates at SCI Pine Grove are held inadministrative or disciplinary confinement at high rates: “It hashistorically been about 10 percent of the population; about 4-5 percent arethose we can’t incorporate back into the population.… So thatdrives our average in the [Restrictive Housing Unit] 4-5 percent higher than[other prisons].”[384] On April30, 2012, 10.9 percent of inmates under 22 at SCI Pine Grove were held ineither administrative or disciplinary confinement.[385]However, officials report that they try to exercise their authority—whenpossible—to reduce the length of time young people spend in disciplinaryconfinement. Eric Bush, the superintendent at SCI Pine Grove, told us,The facility manager can reduce the time. And we use thattool. If we have an opportunity to reduce their DC [Disciplinary Confinement]status we try to do that. Unfortunately, some of them get into gang issues andthey can’t be put back into population. There [are] also mandatory issuesthat we can’t reduce [under the Inmate Discipline Policy]—likeassaulting a staff member.[386]Research FindingsPennsylvania Jails (also called county prisons)Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioninterviewed or corresponded with six young people who reported being held inprotective solitary confinement while in pre-trial detention in Pennsylvaniajails. Five of those young people reported spending more than a month inprotective solitary confinement. Human Rights Watch and the American CivilLiberties Union interviewed five young people who reported being held inpunitive solitary confinement while in pre-trial detention in Pennsylvaniajails. Three of those young people said they spent more than one period inpunitive solitary confinement of 15 days or more. Human Rights Watch and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union interviewed three young people who reported spendingtwo or more days in medical solitary confinement to quarantine them when theyfirst entered jail.Young people held in solitary confinement in Pennsylvaniajails generally described being allowed out of their cell one or two hours eachday into a day room or common space, generally alone, during which they couldshower and sometimes make phone calls to loved ones. Young people reportedbeing able to receive visits from loved ones, but one young person told us heor she was unable to have contact visits. Three young people said they wereunable to access any reading materials and one young person reported beingunable to access writing materials in his or her cell while in solitaryconfinement. One young person said he or she had considered suicide while insolitary confinement.Pennsylvania PrisonsHuman Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Unioncorresponded with two young people who reported being held in punitive solitaryconfinement while in state prison in Pennsylvania. One of those young peoplereported having spent eight-and-a-half months in punitive solitary confinementwhile under age 18.Pennsylvania prison regulations mandate that young people inpunitive or administrative solitary confinement receive only one hour ofrecreation each day, five days a week.[387]Officials confirmed that young people receive an in-cell study packet, meetweekly with a counselor, and with a psychological expert“regularly,” but, “other than that they are pretty much intheir cell.”[388]Avenues for ReformThe legal and policy landscape in Pennsylvania is shifting, andmust move further if it is to adequately protect young people. The 2010 reformthat permits young people charged as if adults to be transferred to thejuvenile justice system is a promising change.[389]But the state must change its approach to detaining and managing young people.Fortunately, officials within the PA DOC acknowledge that young people aredifferent, and that solitary confinement is not an effective way to manageyoung people. Eric Bush put it this way:I most definitely think there is a heightened risk foryoung adults. They are so impulsive and sometimes they “act out”out of anger rather than an intention to hurt themselves—orattention-seeking behaviors.… [Prolonged isolation] is detrimental to theyouth. Unfortunately, we have people confined.… [O]ver the years we havelearned that they don’t get anything out of that. They reallydon’t. My personal opinion is that it is a detriment to them to keep themin restrictive housing for any length of time. Unfortunately, those[Departmental rules] are the policies that guide us.… There is not enoughto be gained on an individual basis for them to prepare themselves for releasein restrictive housing.[390]To continue down the road to reform,Pennsylvania must ensure that young people under age 18 are never subjected tosolitary confinement in jails or in prisons.[391][1]In the United States, and throughout the report, the term ”jail”refers to a facility that generally holds individuals awaiting trial in thecriminal justice system or sentenced to less than a year of incarceration;“prison” refers to a facility that generally holds individualssentenced to one or more years of incarceration. This report uses variousterms, including “youth,” “teenagers,”“children,” “young people,” and“adolescents,” interchangeably to refer to youth under the age of18. Throughout the report, the term “solitary confinement” is usedto describe physical and social isolation for 22 to 24 hours per day and forone or more days, regardless of the purpose for which it is imposed. Whilesolitary confinement is apparently used in juvenile facilities on occasion,this report focuses only on its use in adult jails and prisons.[2]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with the Ohio Department ofRehabilitation and Corrections, January 10, 2012.[3]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with the Ohio Department ofRehabilitation and Corrections, March 9, 2012.[4]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with the Wisconsin Department ofCorrections, March 5, 2012.[5]Even when youth crime rates were at their highest, in the early 1990s, judicialwaiver never exceeded 2 percent of all delinquency cases. United States GeneralAccounting Office, “Juvenile Justice: Juveniles Processed in CriminalCourt and Case Dispositions,” August 1995, http://www.gao.gov/assets/230/221507.pdf[6]Many commentators warned against the rise of the so-called“‘super-predator” youth. John DiIulio, How to Stop theComing Crime Wave (New York: Manhattan Institute, 1996), p. 1. The analysisof data on crime rates is complicated. See, for example, James P. Lynch, Officeof Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, US Department of Justice,“Trends in Juvenile Violent Offending: An Analysis of Victim SurveyData,” October 2002, https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/191052.pdf(accessed June 7, 2012).[7]For more information about the variety of mechanisms to try youth, see Officeof Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, US Department of Justice, 1999National Report Series, “Challenging the Myths,” https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/178993.pdf.[8]“P.A. Legislature: House to Weigh Bill on Violence,” TheVindicator, October 24, 1995. In the summer of 1993, for example, Coloradolegislators wrote, debated, and passed a broad overhaul of criminal laws injust 10 days during an extraordinary session, and radically transformed thestate’s criminal justice system as it related to youth. This was dubbedthe “summer of violence.” “Young Guns: Growing Number ofStates Get Tough,” Associated Press, October 21, 1993; “Summer ofViolence Leaves Denver Demanding Answers,” Associated Press, July 29,1993. Wisconsin and New Hampshire lowered the upper age of juvenile courtjurisdiction, deeming adulthood to begin at 17, not 18, for purposes ofcriminal prosecution. Patricia Torbet et al., Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, US Department of Justice, “Juveniles FacingCriminal Sanctions: Three States that Changed the Rules,” April 2000, https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/181203.pdf(accessed June 7, 2012), pp. xi-xii. By 1997, all states but three (Nebraska,New York, and Vermont) had changed their laws to make it easier and more likelythat child offenders would stand trial and be sentenced in adult criminalcourts. Howard N. Snyder and Melissa Sickmund, Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, US Department of Justice, “Juvenile Offenders andVictims: 1999 National Report,” September 1999, http://www.ncjrs.org/html/ojjdp/nationalreport99/toc.htmlp. 15.[9]Patrick Griffin et al., Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention,US Department of Justice, “Trying Juveniles As Adults: An Analysis ofState Transfer Laws and Reporting,” September 2011, https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/232434.pdf(accessed June 7, 2012). Offense-based exclusion laws subject youth to theoriginal jurisdiction of the adult criminal justice system on the basis of thecharged offense (sometimes but not always with an additional age minimum). Forexample, Pennsylvania charges all homicide cases in adult criminal court,regardless of the age of the offender. Prosecutorial direct-file laws usuallygive charging officials the (sometimes unlimited) discretion to decide whetherto file charges in juvenile court or in adult court (sometimes with agerestrictions). Colorado recently raised the age minimum for direct-fileeligible offenses (such as homicide) from 14 to 16, but other states, such asFlorida, have no minimum age for a broad range of offenses. Finally, in somestates, like Florida, once a youth has been convicted of an offense in adultcriminal court, all subsequent offenses (even minor ones) are treated as ifcommitted by an adult; for many offenses over which the juvenile court retainsoriginal jurisdiction, states have reduced the discretion of judges to preventthe case from being transferred to adult court.[10]Pennsylvania just created an avenue to transfer youth back to the juvenilejustice system; Michigan allows “blended” sentencing of youth.[11]Campaign for Youth Justice, “Jailing Juveniles: The Dangers ofIncarcerating Youth in Adult Jails in America,” November 2007,http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/CFYJNR_JailingJuveniles.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), pp. 20-21.[12]Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, The Rest of Their Lives,p.5.[13]Alex R. Piquero, “Disproportionate Minority Contact,” The Futureof Children, vol. 18, no.2 (2008), p. 66, citing National Council on Crimeand Delinquency, And Justice for Some: Differential Treatment of Youth ofColor in the Justice System (Oakland: National Council on Crime andDelinquency, 2007); Neelum Arya and Ian Augarten, Campaign for Youth Justice,“Critical Condition: African-American Youth in the Justice System,”September 2008, http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/CFYJPB_CriticalCondition.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[14]Piquero, “Disproportionate Minority Contact,” The Future ofChildren, p. 62, citing National Council on Crime and Delinquency, AndJustice for Some: Differential Treatment of Youth of Color in the JusticeSystem.[15]Human Rights Watch, The Price of Freedom: Bail and Pretrial Detention of LowIncome Nonfelony Defendants in New York City, December 3, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/us1210webwcover_0.pdf,p. 20.[16]Ibid., p. 48.[17]As Human Rights Watch has documented elsewhere, some youth convicted of felonymurder serving life without parole played a minor role in the crime. Indeed, insome jurisdictions, as many as half of youth offenders serving life withoutparole were convicted without having physically committed the underlyingoffense. See Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, The Rest of TheirLives: Life without Parole for Child Offenders in the United States,October 12, 2005, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/10/11/rest-their-lives-0, pp.27-28.[18]A total list of crimes of conviction for these  five youth (some of whomwere convicted of a combination of these offenses) include burglary, grandtheft, property damage/criminal mischief, attempted armed burglary, drugpossession, and possession of a concealed weapon.[19]Human Rights Watch has documented the broad failure of adult jails and prisons(as well as shortcomings in the US juvenile justice system) to care for youthand other vulnerable populations, such as the elderly or persons with mental orintellectual disabilities. For examples see: Human Rights Watch, No MinorMatter: Children in Maryland’s Jails, November 1, 1999, http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/1999/maryland/;Human Rights Watch and American Civil Liberties Union, Custody and Control:Conditions of Confinement in New York’s Juvenile Prisons for Girls,September 25, 2006, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/us0906webwcover.pdf;Human Rights Watch, The Rest of Their Lives: Life without Parole for ChildOffenders in the United States, October 11, 2005, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/TheRestofTheirLives.pdf;Human Rights Watch, No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, April 1, 2001,http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2001/prison/report.html;Human Rights Watch, Old Behind Bars: The Aging Prison Population in theUnited States, January 28, 2012, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/usprisons0112webwcover_0.pdf;Human Rights Watch and American Civil Liberties Union, Deportation ByDefault: Mental Disability, Unfair Hearings, and Indefinite Detention in the USImmigration System, July 25, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/usdeportation0710webwcover_1_0.pdf;Human Rights Watch, Against All Odds: Prison Conditions for Youth OffendersServing Life without Parole Sentences in the United States, January 4,2012, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/us0112ForUpload_1.pdf.[20]Laurence Steinberg et al., “The Study of Developmental Psychopathology inAdolescence: Integrating Affective Neuroscience with the Study ofContext,” in Dante Cicchetti and Donald Cohen, eds., DevelopmentalPsychopathology (Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, 2006), p. 710.[21]Sedra Spano, Research Facts and Findings, ACT for Youth Upstate Center forExcellence, “Stages of Adolescent Development,” 2004, http://www.actforyouth.net/resources/rf/rf_stages_0504.pdf; National Institutes of Health,Medline Plus, “Adolescent Development,” http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/002003.htm.[22]American Academy of Pediatrics, “Recommendations for Preventive PediatricCare,” 2000, http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/105/3/645.full.pdf+html. The Academy also has issued a detailed set ofguidelines for addressing physical and mental health in the context ofdetention in juvenile facilities. American Academy of Pediatrics, PolicyStatement, “Healthcare for Youth in the Juvenile Justice System,”2011, http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/128/6/1219.full.pdf+html.[23]American Academy of Pediatrics, “Bright Futures: Guidelines for HealthSupervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents,” 2008, http://brightfutures.aap.org/pdfs/Guidelines_PDF/1-BF-Introduction.pdf.[24]National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health,“Teenage Brain: A Work in Progress,” 2001,http://wwwapps.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/teenage-brain-a-work-in-progress.shtml(accessed November 25, 2007).[25]Steinberg et al., “The Study of Development Psychopathology inAdolescence,” p. 710.[26]Jay N. Giedd, “Structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the AdolescentBrain,” Annals of the New York Academy of Science, vol. 1021 (2004), p. 83.[27]Ibid.[28]Steinberg et al., “The Study of Development Psychopathology inAdolescence,” p. 710.[29]Campaign for Youth Justice, “Jailing Juveniles,” pp. 20-21.[30]Ibid.[31]Wis. Stat. Ann. § 938.18(8) (“When waiver is granted, the juvenile,if held in secure custody, shall be transferred to an appropriate officer oradult facility”); 938.183(1m) (providing for the detention in adultfacilities of youth subject to original criminal jurisdiction); 938.209(3). Butsee Wis. Stat. Ann. § 938.183(1m) (“If the juvenile is under 15years of age, the juvenile may be held in secure custody only in a juveniledetention facility or in the juvenile section of a county jail.”).[32]Michigan’s Code of Criminal Procedure, Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. §764.27a(3); Ohio’s Revised Code, Rev. Code Ann. § 2152.26(f)(1).[33]Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. § 764.27a(3); Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Ann Russell, Corrections Administrator, Oakland County, Michigan, March23, 2012; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with  Michelle M. Sanborn,Jail Administrator, Macomb County, Michigan, March 9, 2012.[34]Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act, 42 USC 5633(a)(11).[35]Status offenses are those that are based solely on a person’s age at thetime of certain conduct, such as a curfew violation.[36]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Elissa Rumsey, ComplianceCoordinator, US Department of Justice Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, June 28, 2012; Substantive Requirements, Code ofFederal Regulations, 28 CFR 31.303(d)(1)(i).[37]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Elissa Rumsey, June 28, 2012;Definitions, US Code, 42 USC 5602 (26) (“the term ‘adultinmate’ means an individual who (A) has reached the age of full criminalresponsibility under applicable State law; and (B) has been arrested and is incustody for or awaiting trial on a criminal charge, or is convicted of acriminal charge offense”).[38]As noted above, in most states those sentenced to less than one year ofincarceration often serve out their sentences in jails.[39]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eric Bush, Superintendent, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,Pine Grove, Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012.[40]Youthful Offenders, Florida Statute, Title 47, Ch. 958. 03-04, http://www.flsenate.gov/Laws/Statutes/2012/Chapter958/All.[41]Federal Bureau of Prisons, “Statement of Work, Contract Secure JuvenileFacility,” amended February 2004, revised July 2011,http://www.bop.gov/locations/cc/SOW_Secure_Juvie.pdf (accessed August 27,2012).[42]In 2005, for example, youth under the age of 18 made up less than 1 percent ofall inmates in US jails, yet comprised 21 percent of all victims ofsubstantiated incidents of sexual abuse involving inmates. National Prison RapeElimination Commission, “National Prison Rape Elimination CommissionReport,” June 2009, https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/226680.pdf (accessedAugust 27, 2012), p. 42, citing Howard N. Snyder and Melissa Sickmund, Officeof Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, US Department of Justice, Juvenileoffenders and victims: 2006 National report (Washington, D.C.: USDepartment of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, 2006) and Allen J. Beck andPaige M. Harrison, Bureau of Justice Statistics, US Department of Justice,“Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2008-09,”August 2010, http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri0809.pdf (accessedAugust 27, 2012). Youth under 20 experience the highest rates of sexual abuseby staff of any prison age demographic, and the highest rates of sexual abuseby other inmates of any jail age demographic. Beck and Harrison, “SexualVictimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2008-2009”; Incontrast, approximately 2.6 percent of youth in juvenile facilities reported asexual incident involving another youth, while 10.3 percent reported anincident involving facility staff. Allen J. Beck, Paige M. Harrison and PaulGuerino, Bureau of Justice Statistics, US Department of Justice, “SexualVictimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 2008-2009,”January 2010, http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/svjfry09.pdf (accessedAugust 27, 2012), p. 1 (analyzing statistics gathered by the Bureau of JusticeStatistics).[43]Jeffrey Fagan, Martin Forst, and T. Scott Vivona, “Youth in Prisons andTraining Schools: Perceptions and Consequences of the Treatment-CustodyDichotomy,” Juvenile and Family Court, vol. 40 (1989), p. 9. Seealso Jason Ziedenberg andVincent Schiraldi, “The Risks Juveniles FaceWhen They Are Incarcerated with Adults,” Justice Policy Institute,July 1997, http://www.justicepolicy.org/images/upload/97-02_REP_RiskJuvenilesFace_JJ.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[44]Fagan, Forst, and Vivona, “Youth in Prisons and Training Schools,” Juvenileand Family Court, p. 10.[45]Robert Hahn et al., Centers for Disease Control, “Effects on Violence ofLaws and Policies Facilitating the Transfer of Youth from the Juvenile to theAdult Justice System: A Report on Recommendations of the Task Force onCommunity Preventive Services,” vol. 56, no. RR-9, November 30, 2007,http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5609a1.htm (accessed August 27,2012).[46]UN Human Rights Council, Interim Report of the Special Rapporteur on tortureand other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Juan Mendez,U.N. G.A. Doc. A/66/268, August 5, 2011,http://daccess-ddsny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/445/70/PDF/N1144570.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 27, 2012). Jail and prison officials do not generally use theterm “solitary confinement” to refer to the range of segregationand isolation practices they employ to manage inmates. They are correct innoting that conditions are not exactly like those used in the earliestfacilities to employ the practice. But because the conditions and effects ofvarious segregation practices are substantially the same, Human Rights Watchand the American Civil Liberties Union use a single definition based on thedegree of deprivation. At the same time, this report’s focus on solitaryconfinement should not be read to endorse segregation and isolation practicesthat do not fit this definition. Any use of physical and social isolation,including if it is for a shorter duration, can raise serious human rightsconcerns. The same is true for the practice of holding two inmates inconditions that would otherwise constitute solitary confinement (Human RightsWatch and mental health professionals have raised serious concerns about thispractice). Similarly, this report’s focus on youth under age 18 shouldnot be read to minimize the developmental differences between, for example, an18 or a 24 year old and a 40 year old, and the corresponding vulnerability tosolitary confinement.[47]Solitary confinement in general has a long history, and Human Rights Watch hasdone extensive research on the isolated—and solitary—confinement ofadults. See, for example: Written Statement from Human Rights Watch to theSenate Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on the Constitution, CivilRights, and Human Rights, “US: Look Critically at WidespreadUse of Solitary Confinement,” June 2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/18/us-look-critically-widespread-use-solitary-confinement.The earliest form of solitary confinement involved complete isolation,including hooding prisoners, so that during their incarceration inmates neversaw (and rarely heard) another human being. Stuart Grassian, “PsychiatricEffects of Solitary Confinement,” Journal of Law and Policy, vol.22 (2006), p. 340. Such complete isolation fell out of favor as a jail orprison management technique for many decades, but a range of similar practicesare now used worldwide. Interim Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture andother cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Juan Mendez, August5, 2011.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Molly J. (pseudonym), Michigan, March 2012.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Henry R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[50]A detailed description of the use of isolation in juvenile facilities can alsobe found in Sandra Simkins et al., “The Harmful Use of Isolation inJuvenile Facilities: The Need for Post-Disposition Representation,” WashingtonUniversity Journal of Law and Policy, vol. 38 (2012), http://digitalcommons.law.wustl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1019&context=wujlp(accessed September 26, 2012).[51]The Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative suggests that best practices forjuvenile facilities include prohibiting room confinement as a response to currentacting out behavior in excess of four hours and prohibiting disciplinary roomconfinement in excess of 72 hours. “Juvenile Detention AlternativesInitiative (JDAI) Facility Site Assessment Instrument,” May 2006, http://www.cclp.org/documents/Conditions/JDAI%20Standards.pdf. The American Bar Association TaskForce on Youth in the Adult Criminal Justice System proposed that roomconfinement for any purpose should never exceed ten days. American BarAssociation (ABA), Youth in the Criminal Justice System: Guidelines forPolicy Makers and Practitioners (American Bar Association, 2001), http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/natlres/ABA%20-%20Youth%20in%20the%20Criminal%20Justice%20System%20Guidelines%20for%20Policymakers.pdf. The 1980 American BarAssociation Guidelines for Juvenile Facilities suggests that best practices forjuvenile facilities should include limiting room confinement for suicide riskor protective custody to eight hours; and limiting disciplinary confinement tofive days for minor infractions and ten days for major infractions.[52]California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation: Office of Audits andCourt Compliance, “Review of Identified Concerns: Ventura YouthCorrectional Facility,” March 2011, https://s3.amazonaws.com/s3.documentcloud.org/documents/203430/djj-audit.pdf.[53]Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union, Custody andControl, pp. 105 - 113.[54]Mental health problems refers to a broad spectrum of mental, behavioral, oremotional symptoms described by youth, including both youth with and withoutidentified mental disabilities, as well as experiences and symptoms that may bedue to psychological immaturity.[55]Craig Haney, “Mental Health Issues in Long-Term Solitary and‘Supermax’ Confinement,” Crime & Delinquency, vol.49, no.1 (2003), pp. 124-156; Holly A. Miller and Glenn R. Young, “PrisonSegregation: Administrative Detention Remedy orMental Health Problem?” CriminalBehaviour and Mental Health, vol. 7, no. 1 (1997), p. 85; Hans Toch, Mosaicof Despair: Human Breakdown in Prison (Washington DC: AmericanPsychological Association, 1992); Richard Korn, “The Effects ofConfinement in the High Security Unit at Lexington,” Social Justice,vol. 15, no. 1 (1988), p. 8; Stanley L. Brodsky and Forrest R. Scogin,“Inmates in Protective Custody: First Data on Emotional Effects,” ForensicReports, vol. 1, no. 4 (1988), p. 267; Stuart Grassian,“Psychopathological Effects of Solitary Confinement,” AmericanJournal of Psychiatry, vol. 140 (1983), p. 1450.[56]The results of and debate regarding a one-year longitudinal study in Coloradosuggest the complexities inherent in measuring and understanding thepsychological effects of solitary confinement. Maureen L. O’Keefe et al.,Colorado Department of Corrections, “One Year Longitudinal Study of thePsychological Effects of Administrative Segregation,” October 31, 2010,https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/232973.pdf (accessed August 27,2012); Peter Scharff Smith, National Institute of Corrections, “Theeffects of solitary confinement: Commentary on One Year Longitudinal Study ofthe Psychological Effects of Administrative Segregation,” June 2011, www.community.nicic.gov/cfs-filesystemfile.ashx/_key/CommunityServer.CommunityServer.Components.PostAttachments/00.00.05.95.22/Supermax-_2D00_-T-_2S00_-Smith.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012). In addition to increased mental health problemsgenerally, suicide rates and incidents of self-harm are much higher forprisoners in solitary confinement. In California, for example, although lessthan 10 percent of the state’s prison population was held in isolation unitsin 2004, those units accounted for 73 percent of all suicides. Expert Report ofProfessor Craig Haney at 45-46, n. 119, Coleman v. Schwarzenegger/ Plata v.Schwarzenegger, Eastern Federal District Court of California/NorthernFederal District Court of California, 2008 (Civ S 90-0520 LKK-JFM P, C01-1351THE (E.D. Cal/N.D. Cal. 2008)).[57]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Louis Kraus, Chief of Child andAdolescent Psychiatry, Rush University Medical Center, and Co-Chair of theAmerican Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Committee on JuvenileJustice Reform, June 14, 2012; with Richard Barnum, forensic childpsychiatrist, May 30, 2012; and with Deborah DePrato, Director, Institute forPublic Health and Justice, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,and Associate Clinical Professor, School of Public Health, June 6, 2012.[58]Congressional Quarterly, “Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitution,Civil Rights, and Human Rights Holds Hearing on Reassessing SolitaryConfinement,” June 19, 2012,http://solitarywatch.files.wordpress.com/2012/06/transcript-of-the-hearing.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), panel 1, transcript (“We would say thatindividuals placed in restricted housing, I would say the stress level isobviously higher.”).[59]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Louis Kraus, June 14, 2012.[60]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Deborah DePrato, June 6, 2012.[61]Human Rights Watch interview with Alyssa E. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Carter P. (pseudonym), Michigan, March 2012.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Jordan E. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Marvin Q. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Phillip J. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[66]Human Rights Watch interview with Rafael O. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Effie H. (pseudonym), Florida, April 20,2012.[68]Human Rights Watch interview with Isaac P. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012.[69]Interview with Jacob L. (pseudonym), New York, April 2012.[70]Interview with Alex A. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[71]Letter from Kyle B. (pseudonym), from California, to Human Rights Watch, May 3,2012.[72]Human Rights Watch interview with Mason P. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with a Philadelphia County Prison (jail) Official,Pennsylvania, February 23, 2012.[74]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Cheryl Wills, independentmedical evaluator and director of child and adolescent psychiatric services,Case Western Reserve University, Ohio, May 24, 2012.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Henry R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[76]Summer J. Robins, Candice L. Odgers, and Michael A. Russell,“Incarcerated Girls’ Physical Health: Can the Juvenile JusticeSystem Help to Reduce Long-Term Health Costs,” Court Review, vol.46 (2009), http://aja.ncsc.dni.us/publications/courtrv/cr46-1and2/CR46-1-2Robins.pdf; Bruce Jacobs, New Mexico StateUniversity, “Adolescents and Self-Cutting (Self-Harm): Information forParents, Guide I-104,” June 2005, aces.nmsu.edu/pubs/_i/i-104.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012). Researchers in the United Kingdom found that whilewomen make up approximately 5 percent of the prison population in the UK, theyaccount for 52 percent of reported incidents of self-harm. SP Inquiry,“An independent public inquiry into the treatment of young women incustody,” http://www.howardleague.org/self-injury/ (accessed August 27,2012).[77]Human Rights Watch interview with Melanie H. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Alyssa E. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[79]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Deborah DePrato, Louisiana, June 6,2012.[80]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Lindsay Hayes, Project Director,National Center on Institutions and Alternatives, Massachusetts, June 13, 2012.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Paul K. (pseudonym), Michigan, March 2012.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz M. (pseudonym), New York, April 2012.[83]Media reports discuss at least six suicides ofyouth under 18 in solitary confinement in adult jails or prisons in recentyears, including James Stewart (Colorado):HectorGutierrez, “Family sues city for $5 million in teen's jail death:They say their son fought depression after fatal crash,” RockyMountain News, November 25, 2008,http://m.rockymountainnews.com/news/2008/nov/25/family-sues-city-5-million-troubled-teens-suicide/,Joseph Boven, “Colorado criminally failing youthsuspects,” The Colorado Independent, March 10, 2010,http://coloradoindependent.com/48181/colorado-criminally-failing-youth-suspects;Robert Borrego, Jr. (Colorado): Jeff Tucker, “Kin of teen suicide victimsue Pueblo County sheriff,” The Pueblo Chieftain, July 10, 2010,http://www.chieftain.com/news/local/article_8eb6efbc-8bf6-11df-b7e2-001cc4c03286.html;Jonathan McLard (Missouri): Orlando Campbell, The W. Haywood Burns Institutefor Juvenile Justice Fairness & Equity, “A Son's Suicide InspiresMother To Fight For Juvenile Justice,” April 26, 2010, http://www.burnsinstitute.org/article.php?id=216,Bridget DiCosmo, “Tracy McClard given award by Campaign for Youth Justiceand the National Juvenile Justice Network,” Southeast Missourian,May 5, 2009, http://www.semissourian.com/story/1536332.html;Kirk Gunderson (Wisconsin): Jo Anne Killeen, “Onalaska mother stillpushing on juveniles in jail issue,” Onalaska Holmen Currier News,July 7, 2011, http://lacrossetribune.com/courierlifenews/news/local/article_fbe60666-a8c6-11e0-88a4-001cc4c002e0.html;Rodney Hulin (Texas): Testimony of Ms. Linda Bruntmyer, Hearing before theSenate Judiciary Committee on The Prison Rape Reduction Act of 2002, July 31,2002,http://www.judiciary.senate.gov/hearings/testimony.cfm?id=4f1e0899533f7680e78d03281fe329f3&wit_id=4f1e0899533f7680e78d03281fe329f3-2-1,Wikipedia, “Suicide of Rodney Hulin,” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suicide_of_Rodney_Hulin;and Jasper Simmons (Arizona): Elizabeth Banicki, “Jail Not Liable forTeen's Suicide, Circuit Says,” Courthouse News Service, June 24,2010, http://www.courthousenews.com/2010/06/24/28353.htm,Simmons v. Navajo County, Ariz., Fifth Circuit Federal Court of Appeals,2010 (609 F.3d 1011 (5th Circ. 2010)), http://www.leagle.com/xmlResult.aspx?xmldoc=in%20fco%2020100623177.xml&docbase=cslwar3-2007-curr[84]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Lindsay Hayes, Project Director,National Center on Institutions and Alternatives, Massachusetts, June 13, 2012.[85]As used in this report, mental disabilities include diagnosable mental,behavioral, or emotional conditions that substantially interfere with or limitone or more major life activities; some refer to mental disabilities as“mental illnesses.” Persons with mental disabilities also refer tothemselves as having psychosocial disabilities, a term that reflects theinteraction between psychological differences and the social/cultural limitsfor behavior as well as the stigma that society attaches to persons with mentalimpairments. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders definesa mental disorder as a “clinically significant behavioral orpsychological syndrome or pattern that occurs in an individual” which isa “manifestation of a behavioral, psychological, or biologicaldysfunction in the individual.” American Psychiatric Association, Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM-IV-TR Fourth Edition(Arlington, Virginia: American Psychiatric Association, 2000), p. xxxi. Thecurrent revised edition of the DSM-IV, known as the DSM-IV-TR, organizespsychiatric diagnoses into five levels (axes) that include serious clinicaldisorders like schizophrenia or bipolar disorder (Axis 1), serious personalitydisorders such as paranoia (Axis 2), and traumatic brain injuries (Axis 3).[86]Jason Washburn et al., “Psychiatric Disorders Among Detained Youths: AComparison of Youths Processed in Juvenile Court and Adult CriminalCourt,” Psychiatric Services, vol. 59, no. 9 (2008),http://ps.psychiatryonline.org/data/Journals/PSS/3857/08ps965.pdf, p. 965(accessed August 27, 2012).[87]That is, a diagnosis of a mental health condition defined by the Diagnostic andStatistical Manual of Mental Disorders of the American Psychiatric Association.Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Sharman Stein, DeputyCommissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, July 27, 2012; HumanRights Watch email correspondence with Robin Campbell, Deputy Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[88]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Deborah DePrato, June 6, 2012; andwith Dr. Cheryl Wills, May 24, 2012.[89]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Cheryl Wills, May 24, 2012.[90]For example, one study found that the mean age for the onset of the mentalhealth problems associated with a diagnosis of schizophrenia was 19 years old.Nitin Gogtay et al., “Age of Onset of Schizophrenia: Perspectives fromNeuroimaging Studies,” Schizophrenia Bulletin, vol. 37 (2011), http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/content/37/3/504.short(accessed September 26, 2012), p. 504.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Landon A. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[92]Ibid.[93]Washburn et al., “Psychiatric Disorders Among Detained Youths: AComparison of Youths Processed in Juvenile Court and Adult CriminalCourt.”[94]Meda Chesney-Lind, The Female Offender: Girls, Women and Crime (ThousandOaks, California: SAGE Publications, 1997), pp. 25-26; Cathy S. Wisdom andMichael G. Maxfield, National Institute of Justice, US Department of Justice,“An Update on the ‘Cycle of Violence,’” 2001,https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/184894.pdf (accessed August 27, 2012);National Mental Health Association, “Mental Health and Adolescent Girlsin the Justice System,” 1999; National Council on Crime and Delinquency,Center for Girls and Young Women, “Getting the Facts Straight about Girlsin the Juvenile Justice System,” February 2009, http://www.nccdglobal.org/sites/default/files/publication_pdf/fact-sheet-girls-in-juvenile-justice.pdf; Robins, Odgers, and Russell,“Incarcerated Girls’ Physical Health,” Court Review,p. 30.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Melanie H. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[96]Ibid. Melanie H. also reported more than one experience of double-celledisolation.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Shauna Geiger, Defense Attorney, Colorado,February 5, 2012.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Louis Kraus, Illinois, June 14, 2012.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Phillip J. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[100]Human Rights Watch, Ill-Equipped: U.S. Prisons and Offenders withMental Illness, October 22, 2003,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/usa1003.pdf.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Isaiah O. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[102]See Section III for a fuller discussion of medical solitary confinement.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Graciela N. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[104]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Dr. Cheryl Wills, independentmedical evaluator and director of child and adolescent psychiatric services,Case Western Reserve University, Ohio, August 13, 2012.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Carter P. (pseudonym), Michigan, March 15,2012.[106]See Appendix 2 for a discussion of Florida.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacob L. (pseudonym), New York, April 2012.[108]Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “How much physical activitydo children need?,” http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/everyone/guidelines/children.html; US Department of Health and Human Services,“Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans,” http://www.health.gov/paguidelines/factsheetprof.aspx.[109]Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “How much physical activitydo children need?”; US Department of Health and Human Services,“Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans.”[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Jason L. (pseudonym), Florida April 2012.[111]For example, in Michigan and Wisconsin. Letter from Scott Lamiman, JailPopulation Coordinator, Muskegon County, Michigan, to Human Rights Watch,January 24, 2012; and letter from Brian Puent, Trempealeau CountySheriff’s Department, Wisconsin, to Human Rights Watch, January 10, 2012.[112]Letter from Kathy Beauer, Deputy Sheriff, Iron County Sheriff’sDepartment, Wisconsin, to Human Rights Watch, January 10, 2012.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Caroline I. (pseudonym), New York, April2012.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with Effie H., Florida, April 20, 2012.[115]Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, United States Department ofAgriculture, “Dietary Guidelines for Americans,” 2012, http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/dietaryguidelines.htm.[116]Ibid.; Aglaee Jacob, Demand Media, “Adult Vs. Teen Nutrition,” SFGate,http://healthyeating.sfgate.com/adult-vs-teen-nutrition-1083.html(accessed August 27, 2012).[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Ernesto D. (pseudonym), Pennsylvania, January2012.[118] Human Rights Watch interview with Molly J. (pseudonym), Michigan, March 2012.[119]Some researchershave identified a link between a range of factors and interruptions of hormonalhomeostasis in various contexts. Katarzyna Bisaga et al., “MenstrualFunctioning and Psychopathology in a Country-Wide Population of High SchoolGirls,” Journal of the Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,vol. 41, no. 10 (October 2002).[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Henry R. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Jeffrey J. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Craig G. (pseudonym), Pennsylvania, March2012.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean F. (pseudonym), Michigan, March 2012.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Lauren C. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[125]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Daryl Tyus, Operations Lieutenant,Jackson County Correctional Facility, Florida, April 3, 2012 (“They donot attend [school]—they lose that”). For youth in some facilities,this is true whether or not youth are in solitary confinement.[126]Letter from Darrell E. (pseudonym), from Wisconsin, to Human Rights Watch, May14, 2012.[127]Colorado State Division of Criminal Justice, “SB 10-054 AnnualReport—2nd Revision,” January 23, 2012.[128]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Jeff Dunmire, School Principal,Secure Correctional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department ofCorrections, Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012; and with Dora B. Schriro,Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, July 6, 2012.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Jeremiah I. (pseudonym), New York, April2012.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with Laura F. (pseudonym), New York, April 2012.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Jordan E. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012.[132]Intellectual disabilities, as used in the report, are permanent developmentallimitations. The American Association on Intellectual and DevelopmentDisabilities defines intellectual disabilities as “characterized bysignificant limitations both in intellectual functioning and in adaptivebehavior, which covers many everyday social and practical skills. Thisdisability originates before the age of 18.” Intellectual functioningrefers to the ability to learn, reason, and problem-solve. American Associationon Intellectual and Development Disabilities, “FAQ on IntellectualDisability,” http://www.aaidd.org/content_100.cfm?navID=21(accessed August 27, 2012).[133]An individual education plan is a tailored plan for meeting educational goalsand requirements, developed by educators with input from individuals and theirfamilies.[134]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jeff Dunmire, School Principal,Secure Correctional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department ofCorrections, Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012.[135]Office for Civil Rights, US Department of Education, “Free AppropriatePublic Education for Students With Disabilities: Requirements Under Section 503of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973,” August 2010,http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/edlite-FAPE504.html (accessedAugust 27, 2012).[136]US Code, State Eligibility, 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a).[137]US Code, State Eligibility, 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(5)(A)(emphasis added).[138]US Code, State Eligibility, 20 USC. § 1412(a)(11)(C).[139]Provision of Free Appropriate Public Education (FAPE) and Development ofIndividual Educational Plans for Students with Disabilities,Fla. Admin. Code r. 6A-6.03028(3)(l).[140]Ibid.[141]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Deborah DePrato, Louisiana, June 6,2012.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Todd D. (pseudonym), Colorado, February 2012.[143]See Appendix 2; Colorado Department of Corrections, Code of Penal Discipline,IV(B) http://www.doc.state.co.us/sites/default/files/ar/0150_01_09012011.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012) (“All offenders in the custody of theexecutive director of the DOC should be subject to this code. All violations ofthis code should be punishable as disciplinary violations.”).[144]For example, one official stated, “[Isolation] [c]ould be up to 30 days.Depends on what they did. If they have many disciplinary reports in that 30 dayspan, then it could be extended.” Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Daryl Tyus, Operations Lieutenant, Jackson County Correctional Facility,Florida, April 3, 2012.[145]We used a range of terminology in corresponding with jail and prison officialsto ensure that we obtained information about all practices involvingsignificant levels of isolation. Of the 80 jail officials who responded toHuman Rights Watch correspondence on detaining and managing youth, 34 respondedto a question about whether youth can be held in separation, segregation, orspecial management cells; 30 of them indicated that youth could be held in suchcells (four said they could not). Officials in this limited sample reportedholding 44 youth in separation, segregation, or special management cells in thepast year. Human Rights Watch cannot confirm the precise conditions ofconfinement for these youth, or whether the youth were held in solitaryconfinement. Letter from Liz O’Neal, Special Management Coordinator, ElPaso County Criminal Justice Center, Colorado, to Human Rights Watch, January5, 2012 (reporting that one youth was punished in this way in 2011); Letterfrom Sherry Stanford, Lieutenant, Lewis County Jail, New York, to Human RightsWatch, January 7, 2012 (reporting that the discipline and management policiesare the same for youth and adults and that two youth were punished in this wayin 2011); Letter from David Hetman, Program/Support Lieutenant, CorrectionBureau, Rensselaer County Office of the Sheriff, New York, to Human RightsWatch, April 19, 2012 (reporting that the discipline and management policiesare the same for youth and adults and that 12 youth were punished in this wayin 2011); Letter from Ken Kochevar, Director of Corrections, Cuyahoga County,Ohio, to Human Rights Watch, January 4, 2012 (reporting that the discipline andmanagement policies are the same for youth and adults and that 28 youth werepunished in this way in 2011); and Letter from Louise Hackel, Sergeant, ClarkCounty Jail, Wisconsin, to Human Rights Watch, February 6, 2012 (reporting thatthe discipline and management policies are the same for youth and adults andthat one youth was punished in this way in 2011).[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacob L. (pseudonym), New York, April 2012.[147]Some youth, however, did not recall having been given any legal oradministrative process before being disciplined. On the other hand,disciplinary solitary confinement is often preceded by a period of short-termadministrative solitary confinement. In some facilities, Human Rights Watch andthe American Civil Liberties Union found that such confinement is automatic,but others require a consideration of risk to other inmates before anindividual can be placed in administrative solitary confinement pending ahearing for a disciplinary infraction. In some facilities, time spent inshort-term administrative solitary confinement is “credited” whenassessing a disciplinary sanction; in other facilities, youth do not receivecredit for time spent in administrative confinement. One youth told HumanRights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union, “They gave me 10days… [but] there is no credit for time served [and] you have to wait 5days for your hearing.” Human Rights Watch interview with Mason P.(pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Corey H. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Jacob L. (pseudonym), New York, April 2012.[150]Alex A. said he had admitted fighting with another inmate. Human Rights Watchinterview with Alex A. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[151]The standard for determining guilt in administrative disciplinary processes islow, often only requiring a preponderance of the evidence.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with Jeffrey J. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.There were not actually one thousand youths in the unit.[153]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Michael Grover, Police Chief,Cottage Grove, Oregon, April 20, 2012.[154]See discussion of duration in Section III below.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Elizabeth K. (pseudonym), New York, April2012.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Rafael O. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012.[157]Only a few of the 77 youth interviewed by Human Rights Watch and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union described attempting (unsuccessfully) to appeal theirdisciplinary sentence, with one saying, “[The process] iscrazy—there’s no relief!” Human Rights Watch interview withJacob L. (pseudonym), New York, April 2012.[158]Human Rights Watch, No Equal Justice: The Prison Litigation Reform Act inthe United States, June 2009, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/us0609web.pdf,citing Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Terry Kupers, M.D.,California, November 14, 2008.[159]Human Rights Watch telephone Interview with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections, July 6, 2012.[160]Attapol Kuanliang et al., “Juvenile Inmates in an Adult Prison System:Rates of Disciplinary Misconduct and Violence,” Criminal Justice andBehavior, vol. 35 (2008), http://www.sagepub.com/stohrstudy/articles/11/Kuanliang.pdf. The analysis found that rates of all violationsper 1,000 inmates were 2,558 for youth under 18; 1,895 for youth between age 18and 20; and 937 for other adult inmates; rates of all assaultive ruleviolations were 109 per 1,000 for youth under 18; 61 for youth between age 18and 20; and 26 for other adult inmates.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Ernesto D. (pseudonym), Pennsylvania, January2012.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with Jordan E. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012.[163]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eric Bush, Superintendent, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,June 21, 2012.[164]Human Rights Watch interviewed more than a dozen youth held in variousfacilities that did not permit outdoor recreation.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Jordan E. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012.[166]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified bythe United States on June 8, 1992, art. 7; Convention against Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention againstTorture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987,ratified by the United States on October 21, 1994, art. 9.[167]Standard 4-4307, “Youthful Offenders,” in American CorrectionalAssociation, Standards for Adults Correctional Institutions, 4th. Ed.(ACA: January 2003); Standard 4-ALDF-2A-38, “Youthful Offenders,”in American Correctional Association, Performance-Based Standards for AdultLocal Detention Facilities, 4th Ed. (ACA: June 2004); Standard1-CORE-2A-20, “Plan for Youthful Offenders,” in AmericanCorrectional Association, Core Jail Standards (ACA: 2010).[168]Letter from Susan Anderson, Corporal, Pasco County Detention Center, Florida,to Human Rights Watch, January 27, 2012 (reporting that on January 27, 2012,the facility held 12 youth charged as adults in single, separation,segregation, or special management cells; that youth spend less than one hourper day out of their cells; and that youth generally spend three to six monthsin the facility); Letter from Kent Rachel, Crawford County Justice Center,Ohio, to Human Rights Watch, January 5, 2012 (reporting that the facilityrarely holds youth, but that when it does they are held in separation,segregation, or special management cells; that youth spend one to two hours perday out of their cells; and that youth generally spend one week or less in thefacility); and Letter from Jacqueline Motter, Deputy Warden, Clinton CountyCorrectional Facility, Pennsylvania, to Human Rights Watch, February 13, 2012(reporting that the facility generally holds youth charged as adults in singlecells near adults; that youth spend between one and two hours per day out oftheir cells; and that youth spend one to two weeks in the facility).[169]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Michelle M. Sanborn, JailAdministrator, Macomb County, Michigan, March 9, 2012.[170]Michele Deitch, Anna Lipton Galbraith, and Jordan Pollock,  Lyndon B.Johnson School of Public Affairs, The University of Texas at Austin,“Conditions for Juveniles in Texas County Jails,” May 2012, http://www.utexas.edu/lbj/sites/default/files/file/news/Conditions%20for%20Certified%20Juveniles%20in%20Texas%20County%20Jails-FINAL4.pdf (reporting the use of single-cell confinementfor 23 hours per day).[171]Youthful Inmates, Prison Rape Elimination Act National Standards, 28 CFR §115.14(a) (“A youthful inmate shall not be placed in a housing unit inwhich the youthful inmate will have sight, sound, or physical contact with anyadult inmate through the use of a shared dayroom or other common space, showerarea, or sleeping quarters.”).[172]28 CFR § 115.14(c).[173]28 CFR § 115.43(c).[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Sean F. (pseudonym), Michigan, March 2012.[175]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tom Clements, Executive Director,Colorado Department of Corrections, Colorado, June 18, 2012.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Marcus S. (pseudonym), Florida, May2012.[177]Opening Statement of Senator Dick Durbin, “Reassessing SolitaryConfinement: The Human Rights, Fiscal and Public Safety Consequences,”Hearing before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on theConstitution, Civil Rights and Human Rights, June 19, 2012,http://www.judiciary.senate.gov/pdf/12-6-19DurbinStatement.pdf (accessed August27, 2012). Prisons and jails generally attempt to strictly enforce a genderbinary system and categorize inmates as either male or female. Regina Kunzel, CriminalIntimacy: Prison and the Uneven History of Modern American Sexuality(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008). Yet research has consistentlydemonstrated the increased vulnerability of LGBTI inmates. National Prison RapeElimination Commission, “National Prison Rape Elimination CommissionReport,” June 2009, https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/226680.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), p. 7. A recent study of California correctionalfacilities found that approximately 67 percent of non-heterosexual inmatesreported being victims of sexual assault, compared with approximately 2 percentof heterosexual inmates. Valerie Jenness et al., Center for Evidence-BasedCorrections, “Violence in California Correctional Facilities: AnEmpirical Examination of Sexual Assault,” May 16, 2007, http://www.ushrnetwork.org/sites/default/files/VJReport2007.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), p. 55.[178]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ethan B. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012; and with Sean F. (pseudonym), Michigan, March 2012.[179]Letter from Douglas C. (pseudonym), from Colorado, to Human Rights Watch, April17, 2012.[180]National Institute of Corrections, US Department of Justice, “InternalPrison Classification Systems: Case Studies and Their Development andImplementation,” January 2002, http://static.nicic.gov/Library/017381.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[181]For example, Tom Clements, the Executive Director of the Colorado Department ofCorrections, told Human Rights Watch that although the Department ofCorrections is in the process of validating a new classification instrument,the final version will not take age into account as a factor in determiningclassification. Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tom Clements, June18, 2012. (“Our classification system really doesn’t factor in age.If there is a person who is 17, 18, 19 years old we apply the sameclassification system to them. We have been doing some work for the last ninemonths or so on our classification system. We are piloting a new classificationinstrument.… Assuming we implement that fully, we will rely less on howmuch time a person has left to serve and focus more on other attributes andcharacteristics. But it still will not factor in age as a drivingfactor.”).[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Ryan G. (pseudonym), Colorado, February 2012;Human Rights Watch, The Rest of Their Lives; Human Rights Watch, AgainstAll Odds.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Philadelphia County Prison Official, February23, 2012.[184]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tom Clements, June 18, 2012.[185]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Marshall Shirley, Deputy, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012. Note that the Pennsylvania Department ofCorrections houses youth as young as 12 and as old as 22 in the same facility.[186]Written Testimony of Commissioner Chris Epps, Mississippi Department ofCorrections, “Reassessing Solitary Confinement the Human Rights, Fiscal,and Public Safety Consequences,” Hearing before the Senate Committee onthe Judiciary, Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights and Human Rights,June 19, 2012, http://www.judiciary.senate.gov/pdf/12-6-19EppsTestimony.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), p. 2.[187]Erica Goode, “Prisons Rethink Isolation, Saving Money, Lives, andSanity,” New York Times, March 10, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/11/us/rethinking-solitary-confinement.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1(accessed August 27, 2012); See also Margaret Winter, National Prison Project,American Civil Liberties Union “Rethinking Solitary Confinement inMississippi and Beyond,” March 12, 2012, http://www.aclu.org/blog/prisoners-rights/rethinking-solitary-confinement-mississippi-and-beyond(accessed August 27, 2012).[188]Written Testimony of Commissioner Chris Epps, pp. 1-2.[189]Goode, “Prisons Rethink Isolation, Saving Money, Lives, andSanity,” New York Times.[190]Congressional Quarterly, “Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitution,Civil Rights, and Human Rights Holds Hearing on Reassessing SolitaryConfinement,” June 19, 2012,http://solitarywatch.files.wordpress.com/2012/06/transcript-of-the-hearing.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), Panel 1, transcript.[191]Human Rights Watch interviewed more than a dozen youth held in variousfacilities that did not permit outdoor recreation.[192]Others have noted that the practice still occurs in many jails and prisons.Jeffrey L. Metzner, “Introduction to: Resource Document on the Use ofRestraint and Seclusion in Correctional Mental Health Care,” Journalof the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, vol. 35 (December 2007),http://www.jaapl.org/content/35/4/415.full(accessed August 27, 2012), p. 415.[193]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Peter Ash, Chief, Child and AdolescentPsychiatry, Director, Psychiatry and Law Service, and Associate Professor,Emory University, Georgia, January 9, 2012.[194]Letter from Christopher M. (pseudonym), from Wisconsin, to Human Rights Watch,January 17, 2012.[195]Human Rights Watch interviews with Lloyd U. (pseudonym), Pennsylvania, January2012; and with Craig G. (pseudonym), Pennsylvania, January 2012.[196]Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union, Sentenced toStigma:Segregation of HIV-Positive Prisoners in Alabama and SouthCarolina, April 14, 2010,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/health0410webwcover.pdf.[197]SAMHSA defines seclusion as “the involuntary confinement of a patientalone in an area in which the patient is prevented from leaving.”Interagency Autism Coordinating Committee (IACC) Services and Safety Committee,Administrator’s Office of Policy Planning and Innovation (OPPI) andSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Service Administration, “Alternativesto Seclusion and Restraint in Behavioral Health Care,” May 19, 2011, http://iacc.hhs.gov/events/2011/slides_larke_huang_051911.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012). Referencing CMS Hospital Conditions ofParticipation: SAMHSA National Action Plan on Seclusion and Restraint,Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Administration, “Seclusion andRestraint: Statement of the Problem and SAMHSA’s Response,” May2003, http://www.samhsa.gov/seclusion/sr_handout.aspx(accessed August 27, 2012).[198]SAMHSA National Action Plan on Seclusion and Restraint, “Seclusion andRestraint: Statement of the Problem and SAMHSA’s Response.”[199]IACC Services and Safety Committee, “Alternatives to Seclusion andRestraint in Behavioral Health Care”; SAMHSA National Action Plan onSeclusion and Restraint, “Seclusion and Restraint: Statement of theProblem and SAMHSA’s Response.”[200]Indeed, there are also no systematic national data on how many adults in jailsand prisons or youth in juvenile facilities are subjected to solitaryconfinement.[201]See discussion of protective solitary confinement above. Letter from SusanAnderson, Corporal, Pasco County Detention Center, Florida, to Human RightsWatch, January 27, 2012; Letter from Kent Rachel, Crawford County JusticeCenter, Ohio, to Human Rights Watch, January 5, 2012; and Letter fromJacqueline Motter, Deputy Warden, Clinton County Correctional Facility,Pennsylvania, to Human Rights Watch, February 13, 2012.[202]Deitch, Galbraith and Pollock, “Conditions for Juveniles in Texas CountyJails”; Chris Vogel, “For Their Own Good,” Texas Observer,June 9, 2010, http://www.texasobserver.org/mollyaward/columns/for-their-own-good(accessed August 27, 2012).[203]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Sharman Stein, DeputyCommissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, July 27, 2012; HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Marshall Shirley, Deputy, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012. Note that the Pennsylvania Department ofCorrections houses youth as young as 12 and as old as 22 in the same facility.See Pennsylvania Department of Corrections monthly prison data (reporting 10.9percent of all youth under age 22 at Pine Grove Secure Correctional Institutionin administrative or disciplinary solitary confinement as of April 2012),http://www.cor.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/community/research___statistics/10669/monthly_population_reports/1069959(accessed September 26, 2012);  Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Eric Bush, Superintendent, Secure Correctional Institution Pine Grove,Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, June 21, 2012.[204]New York state law distinguishes between adolescents ages 16 to 18 and adultsfor purposes of pre-trial and post-conviction detention; data was thereforereported for all adolescents. Human Rights Watch email correspondence withSharman Stein, Deputy Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections,July 27, 2012; Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Robin Campbell,Deputy Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[205]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections, New York, July 6, 2012.[206]Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, “Monthly PopulationReport,” http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/(accessed August 27, 2012).[207]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Marshall Shirley, Deputy, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012.[208]Heather West, Bureau of Justice Statistics, US Department of Justice,“Prison Inmates at Mid-year 2009 – Statistical Tables,” June2010, http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/pim09st.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[209]Prison officials in Colorado, Michigan, New York, and Pennsylvania all toldHuman Rights Watch that youth and adults are bound by the same disciplinaryrules and that youth are held in punitive segregation. Jail officials in 26counties in Colorado, Florida, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania,and Wisconsin told Human Rights Watch that youth and adults are bound by thesame disciplinary rules.[210]Kuanliang et al., “Juvenile Inmates in an Adult Prison System: Rates ofDisciplinary Misconduct and Violence.” The analysis suggeststhat—per year—youth under age 18 are found guilty of“potentially violent rule violations” at a rate of 353.17 per 1,000and of “assaultive rule violations” at a rate of 109.38 per 1,000.[211]Ibid. Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union have found thatyouth subjected to disciplinary confinement in Florida are sometimes held twoper cell but at other times are held in solitary confinement.[212]See discussion of Florida prisons in Appendix 2.[213]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jeffrey Hartman, Captain, ErieCounty Holding Center, New York, March 2, 2012.[214]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections, New York, July 6, 2012.[215]Human Rights Watch interviews with James M. (pseudonym), Florida, April2012 and April 7, 2012; and with Justin C. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[216]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jeffrey Hartman, Captain, ErieCounty Holding Center, New York, March 2, 2012.[217]No state prison system reported a difference in the formal regulationsgoverning disciplinary solitary confinement for youth and adults. A few jailofficials also explicitly stated that youth and adults are subjected to thesame periods of solitary confinement. Letter from Bernie Zook,Administrator/Warden, Mifflin County Correctional Facility, Pennsylvania, toHuman Rights Watch, January 3, 2012; and Letter from Paul Falduto, Captain ofDetentions, Kenosha County Sheriff’s Department, Wisconsin, to HumanRights Watch, January 17, 2012.[218]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner,New York City Department of Corrections, New York, July 6, 2012.[219]Ibid.[220]This data is from FY 2012. Human Rights Watch email correspondence with SharmanStein, Deputy Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, July 27,2012; Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Robin Campbell, DeputyCommissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[221]Officials at the New York City Department of Corrections indicated that theyhope to reform the management structure at the facility to allow them to imposeshorter periods of punishment. Human Rights Watch telephone interview with DoraB. Schriro, Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, New York,July 6, 2012.[222]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Robin Campbell, DeputyCommissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[223]Human Rights Watch interviews with Bradley T. (pseudonym), Colorado, February2012; and with George T. (pseudonym), Florida, April 2012.[224]United Nations Declaration on the Rights of the Child, adopted November 20,1959, G.A. res. 1386 (XIV), 14 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 19, U.N. Doc. A/4354(1959). Similarly, The American Convention on Human Rights (“Pact of SanJosé, Costa Rica”), Article 19, states, “Every minor childhas the right to the measures of protection required by his condition as aminor on the part of his family, society, and the state.” The Pact wasadopted November 22, 1969, O.A.S. Treaty Series No. 36, 1144 U.N.T.S. 123,entered into force July 18, 1978, reprinted in Basic Documents Pertaining toHuman Rights in the Inter-American System, OEA/Ser.L.V/II.82 doc.6 rev.1 at 25(1992).[225]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified bythe United States on June 8, 1992. The Human Rights Committee has interpreted theICCPR’s provisions on child offenders to apply to all persons under theage of 18. UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 1 (Forty-fourth session,1992), Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted byHuman Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1 at 155 (1994),http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/gencomm/hrcoim20.htm (accessed August 27, 2012),para. 13.[226]The United States co-sponsored this provision together with Great Britain andIndia, and it was adopted unanimously. See Marc Bossuyt, Guide to the“Travaux Préparatoires” of the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,1987), p. 307. The ICCPR contains three additional provisions related tojuvenile justice. Article 6(5) prohibits imposing the death penalty on personswho committed crimes while under the age of 18. Article 10(2), subparagraph b,mandates the separation of accused children from adults and the swiftadjudication of their cases. Article 14(1) provides an exception for casesinvolving children to the general requirement that judgments be made public.[227]Manfred Nowak, U.N. Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: CCPR Commentary(Kehl: N.P. Engel, 1993), p. 266.[228]ICCPR, art. 7; Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture), adopted December 10,1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc.A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, ratified by the United Stateson October 21, 1994, art. 16.[229]In article 37 of the CRC, the prohibition of both capital punishment and lifeimprisonment without possibility ofrelease are included in the sub-section banning cruel,inhuman, or degrading punishments. Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49)at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990. TheUnited States signed the CRC in 1995 but has not ratified.[230]See UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 9, Article 10 (Sixteenthsession, 1982), Compilation of General Comments and General RecommendationsAdopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 (1994).[231]ICCPR, art. 10(1).[232]ICCPR, United States of America: Reservations, para. 5 (emphasis added). TheUnited States also included a reservation to the general obligation ofrehabilitation.[233]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A.Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49(1989), entered into force September 2, 1990. The United States signed the CRCin 1995 but has not ratified.[234]CRC, art. 37(b).[235]CRC, art. 40(1).[236]CRC, art. 40(4).[237]CRC, art. 37(d).[238]ICCPRart. 23; International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights(ICESCR), G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 49, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3, 1976, art. 10. TheUnited States signed the ICESCR in 1977 but has not ratified.[239]Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), G.A. res. 217A (III), U.N. DocA/810 at 71 (1948); ICESCR, art. 13.[240]Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), adopted December13, 2006, G.A. Res. 61/106, Annex I, U.N.GAOR, 61st Sess., Supp. (No. 49) at65, U.N. Doc. A/61/49 (2006), entered into force May 3, 2008, arts. 7(1), 14.The United States signed the CRPD in 2009 but has not ratified.[241]See for example, a recent report considering the particular vulnerability of personswith disabilities to cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment, including in thecontext of detention. UN General Assembly, Torture and other cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment or punishment: Note by the Secretary-General, U.N. Doc.A/63/175, July 28, 2008.[242]United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (TheRiyadh Guidelines), G.A. Res. 45/112, annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at201, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990).[243]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 10, Children’srights in juvenile justice, U.N. Doc. CRC/C/GC/10 (2007).[244]UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty, G.A. Res.45/113, annex, 45 U.N. GAPR Supp. (no. 49A) at 205, U.N. Doc. A/45/49, (1990).[245]See, for example, UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 20, Article 7,Prohibition of torture, or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment orpunishment (Forty-fourth session, 1992), Compilation of General Comments andGeneral Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1 (1994); UN Committee Against Torture, Interim report of theSpecial Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment, U.N. Doc. A/63/175, July 28, 2008, para. 80; UN CommitteeAgainst Torture, “Consideration of reports submitted by States partiesunder Article 19 of the Convention: Concluding Observations of the CommitteeAgainst Torture,” U.N. Doc. CAT/C/MAC/CO/4, November 21, 2008, para. 8.The Committee on the Rights of the Child has repeatedly recommended thepractice be banned. UN Committee on the Rights of the Child,“Consideration of reports submitted by States parties under Article 44 ofthe Convention:Concluding Observations of the Committeeon the Rights of the Child,” U.N. Doc. CRC/C/15/Add.151, October 7, 2001,para. 41; UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Consideration ofreports submitted by States parties under Article 44 of the Convention: Concludingobservations, Singapore,” U.N. Doc. CRC/C/15/Add.220, October 27, 2003,para. 45(d); and UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Considerationof reports submitted by States parties under Article 44 of the Convention:Concluding Observations, El Salvador,” U.N.Doc. CRC/C/15/Add.232, June 30, 2004, para. 36(a). See also the EuropeanCommittee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment ofPunishment (CPT), “The CPT Standards: ‘Substantive’ sectionsof the CPT’s General Reports,” CPT/Inf/E(2002) 1- Rev. 2006,Strasbourg, France, http://www.cpt.coe.int/en/documents/eng-standards-prn.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), para. 56. Human Rights Watch has condemnedprolonged solitary confinement of adults as a function of individualcharacteristics and the particular conditions of confinement. See, for example,Human Rights Watch, Out of Sight: Super-Maximum Security Confinement in theUS, February 1, 2000, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2000/02/01/out-sight-super-maximum-security-confinement-us.[246]UN Human Rights Council, Interim Report of the Special Rapporteur on tortureand other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Juan Mendez,U.N. G.A. Doc. A/66/268, August 5, 2011, http://daccess-ddsny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/445/70/PDF/N1144570.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 27, 2012), para. 77.[247]Ibid., paras. 67-68, 78.[248]United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of JuvenileJustice (“The Beijing Rules”), adopted November 29, 1985, G.A. Res.40/33, annex, 40 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 53) at 207, U.N. Doc. A/40/53 (1985).[249]Standard4-ALDF-2A-38, “Youthful Offenders,” in American CorrectionalAssociation, Performance-Based Standards for Adult Local DetentionFacilities, 4th Ed. (ACA: June 2004); National Commission on CorrectionalHealth Care, “Position Statement, Health Services to Adolescents in AdultCorrectional Facilities,” May 17, 1998,http://www.ncchc.org/resources/statements/adolsecents.html(accessed August 27.2012);AmericanBar Association (ABA), Youth in the Criminal Justice System: Guidelines forPolicy Makers and Practitioners, 2001,http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/natlres/ABA%20-%20Youth%20in%20the%20Criminal%20Justice%20System%20Guidelines%20for%20Policymakers.pdf(accessed August 27,2012).[250]American Correctional Association, Core Jail Standards (ACA: 2010).[251]American Correctional Association, Standards for Adult CorrectionalInstitutions, 4th Ed (Virginia: American Correctional Association,2003).  ACA Policy prohibits the confinement of youthful offenders in anadult facility. Comment to Standard 4-4307 in American CorrectionalAssociation, Standards for Adult Correctional Institutions, 4th Ed.[252]The right to life is protected in all major human rights instruments, includingthe UDHR, the ICCPR, and the Convention against Torture.[253]For example, Ruiz v. Johnson, Southern Federal District Court of Texas,1999 (37 F. Supp. 2d. 855, 915 (S.D. Tex. 1999)), rev’d on other grounds,Ruiz v. Johnson , Fifth Circuit Federal Court of Appeals, 2001 (243 F.3d941 (5th Cir. 2001)), adhered to on remand, Ruiz v. Johnson , SouthernFederal District Court of Texas, 2001 (154 F. Supp. 2d 975 (S.D. Tex. 2001))(“Conditions in TDCJ-ID’s administrative segregation units clearlyviolate constitutional standards when imposed on the subgroup of theplaintiff’s class made up of mentally-ill prisoners); Coleman v.Wilson, Eastern Federal District Court of California, 1995 (912 F. Supp.1282, 1320-21 (E.D. Cal. 1995)); Madrid v. Gomez, Northern FederalDistrict Court of California, 1995 (889 F. Supp. 1146, 1265-66 (N.D. Cal.1995)); Casey v. Lewis, Federal District Court of Arizona, 1993 (834 F.Supp. 1477, 1549-50 (D. Ariz. 1993)); Langley v. Coughlin, SouthernFederal District Court of New York, 1988 (715 F. Supp. 522, 540 (S.D.N.Y.1988)) (holding that evidence of prison officials’ failure to screen outfrom SHU ‘those individuals who, by virtue of their mental condition, arelikely to be severely and adversely affected by placement there’ statesan Eighth amendment claim).[254]Letter from Thomas E. Perez, Assistant Attorney General, to Andrew J. Spano,Westchester County Executive, November 19, 2009,http://www.justice.gov/crt/about/spl/documents/Westchester_findlet_11-19-09.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), para. 27-30 (noting that the average disciplinarysanction imposed on young people in an adult jail was in excess of 365 days inisolation, with the longest period being 510 days, and noting how the isolationhas contributed to the deteriorating mental health of juvenile inmates); Letterfrom Wan J. Kim, Assistant Attorney General, to Jim Doyle, Governor ofWisconsin, May 1, 2006,http://www.justice.gov/crt/about/spl/documents/taycheedah_findlet_5-1-06.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), para. 10-13 (finding that the adult facility usedadministrative segregation and observation status for inmates with severemental illness in violation of the Constitution); Letter from Ralph F. Boyd,Jr., Assistant Attorney General, to Parris N. Glendening, Governor of Maryland,Aug. 13, 2002, http://www.justice.gov/crt/about/spl/documents/baltimore_findings_let.php(accessed August 27, 2012) (finding that juveniles in an adult jail were put inisolation cells under “supermax” conditions, sometimes for as longas several months).[255]The few courts to consider isolation of young people have generally done so inthe context of a range of claims related to mistreatment in juvenilefacilities. For example, R.G. v. Koller, Federal District Court ofHawaii, 2006 (415 F.Supp. 1129 (D. Hawaii 2006)); Santana v. Collazo,First Circuit Federal Court of Appeals, 1984 (793 F.2d 41 (1st Cir. 1984))(holding that juvenile detention facilities in Puerto Rico failed to meetburden of showing legitimate interest in confining juveniles in isolation foras long as 20 days on grounds of protecting juveniles from harm, discouragingoffender behavior, and preventing escapes); D.B. v. Tewksbury, FederalDistrict Court of Oregon,  1982 (545 F. Supp. 896 (D. Or. 1982))(detaining child pretrial detainees in jail under circumstances, in which therewas failure to provide work, exercise, education, recreation or recreationalmaterials or for privacy when showering, using toilets or maintaining femininehygiene, in which certain children were placed in isolation cells and in whichthere was failure to provide adequate supervision to prevent harm, to allowcontact between children and their families, to provide adequate diet, to trainstaff to meet children's psychological needs, to provide written rules andgrievance procedure and to provide adequate medical care, constituted“punishment,” and, thus, violated due process clause); Gary H.v. Leo Hegstrom, Ninth Circuit Federal Court of Appeals, 1987 (831 F.2d at1433 (9th Cir. 1987)) (“To the extent that the court ordered due processhearings prior to confinement in excess of 24 hours, . . . the decree wasclearly within the power of a federal court to assure minimum constitutionalstandards taught by Youngberg.”).[256]J.D.B. v. North Carolina, United States Supreme Court, 2011 (564 US __at 10(2011)) (internal citations omitted).[257]Roper v. Simmons, United States Supreme Court, 2005 (543 US __, at 19(2005)) ( “The differences between juvenile and adult offenders are toomarked and well understood to risk allowing a youthful person to receive thedeath penalty despite insufficient culpability.”); Graham v. Florida,United States Supreme Court, 2010 (560 US __, at 23 (2010)) (“Thedifferences between juvenile and adult offenders are too marked and wellunderstood to risk allowing a youthful person to receive the death penaltydespite insufficient culpability.”); Miller v. Alabama, UnitedStates Supreme Court, 2012 (No. 10‐9646,slip op. at 8 (2012))(“ …[C]hildren are constitutionally differentfrom adults.… [J]uveniles have diminished culpability and greaterprospects for reform … [and] are less deserving of the most severepunishments.… [C]hildren have a lack of maturity and an underdevelopedsense of responsibility[;] … [c]hildren are more vulnerable … tonegative influences and outside pressures[;] … [a]nd … a child’scharacter is not as well formed as an adult’s; his traits are lessfixed.”).[258]The study also found that, when compared with 97 facilities nationwide thatconfidentially report data to the Council of Juvenile CorrectionalAdministrators Performance-based Standards (PbS) project, the ratio ofisolation incidents nationally to those in Missouri was 228:1. Richard Mendel,The Annie E. Casey Foundation, “The Missouri Model: Reinventing thePractice of Rehabilitating Youthful Offenders,” 2010, http://www.aecf.org/MajorInitiatives/~/media/Pubs/Initiatives/Juvenile%20Detention%20Alternatives%20Initiative/MOModel/MO_Fullreport_webfinal.pdf(accessed August 3, 2012), pp. 9-10. A detailed description of the use ofisolation in juvenile facilities can also be found in Sandra Simkins et al.,“The Harmful Use of Isolation in Juvenile Facilities: The Need forPost-Disposition Representation,” Washington University Journal of Lawand Policy, vol. 38 (2012),http://digitalcommons.law.wustl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1019&context=wujlp(accessed September 26, 2012).[259]The Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative suggests that best practices forjuvenile facilities include prohibiting room confinement in excess of fourhours as a response to current misbehavior and prohibiting disciplinary roomconfinement in excess of 72 hours. “Juvenile Detention AlternativesInitiative (JDAI) Facility Site Assessment Instrument,” May 2006, http://www.cclp.org/documents/Conditions/JDAI%20Standards.pdf. The American Bar Association Task Force onYouth in the Adult Criminal Justice System proposed that room confinement forany purpose should never exceed 10 days. AmericanBar Association (ABA), Youth in the Criminal Justice System: Guidelines forPolicy Makers and Practitioners, http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/natlres/ABA%20-%20Youth%20in%20the%20Criminal%20Justice%20System%20Guidelines%20for%20Policymakers.pdf. The 1980 American Bar Association Guidelinesfor Juvenile Facilities suggests that best practices for juvenile facilitiesshould include limiting protective custody to eight hours and prohibiting roomconfinement for suicide risk, as well as limiting disciplinary confinement to 5days for minor infractions and 10 days for major infractions.[260]For a discussion of staffing ratios in juvenile facilities, see Center forChildren’s Law and Policy et al., “Protecting Youth in the PREAnational standards,” April 4, 2011, http://www.cclp.org/documents/PREA/PREA%20Youth%20Comments.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[261]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eric Bush, Superintendent, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012.[262]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Marshall Shirley, Deputy, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012.[263]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eric Bush, June 21, 2012.[264]“NewPrivately Funded Program to Reduce Reincarceration—ABLE—is part ofCity’s comprehensive Young Men’s Initiative,” News from theBlue Room, NYC.gov press release, August 2, 2012, http://www.nyc.gov/portal/site/nycgov/menuitem.c0935b9a57bb4ef3daf2f1c701c789a0/index.jsp?pageID=mayor_press_release&catID=1194&doc_name=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nyc.gov%2Fhtml%2Fom%2Fhtml%2F2012b%2Fpr285-12.html&cc=unused1978&rc=1194&ndi=1.[265]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections, New York, July 6, 2012.[266]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Deborah DePrato, Director,Institute for Public Health and Justice, Louisiana State University HealthSciences Center, and Associate Clinical Professor, School of Public Health,Louisiana, June 6, 2012.[267]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Martin Horn, Distinguished Lecturerin Criminal Justice, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, New York, May 24,2012.[268]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Steve Hager, Director, YouthfulOffender System (YOS), Colorado Department of Corrections, Colorado, June 18,2012.[269]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections, New York, July 6, 2012.[270]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Martin Horn, New York, May 24,2012.[271]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Peter Plant, Senior Vice Presidentfor Education and Policy Development, G4S Youth Services, LLC., Florida,November 1, 2011.[272]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jeffrey Hartman, Captain, ErieCounty Holding Center, New York, March 2, 2012.[273]Richard Mendel, “The Missouri Model: Reinventing the Practice ofRehabilitating Youthful Offenders,” http://www.aecf.org/MajorInitiatives/~/media/Pubs/Initiatives/Juvenile%20Detention%20Alternatives%20Initiative/MOModel/MO_Fullreport_webfinal.pdf(accessed September 26, 2012), p. 29.[274]For an interesting discussion of why penal isolation should be regulated in thesame way as use of force, see Fred Cohen, “Isolation in Penal Settings:The Isolation-Restraint Paradigm,” Journal of Law and Policy, vol.22 (2006), p. 295; and Frank Cohen, “Penal Isolation: Beyond theSeriously Mentally Ill,” Journal of Criminal Justice and Behavior,vol. 35 (2008), p. 1017.[275]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dr. Cheryl Wills, independentmedical evaluator and director of child and adolescent psychiatric services atCase Western Reserve University, Ohio, May 24, 2012.[276]Human Rights Watch, “Comments on the National Standards to Prevent,Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape proposed by the Department of Justice onFeb. 3, 2011,” April 4, 2011, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/related_material/Human%20Rights%20Watch%20Comments%20on%20Prison%20Rape%20Standards.pdf.[277]Juvenile Justice Reform Committee, American Academy of Child and AdolescentPsychiatry, “Policy Statements: Solitary Confinement of JuvenileOffenders,” April 2012, http://www.aacap.org/cs/root/policy_statements/solitary_confinement_of_juvenile_offenders.[278]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Louis Kraus, Chief of Child andAdolescent Psychiatry, Rush University Medical Center, and Co-Chair of theAmerican Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Committee on JuvenileJustice Reform, Illinois, June 14, 2012.[279]Letter from Nicholas M. (pseudonym), from Wisconsin, to Human Rights Watch,March 22, 2012.[280]Todd Minton, Bureau of Justice Statistics, US Department of Justice,“Jail Inmates at Midyear 2011—Statistical Tables,” April 26,2012, http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4235(accessed June 6, 2012).[281]The count does not represent the number of people admitted into jail on thatday, or any other day. Rather, it is the number of people in jail on the daythat sampled jails submitted survey responses. It also provides no informationon the length of detention of inmates counted. Inmates may have been admittedthe day before the survey or may have been detained for months.[282]As discussed in Section I above, all youth held as juveniles are protected byfederal law mandating sight and sound separation for those under age 18.[283]Midyear count is the number of inmates held on the last weekday in June.[284]All characteristic data for 2011 adjusted for non-response and rounded to thenearest 100.[285]Young people are under age 18 as of the data reporting at mid-year.[286]Includes youth under age 18 who were tried or awaiting trial as adults.[287]Others have suggested that, based on the numbers of youth prosecuted as ifadults each year, as many as 200,000 young people are at risk of being detainedin adult facilities. Campaign for Youth Justice, “Jailing Juveniles: TheDangers of Incarcerating Youth in Adult Jails in America,” November 2007,http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/CFYJNR_JailingJuveniles.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012); Campaign for Youth Justice, “The ConsequencesAren’t Minor: The Impact of Trying Youth as Adults and Strategies forReform,” March 2007, http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/CFYJNR_ConsequencesMinor.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[288]Data extracted from annual Jails at Midyear reports. See methodology sectionfor description of calculation methods.[289]Guerino, Harrison, and Sabol, “Prisoners in 2010”; West,“Prison Inmates at Mid-year 2009 – Statistical Tables”;Heather West and William Sabol, Bureau of Justice Statistics, US Department ofJustice, “Prisoner Inmates at Midyear 2008,” March 2009, http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=839(accessed August 27, 2012).[290]Guerino, Harrison, and Sabol, “Prisoners in 2010”; West,“Prison Inmates at Mid-year 2009 – Statistical Tables”; Westand Sabol, “Prisoner Inmates at Midyear 2008.”[291]To prevent double-counting, this estimate does not include states that haveintegrated prison-jail systems. It also does not include the 142 juveniles heldin the federal prison system in 2010. Additionally, the combined estimates ofjuveniles entering adult facilities do not include any juveniles detained byImmigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Though these detainees are held inadministrative or civil detention, they are often housed in criminal detentionfacilities.[292]The federal Bureau of Prisons does not generally house inmates under the age of18 in its custody; therefore, additional juveniles incarcerated in adultprisons are held only in state prison systems. However, in 2010, 142 juvenilesin the federal system were held in contract facilities. Paul Guerino, Paige M.Harrison, and William Sabol, Bureau of Justice Statistics, US Department ofJustice, “Prisoners in 2010,” December 2011, http://bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/p10.pdf (accessedAugust 27, 2012); Heather West, Bureau of Justice Statistics, US Department ofJustice, “Prison Inmates at Mid-year 2009 – StatisticalTables,” June 2010, http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/pim09st.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[293]Specifically, we adjusted the numbers for the following facilities:2006: Ville Platte Jail, LA –- 9 juveniles heldas adults counted as males under age 18.White County/City Jail, IL – 5 juveniles held as adults counted as malesunder age 18.Fairfax County Adult Detention, VA – 2 juveniles held as adults countedas males under age 18.2007: Union County Jail, PA – 18 juveniles heldas adults counted as males under age 18.2008: Allen County Jail, ID – 4 juveniles heldas adults counted as males under age 18.2009: None2010: Sherman Walker Correctional Facility, LA –179 juveniles held as adults counted as males under age 18.Ascension Parish Jail, LA – 50 juveniles held as adults counted as malesunder age 18.Madison County Jail, NE – 30 juveniles held as adults counted as malesunder age 18.Washington County Jail, MN – 23 juveniles held as adults counted as malesunder age 18.Scotland County Jail, MO – 2 juveniles held as adults counted as malesunder age 18.Data for Oakland County, MI was flagged as a likelyerror and was removed from analysis. In five other years of surveys, thefacility reported between 10 and 25 juveniles. However, in 2010, the facilityreported 1302 juvenile male (and only 13 adult male) inmates.2011: None[294]Minton, “Jail Inmates at Midyear 2011—Statistical Tables,” p.12.[295]Two of the individuals interviewed by Human Rights Watch were age 21 or youngerwhen interviewed.[296]Jails at Mid-Year Survey (2006 - 2011), Bureau of JusticeStatistics, US Department of Justice.[297]Throughout the report, “solitary confinement” is used to refer tophysical and social isolation that extended for more than 22 hours each day andlasted for one or more days. See UN Human Rights Council, Interim Report of theSpecial Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment, Juan Mendez, U.N. G.A. Doc. A/66/268, August 5, 2011,http://daccess-ddsny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/445/70/PDF/N1144570.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 27, 2012). This report does not address the practice ofholding two individuals in prolonged segregation, but Human Rights Watch andmental health experts have raised serious concerns about this practice as well.[298]This is the result of legislative reforms enacted in 2012. Colorado RevisedStatutes, Colorado Rev. Stat. Code 19-2-508(3)(c)(II).[299]Colorado Rev. Stat. 19-2-508(3)(c)(III).[300]Colorado Rev. Stat. § 19-2-508(4)(a)[301]The various forms of solitary confinement are discussed in Section III of thereport.[302]Colorado State Division of Criminal Justice, SB 10-054 Annual Report—2ndRevision, January 23, 2012.[303]Human Rights Watch interview with Chief Elias Diggins, Denver SheriffDepartment, Colorado, February 9, 2012; Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith Liz O’Neil, Special Management Coordinator El Paso CountySheriff’s Office, Colorado, April 9, 2012; Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Kurt Ester, Captain, Adams County Detention Facility, Colorado,March 29, 2012.[304]Human Rights Watch interview with Chief Elias Diggins, February 9, 2012; HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Liz O’Neil, Special ManagementCoordinator El Paso County Sheriff’s Office, Colorado, April 9, 2012.[305]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tom Clements, Executive Director,Colorado Department of Corrections, June 18, 2012. The limits of the youthfuloffender system are provided by statute at Colorado Rev. Stat. 18-1.3-407.[306]Colorado Department of Corrections, Regulation Code of Penal Discipline, AR#150-01 at (IV)(E)(o), effective September 1, 2011, http://www.doc.state.co.us/sites/default/files/ar/0150_01_09012011.pdf(accessed June 4, 2012).[307]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Steve Hager, Director, YouthfulOffender System (YOS), Colorado Department of Corrections, Colorado, June 18,2012.[308]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Steve Hager, Director, YouthfulOffender System (YOS), Colorado Department of Corrections, Colorado, June 18,2012.[309]House Bill 12-1139, Concerning Pretrial Detention of Children Prosecuted asAdults, signed March 15, 2012, http://cjdc.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/HB-1139_Final.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012); “Colorado: Assembly Acts to Protect YouthAccused of Crimes,” Human Rights Watch and American Civil Liberties Unionnews release, March 6, 2012,http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/03/06/colorado-assembly-acts-protect-youth-accused-crimes.[310]Colorado Department of Corrections, Report of the Colorado Department ofCorrections on Administrative Segregation, January 2012, http://www.aclu.org/files/assets/co_adseg_rept_jan2012.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[311]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tom Clements, June 18, 2012.[312]For detailed recommendations, see recommendations section above.[313]Jails at Mid-Year Survey (2006 - 2011), Bureau of JusticeStatistics, US Department of Justice.[314]Throughout the report, “solitary confinement” is used to refer tophysical and social isolation that extended for more than 22 hours each day andlasted for one or more days. UN Human Rights Council, Interim Report of theSpecial Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment, Juan Mendez, U.N. G.A. Doc. A/66/268, August 5, 2011,http://daccess-ddsny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/445/70/PDF/N1144570.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 27, 2012). This report does not address the practice ofholding two individuals in prolonged segregation, but Human Rights Watch andmental health experts have raised serious concerns about the practice.[315]Fla. Stat. Ann. § 985.265.[316]Fla. Stat. Ann. § 985.265.[317]Florida law SB2112 on Juvenile Detention Facilities, effective July 1, 2011;David J. Utter, Southern Poverty Law Center, “One Florida County WiselySays No to Putting Children in Adult Jails,” May 8, 2012, http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/news/one-florida-county-wisely-says-no-to-putting-children-in-adult-jails(accessed August 27, 2012).[318]The various forms of solitary confinement are discussed in Section III of thereport.[319]Florida Department of Corrections, “Florida County Detention FacilitiesAverage Inmate Population January 2012,” January 2012, http://www.dc.state.fl.us/pub/jails/2012/01/FCDF.PDF(accessed August 27, 2012).[320]Letter from Dan Carriveau, Classification Sergeant, Hernando County DetentionCenter, Florida, to Human Rights Watch, January 6, 2012; Letter from DavidRobinson, Lieutenant, Pinellas County Sheriff’s Office, Florida, to HumanRights Watch, February 2, 2012; and Letter from F. Patrick Tighe, Major, St.Lucie County Jail, Florida, to Human Rights Watch, January 4, 2012.[321]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Daryl Tyus, Operations Lieutenant,Jackson County Correctional Facility, Florida, April 3, 2012.[322]Florida Statutes Title 47, Ch. 958.04, 958.11; Human Rights Watch emailcorrespondence with Ann Howard, Communications Director, Florida Department ofCorrections, July 31, 2012.[323]2010-2011 Agency Annual Report, Florida Department of Corrections,“Inmate Population,” http://www.dc.state.fl.us/pub/annual/1011/ar-im-population.html(accessed August 27, 2012); 2010-2011 Agency Annual Report, Florida Departmentof Corrections, “Inmate Admissions,” http://www.dc.state.fl.us/pub/annual/1011/ar-im-admissions.html(accessed August 27, 2012); 2010-2011 Agency Annual Report, Florida Departmentof Corrections, “Youthful Offenders,” http://www.dc.state.fl.us/pub/annual/1011/ar-additional-facts-youth.html(accessed August 27, 2012).[324]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Ann Howard, July 31, 2012.[325]Regulation 33-602.222, Florida Department of Corrections, “ DisciplinaryConfinement,” https://www.flrules.org/gateway/ruleno.asp?id=33-602.222&Section=0(accessed August 27, 2012), Sections 2(e) and 2(p); Regulation 33-602.220,Florida Department of Corrections, “Administrative Confinement,” https://www.flrules.org/gateway/ruleno.asp?id=33-602.220&Section=0(accessed August 27, 2012), Sections 5(e) and 5(p).[326]Regulations 33-601.800, Florida Department of Corrections, “CloseManagement,” https://www.flrules.org/gateway/ruleno.asp?id=33-601.800(accessed August 27, 2012).[327]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Ann Howard, August 28, 2012.[328]This report does not address the practice of holding two individual inprolonged segregation but Human Rights Watch, mental health experts, andadvocates have raised serious concerns about the practice.[329]Jails at Mid-Year Survey (2006 - 2011), Bureau of JusticeStatistics, US Department of Justice.[330]Throughout the report, “solitary confinement” is used to refer tophysical and social isolation that extended for more than 22 hours each day andlasted for one or more days. UN Human Rights Council, Interim Report of theSpecial Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment, Juan Mendez, U.N. G.A. Doc.,http://daccess-ddsny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/445/70/PDF/N1144570.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 27, 2012). This report does not address the practice ofholding two individuals in prolonged segregation, but Human Rights Watch andmental health experts have raised serious concerns about the practice.[331]Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. § 712A.2 (restricting exclusive jurisdiction of thejuvenile court to youth under age 17); Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. § 712A.2d(permitting the filing of criminal charges—and trial as ifadults—for certain youth under age 17).[332]Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. § 764.27a(3) (permitting the detention of youthunder age 17 charged as adults in adult facilities); Mich. Comp. Laws Ann.§ 771.7(2)(f) (permitting the detention of certain juvenile delinquentswho violate probation).[333]Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. §764.27a.[334]The various forms of solitary confinement are discussed in Section III of thereport.[335]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Troy Stewart, Administrator BayCounty Jail, Michigan, March 23, 2012; and with Ann Russell, CorrectionsAdministrator, Oakland County, Michigan, March 23, 2012; Letter from JeffreyConquest, Lieutenant/Jail Administrator, Benzie County Jail, Michigan, to HumanRights Watch, January 11, 2012; Letter from Joseph Underwood, Sheriff, CassCounty Sheriff’s Office/Correctional Facility, Michigan, to Human RightsWatch, January 30, 2012; Letter from David Deeter, Jail Administrator,Cheboygan County Sheriff Department, Michigan, to Human Rights Watch, January4, 2012; Letter from Carl Gruzhit, Corrections Officer, Gladwin County Jail,Michigan, to Human Rights Watch, January 31, 2012; Letter from Marjorie Chandonais,Captain Houghton County Sheriff’s Office, Michigan, to Human RightsWatch, January 4, 2012; and Letter from Duane Engelhardt, Jail Administrator,Lapeer County Sheriff’s Office, Michigan, to Human Rights Watch, February1, 2012;[336]Letter from David Deeter, Jail Administrator, Cheboygan County SheriffDepartment, Michigan, January 4, 2012; Letter from Carl Gruzhit, CorrectionsOfficer, Gladwin County Jail, Michigan, January 31, 2012; Letter from MarjorieChandonais, Captain Houghton County Sheriff’s Office, Michigan, January4, 2012; Letter from Scott Lamiman, Jail Population Coordinator, MuskegonCounty Jail, Michigan, to Human Rights Watch, January 24, 2012; and Letter fromTim Schuler, Captain, St. Joseph County Sheriff’s Office, Michigan, to HumanRights Watch, January 5, 2012.[337]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ann Russell, CorrectionsAdministrator, Oakland County, Michigan, March 23, 2012; and with Michelle M.Sanborn, Jail Administrator, Macomb County, Michigan, March 9, 2012.[338]Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. §762.11.[339]Policy Directive 05.01.140, Michigan Department of Corrections, “PrisonerPlacement and Transfer,” October 2011, http://www.michigan.gov/documents/corrections/0501140_365947_7.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), at CC-EE.[340]Ibid., at EE.[341]Ibid., at DD-GG.[342]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Russell Marlan, Administrator,Executive Bureau, Michigan Department of Corrections, June 19, 2012.[343]Policies in place governing youth in Department custody suggest that thesegregation of youth is regulated in the same way as the segregation of adults.Michigan Department of Corrections, “Prisoner Placement andTransfer,” at DD; Policy Directive 04.05.120, Michigan Department ofCorrections, “Segregation Standards,” September 2010, http://www.michigan.gov/documents/corrections/0405120_333436_7.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), at V.9 and V.21.[344]Jails at Mid-Year Survey (2006 - 2011), Bureau of JusticeStatistics, US Department of Justice.[345]Throughout the report, “solitary confinement” is used to refer tophysical and social isolation that extended for more than 22 hours each day andlasted for one or more days. UN Human Rights Council, Interim Report of theSpecial Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment, Juan Mendez, U.N. G.A. Doc. A/66/268, August 5, 2011,http://daccess-ddsny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/445/70/PDF/N1144570.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 27, 2012).. This report does not address the practice ofholding two individuals in prolonged segregation, but Human Rights Watch andmental health experts have raised serious concerns about the practice.[346]The defense of infancy can only be invoked by youth under age 16 (and incertain circumstances). New York Penal Law § 30. See also Remarks of ChiefJudge Lippman to the New York Citizens Crime Commission, September 21, 2011, http://www.nycrimecommission.org/pdfs/Lippman110921.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012). There is a procedure for sentencing such youth as“youthful offenders” in particular circumstances, though this isdistinct from treating them as “juveniles” under New York law. NewYork Criminal Procedure Law § 720.[347]All youth between 16 and 18 are generally held in adult jails, and youth under16 can be held there in certain circumstances. N.Y. Crim. Proc. Law §510.15(1) (McKinney2006).[348]The statute reads, “No person under nineteen years of age shall be placedor kept or allowed to be at any time with any prisoner or prisoners nineteenyears of age or older, in any room, dormitory, cell or tier of the buildings ofsuch institution unless separately grouped to prevent access to persons undernineteen years of age by prisoners nineteen years of age or older.” N.Y.Correct. Law § 500-b(4). The New York City Board of Corrections, whichseparately regulates New York City jails, refers to this population as“adolescents.” NYC Board of Correction (BOC), “VariancesGranted by the Board of Correction, Minimum Standards for New York CityCorrectional Facilities,” Section 1-02, “Classification ofPrisoners,” March 1989, http://www.nyc.gov/html/boc/html/rules/variances.shtml(accessed August 27, 2012).[349]The various forms of solitary confinement are discussed in Section III of thereport.[350]Remarks of Chief Judge Lippman, September 21, 2011.  This data is hard toestimate because New York State does not publish age-disaggregated felonyarrest statistics. See New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services,“Adult Arrests: 2002-2011,” http://www.criminaljustice.ny.gov/crimnet/ojsa/arrests/index.htm(accessed August 27, 2012).[351]See Appendix 1 above; New York City data is drawn from City of New YorkDepartment of Corrections, “Adolescents: Overview,” http://www.nyc.gov/html/doc/html/adolescent/doc_stats_adol.shtml(accessed August 27, 2012).[352]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Jeffrey Hartman, Captain, ErieCounty Holding Center,  New York, March 2, 2012; with Dora B. Schriro,Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections,  New York, July 6,2012; and with Dominick Orsino, Corrections Administrator, Orange CountyCorrectional Facility, New York, April 9, 2012; and letter from Randy Benedict,Captain/Jail Administrator, Fulton County Correctional Facility, New York, toHuman Rights Watch, January 10, 2012; Letter from Sherry Stanford, Lieutenant, LewisCounty Jail, New York, to Human Rights Watch, January 7, 2012; Letter fromJason Tripoli, Corporal, Monroe County Jail New York,  to Human RightsWatch, January 23, 2012; and Letter from David Hetman, Program/SupportLieutenant, Correction Bureau, Rensselaer County Office of the Sheriff, NewYork, to Human Rights Watch, April 19, 2012.[353]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Dominick Orsino, CorrectionsAdministrator, Orange County Correctional Facility, New York,  April 9,2012; and with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner, New York City Department ofCorrections,  New York, July 6, 2012.[354]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jeff McKoy, Deputy Commissioner forProgram Services, New York Department of Corrections and Community Supervision,June 28, 2012.[355]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Peter Cutler, Director of PublicInformation, New York Department of Corrections and Community Supervision, July20, 2012.[356]Human Rights Watch email Correspondence with Peter Cutler, June 15, 2012.[357]In a recent op-ed, New York Department of Corrections and Community Supervision(NYDOCCS) Commissioner Brian Fischer stated that of the 4,300 inmates indisciplinary segregation in DOCCS facilities as of August 19, 2012, 1,400 (orapproximately one-third) live in two-man cells. Brian Fischer, “Safetyhas to come first in N.Y.’s prisons,” Times Union, August19, 2012, http://www.timesunion.com/default/article/Safety-has-to-come-first-in-N-Y-s-prisons-3798859.php(accessed August 27, 2012). This report does not address the practice ofholding two individual in prolonged segregation, but Human Rights Watch, mentalhealth experts, and other advocates have raised serious concerns about thepractice. See for example, New York Civil Liberties Union, “Boxed In: TheTrue Cost of Extreme Isolation in New York’s Prisons,” October2012, http://www.nyclu.org/BoxedIn.[358]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jeff McKoy, June 28, 2012(“As with any other offender, when they go to SHU they are double-celledunless it is determined that they shouldn’t be double celled.”).[359]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Peter Cutler, July 20, 2012.[360]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Sharman Stein, DeputyCommissioner, New York City Department of Corrections,July 27, 2012; HumanRigths Watch email correspondence with Robin Campbell, Deputy Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[361]As discussed in the report, Human Rights Watch and the American Civil LibertiesUnion use the term “mental disability” to refer to this population.The Department of Corrections did not provide data about what percentage ofyouth subjected to punitive segregation had a mental disability. Human RightsWatch email correspondence with Sharman Stein, Deputy Commissioner, New YorkCity Department of Corrections, July 27, 2012; Human Rights Watch emailcorrespondence with Robin Campbell, Deputy Commissioner, New York CityDepartment of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[362]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections,  New York July 6, 2012.[363]This data is for FY2012. Human Rights Watch email correspondence with SharmanStein, Deputy Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, July 27,2012; Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Robin Campbell, DeputyCommissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[364]This data is for FY2012. Human Rights Watch email correspondence with SharmanStein, Deputy Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, July 27,2012; Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Robin Campbell, DeputyCommissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[365]Note that the data, which is for FY2012, is not completely parallel between thetwo groups. Human Rights Watch email correspondence with Sharman Stein, DeputyCommissioner, New York City Department of Corrections, July 27, 2012; HumanRights Watch email correspondence with Robin Campbell, Deputy Commissioner, NewYork City Department of Corrections, September 26, 2012.[366]New York State Bill A9424-2011/S7020-2011, http://open.nysenate.gov/legislation/bill/A9424-2011(accessed August 27, 2012).[367]“New Privately Funded Program to ReduceReincarceration—ABLE—is part of City’s comprehensive YoungMen’s Initiative,” August 2, 2012, News from the Blue Room, NYC.govpress release, http://www.nyc.gov/portal/site/nycgov/menuitem.c0935b9a57bb4ef3daf2f1c701c789a0/index.jsp?pageID=mayor_press_release&catID=1194&doc_name=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nyc.gov%2Fhtml%2Fom%2Fhtml%2F2012b%2Fpr285-12.html&cc=unused1978&rc=1194&ndi=1; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withDora B. Schriro, Commissioner, New York City Department of Corrections,New York,  July 6, 2012; New York City Board Of Corrections Letter toCommissioner Dora Schriro, September 20, 2012, http://www.nyc.gov/html/boc/downloads/pdf/Variance_Documents/201208/CELL%20RESTRICTION%20APPROVAL%20LTR.pdf(accessed October 2, 2012).[368]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jeffrey Hartman, Captain, ErieCounty Holding Center, New York, March 2, 2012.[369]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with with Dora B. Schriro, Commissioner,New York City Department of Corrections, New York,  July 6, 2012.[370]For detailed recommendations, see recommendations section above.[371]In Pennsylvania, county detention facilities are called “countyprisons.” However, because the term “jail” is used throughoutthe report, it is retained here for the sake of consistency.[372]Jails at Mid-Year Survey (2006 - 2011), Bureau of JusticeStatistics, US Department of Justice.[373]Throughout the report, “solitary confinement” is used to refer tophysical and social isolation that extended for more than 22 hours each day andlasted for one or more days. UN Human Rights Council, Interim Report of theSpecial Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment, Juan Mendez, U.N. G.A. Doc. A/66/268, August 5, 2011,http://daccess-ddsny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/445/70/PDF/N1144570.pdf?OpenElement(accessed August 27, 2012). This report does not address the practice ofholding two individuals in prolonged segregation, but Human Rights Watch andmental health experts have raised serious concerns about the practice.[374]Pa. Cons. Stat. § 6327(c)-(d). Youth under age 18 are charged as adultsthrough the operation of statutory language excluding certain crimes from thedefinition of “delinquent acts.” Pa. Const. Stat. § 6302.[375]Pa. Cons. Stat. § 6322.[376]Pa. Cons. Stat. § 6327(c)(3).[377]The various forms of solitary confinement are discussed in Section III of thereport.[378]Pennsylvania jails report detention data to the State Department ofCorrections. It is available athttp://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/1259638/2012_county_statistics_xls(accessed September 26, 2012).[379]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jack Healy, Director of InmateServices, Chester County Prison, Pennsylvania, February 29, 2012; Letter fromBernie Zook, Administrator/Warden, Mifflin County Correctional Facility,Pennsylvania, to Human Rights Watch, January 3, 2012; Letter from Joseph Gross,Warden, Carbon County Correctional Facility, Pennsylvania, to Human RightsWatch, January 6, 2012; and Letter from Jacqueline Motter, Deputy Warden,Clinton County Correctional Facility, Pennsylvania, to Human Rights Watch,February 13, 2012.[380]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jack Healy, Director of InmateServices, Chester County Prison, Pennsylvania, February 29, 2012; Letter from JacquelineMotter, Deputy Warden, Clinton County Correctional Facility, Pennsylvania, toHuman Rights Watch, February 13, 2012.[381]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eric Bush, Superintendent, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,June 21, 2012; Policy 11.2.1, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,“Reception and Classification,” http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/916502/11_02_01_reception___classification_pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), section 8(A).[382]Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, Monthly Population Report,http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/ (accessed August 27,2012).[383]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Marshall Shirley, Deputy, SecureCorrectional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections,Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012.[384]Ibid.[385]Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, Monthly Population Report,http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/.[386]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eric Bush, June 21, 2012; See alsoPolicy DC-ADM 801,Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, “InmateDiscipline,” http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/916568/801_inmate_discipline_pdf(accessed August 27, 2012), section 4(B)(7).[387]Inmates in PA DOC custody who are placed in administrative confinement aresubject to periodic review from the Program Review Committee, his or hercounselor, and the Unit Management Team. A qualified psychologist orpsychiatrist is to personally interview and conduct an assessment of any inmateremaining in administrative confinement for longer than 30 calendar days. Forinmates kept further in administrative confinement for an extended period, amental health assessment is to be completed every 90 calendar days. PolicyDC-ADM 802, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, “AdministrativeCustody Procedures,” www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/919463/802_administrative_custody_procedures_pdf+&hl=en&g(accessed August 27, 2012), section (2)(D). Inmates in administrativeconfinement are permitted only non-contact visits and are permitted exerciseone hour per day, five days per week. Ibid., section (3)(D)(6).[388]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jeff Dunmire, School Principal,Secure Correctional Institution Pine Grove, Pennsylvania Department ofCorrections, Pennsylvania, June 21, 2012.[389]See Campaign for Youth Justice, “The Pennsylvania Success Story:Pennsylvania Allows for Youth Sentenced as Adultsto be Served by Juvenile Facilities,” March2011, http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/PA_SB_1169.pdf(accessed August 27, 2012).[390]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Eric Bush, June 21, 2012[391]For detailed recommendations, see recommendations section above.Related ContentOctober 10, 2012News ReleaseUS:Teens in Solitary ConfinementYouths Suffer Serious Harm From Weeks, Months in ‘Lock-Down’October 10, 2012News ReleaseUS:Teens in Solitary ConfinementRegion / CountryUnited States Criminal JusticeProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch