A Poisonous Mix: Child Labor, Mercury, and Artisanal Gold Mining in Mali | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureDecember 6, 2011A Poisonous MixChild Labor, Mercury, and Artisanal Gold Mining in MaliAvailable InEnglishFrançaisA Poisonous MixChild Labor, Mercury, and Artisanal Gold Mining in MaliRegional MapsSummaryKeyRecommendationsMethodologyI. TheContext: Gold Mining in MaliMali’sGold EconomyArtisanalGold MiningChild Laborand Migration in West AfricaII. TheLegal FrameworkInternationalHuman Rights LawNationalLaws on Human RightsIII.Hazardous Child Labor in Mali’s Artisanal Gold MinesHazardousChild Labor throughout the Mining ProcessMercuryPoisoning of Children in Artisanal Mines—an “InvisibleEpidemic”“EverythingHurts:” Other Health Consequences of Child Labor in  Artisanal GoldMiningWorkingHours and Pay: Between Family Support and ExploitationTraffickingCoercionOther ChildLabor in Mining CommunitiesAttitudes toChild LaborIV. Sexual Exploitation and ViolenceSexual ExploitationSexualViolenceV. LimitedImpact: Policy and Program Responses to Child Labor and AbuseGovernmentAction on Child LaborDonor andNGO Programs on Child LaborTheILO’s “Minors out of Mining” Initiative: Hollow Commitments?Efforts toEnd Child Abuse and TraffickingVI. A PoorHealth Policy ResponseA WeakHealth SystemHealthAccess Barriers for Children in Mining AreasGovernmentNeglect of Mercury Related Health ConditionsEfforts toReduce Exposure to MercuryTowards anInternational Mercury Reduction TreatyVII.“I Have Never Been to School” – Access to  Education forChild Laborers in MinesDifficultAccess to Education in Artisanal Mining AreasEducationPolicies: Failing to Reach Child LaborersSocialProtection Measures to Improve Access to EducationVIII. TheGold Traders’ ResponsibilityTheResponsibility of Gold Traders in MaliThe Role ofArtisanal Miners’ AssociationsTheResponsibility of International Gold Trading CompaniesGovernmentMining Policies: Failure to Regulate Artisanal MiningRegional andInternational Initiatives towards Mining BusinessesConclusionRecommendationsTo theGovernment of MaliTo theEconomic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)To DonorCountries and the World Bank, and Relevant UN Agencies, such as ILO, UNICEF,UNIDO, UNEP, and WHOTo Malianand International Companies Trading in Artisanal GoldTo MalianAssociations of Artisanal Gold MinersTo AllGovernmentsAcknowledgementsAnnex IAnnex IIAnnex IIIAnnex IVAnnex VRegional MapsClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageSummaryIn many poor rural areas around the world, men, women, andchildren work in artisanal gold mining to make a living. Artisanal orsmall-scale mining is mining through labor-intensive, low-tech methods, andbelongs to the informal sector of the economy. It is estimated that about 12percent of global gold production comes from artisanal mines.Mining is one of the most hazardous work sectors in theworld, yet child labor is common in artisanal mining. This report looks at theuse of child labor in Mali’s artisanal gold mines, located in the largegold belt of West Africa. Mali is Africa’s third largest gold producerafter South Africa and Ghana; gold is Mali’s most important exportproduct.It is estimated that between 20,000 and 40,000 children workin Mali’s artisanal gold mining sector. Many of them start working asyoung as six years old. These children are subjected to some of the worst formsof child labor, leading to injury, exposure to toxic chemicals, and even death.They dig shafts and work underground, pull up, carry and crush the ore, and panit for gold. Many children suffer serious pain in their heads, necks, arms, orbacks, and risk long-term spinal injury from carrying heavy weights and fromenduring repetitive motion. Children have sustained injuries from falling rocksand sharp tools, and have fallen into shafts.  In addition, they riskgrave injury when working in unstable shafts, which sometimes collapse.Child miners are also exposed to mercury, a highly toxicsubstance, when they mix gold with mercury and then burn the amalgam toseparate out the gold. Mercury attacks the central nervous system and isparticularly harmful to children. Child laborers risk mercury poisoning, whichresults in a range of neurological conditions, including tremors, coordinationproblems, vision impairment, headaches, memory loss, and concentrationproblems. The toxic effects of mercury are not immediately noticeable, butdevelop over time: it is hard to detect for people who are not medical experts.Most adult and child artisanal miners are unaware of the grave health risksconnected with the use of mercury.The majority of child laborers lives with and work alongsidetheir parents who send their children into mining work to increase the familyincome. Most parents are artisanal miners themselves, and are paid little forthe gold they mine, while traders and some local government officials makeconsiderable profit from it. However, some children also live or work withother people—relatives, acquaintances, or strangers, and are economicallyexploited by them. A significant proportion of child laborers are migrants,coming from different parts of Mali or from neighboring countries, such asBurkina Faso and Guinea. Some of them may be victims of trafficking. Younggirls in artisanal mining areas are also sometimes victims of sexualexploitation and abuse.Many children working in artisanal mining never go toschool, missing out on essential life skills as well as job options for thefuture. The government has largely failed to make education accessible andavailable for these children. School fees, lack of infrastructure, and poorquality of education deter many parents in mining areas from sending theirchildren to school. Schools have also sometimes failed to enroll and integratechildren who have migrated to mines. Nevertheless, some child laborers attendschool but struggle to keep up, as they are working in the mines duringholidays, weekends, and other spare time.In the view of Human Rights Watch, with some exceptions, Malianand international gold companies operating in Mali have not done enough toaddress the issue of child labor in the supply chain. Much of the gold fromMali’s artisanal mines is bought by small traders who supply middlemenand trading houses in Bamako, the country’s capital. A few trading housesexport the gold to Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates (in particular Dubai),Belgium, and other countries.Under international law, the government of Mali is obligatedto protect children from the worst forms of child labor, and from economicexploitation, trafficking, and abuse. It also has an obligation to ensure freeand compulsory primary education for all. The government must take measures toavoid occupational accidents and diseases, and reduce the population’sexposure to harmful substances. International development partners shouldassist poorer nations, such as Mali, to fulfill their obligations underinternational law. Businesses, under international law and other norms, also havea responsibility to identify, prevent, mitigate, and account for their impacton human rights through policies and due diligence measures.Encouragingly, the government of Mali has taken someimportant measures to protect children’s rights. It has outlawed hazardouschild labor in artisanal mines and, in June 2011, adopted a National ActionPlan for the Elimination of Child Labor in Mali. The government has also madesome progress in improving access to education, though net enrollment remainslow at 60.6 percent. With regard to mercury, the government supports mercuryreduction measures through the upcoming global treaty on mercury.Yet, the government has not put its full political weightbehind these efforts. Existing initiatives, such as the work of the NationalUnit to Combat Child Labor, tend to be isolated, understaffed, and lack fullsupport from other ministries. Health policy lacks a strategy to prevent ortreat health problems related to mercury use or other mining-relatedconditions. Child laborers, including those in artisanal mining areas, have notbenefitted from government’s education policy, and the education systemhas not been adapted to their needs. Mining policy has focused on industrialmining, carried out by international companies, and has largely neglectedproblems related to artisanal mining, including child labor. Meanwhile, localgovernment officials and traditional authorities such as local chiefs havebenefitted financially from artisanal mining. Government policies on crucial areassuch as health, education, and artisanal mining, are also sometimes underminedby the laissez-faire attitude of local government officials, who carryconsiderable weight in the current decentralized governance structure. Suchattitude effectively undermines the government’s efforts to address childrights issues, including child labor in artisanal gold mining.Donors, United Nations agencies, and civil society groupshave undertaken some important initiatives on child labor, education, orartisanal mining in Mali. For example, the International Labor Organization(ILO) and a Malian non-governmental organization, Réseau d’Appuiet de Conseils, have assisted children in leaving mining work and startingschool. But such initiatives have been limited in scope, suffered from paucityof funding, and lacked consistent political backing. The United States and theEuropean Commission have drastically reduced their funding for internationalchild labor programs in Mali, contributing to a funding crisis at the ILO. Atthe international level, the ILO has failed to follow up on its 2005 call toaction “Minors out of Mining,” in which 15governments—including Mali—committed to eliminating child labor intheir artisanal mining sector by 2015.Hazardous child labor in Mali’s artisanal mines canonly be ended if different actors—central and local governments, civilsociety, UN agencies, donors, artisanal miners, gold traders andcompanies—prioritize its elimination, give it their full politicalsupport, and provide financial support to efforts aimed at ending it. There isan urgent need for feasible and concrete solutions that can bring about change.As a first step, the government should take immediatemeasures to end the use of mercury by children working in artisanal mining,through a public announcement reiterating the ban on such hazardous work forchildren, an information campaign in mining areas, and regular laborinspections.Beyond this immediate step, the government and all relevantstakeholders should come together to implement the government’s actionplan on child labor. The government should also take steps to improve access toeducation in mining zones, by abolishing all school fees, introducing statesupport for community schools, and establishing a social protection scheme forvulnerable children. The government and other actors should provide strongersupport for artisanal gold miners, such as support in the creation ofcooperatives, and the introduction of alternative technologies that reduce theuse of mercury. The government should also address the health impact of mercuryon artisanal miners, in particular on children, and address othermining-related health problems. International donors and UN agencies shouldsupport the government in its efforts to eliminate hazardous child labor inartisanal mining, politically, financially, and with technical expertise. Thereis the need to convene a national roundtable on hazardous child labor inartisanal mining in Mali, to bring together all relevant actors—government,civil society, UN, donors, experts, and business—and create momentum forconcerted action.Malian and international companies should recognize theirresponsibility regarding child labor and other human rights issues. Companiesshould introduce thorough due diligence processes and engage in meaningfuldialogue with their suppliers and their government, urging measures towards theelimination of child labor within a specific time frame, for example, twoyears. They should also directly support projects that aim to eliminate childlabor, such as education and health programs for children in artisanal miningareas. An immediate and total boycott of gold from Mali is not the answer tohuman rights violations in Mali’s artisanal gold mines. Boycott risksreducing the income of impoverished artisanal mining communities and may evenincrease child labor as families seek to boost their income.At the regional level, the Economic Community of WestAfrican States (ECOWAS) should ensure that the future ECOWAS Mining Codeprohibits child labor in artisanal mining, including the use of mercury, andmandates governments to take steps to reduce the use of mercury.At theinternational level, the future global treaty on mercury should obligegovernments to take measures that end the practice of child laborers workingwith mercury. The ILO should build on its past efforts to end child labor inartisanal mining by reviving its “Minors out of Mining” initiative.Key RecommendationsThe Malian government should immediately take steps toend the use of mercury by child laborers, through informationdissemination and outreach with affected communities.The Malian government and international donors, includingthe United States and European donors, should give full political backingand sufficient financial support for the recently adopted NationalAction Plan on Child Labor, including to programs for the withdrawalof children working in mines.As part of a nationwide campaign on child labor and theright to education, local authorities—with oversight fromnational government—should raise awareness in the mining communitiesabout the laws on hazardous child labor and compulsory education. Laborinspectors should start inspections in artisanal mines and sanction those whouse child labor in contravention of the law.The Malian government should improve access toeducation for children in artisanal gold mining areas, by liftingschool fees, introducing free school meals, increasing state financialsupport for community schools, and improving school infrastructure. Itshould also establish a social protection scheme for child laborers,including those in mining areas that ties cash transfers to regular schoolattendance.The Malian government, together with civil society groups,should develop a national action plan for the reduction of mercury inartisanal mining, with attention to the particular situation ofchildren and pregnant women living and working in artisanal mining areas.The Malian government should develop a comprehensivepublic health strategy to tackle chronic mercury exposure and mercurypoisoning in Mali, with a particular focus on child health.The Malian government should improve the livelihood ofartisanal mining communities by providing training on improved miningtechniques, assisting artisanal miners in efforts to set up cooperatives,and offering income-generating activities in other sectors.National and international companies buying gold fromMali’s artisanal mines should have due diligence proceduresthat include regular monitoring of child labor. If child labor is found,companies should urge the government and suppliers to take measurablesteps towards the elimination of child labor in their supply chain withina defined time frame, and directly support measures to end child labor.The International Labor Organization should renew its “Minorsout of Mining” initiative, in which 15 governments committed toeliminate child labor in artisanal mining by 2015.All governments should support a strong global treatyon mercury that requires governments to implement mandatory actionplans for mercury reduction in artisanal gold mining. The action plansshould include strategies to end the use of mercury by children andpregnant women working in mining, and public health strategies to addressthe health effects of mercury poisoning.MethodologyField research for this report was carried out betweenFebruary and April 2011 in Bamako and in the mining areas in Western andS0uthern Mali. Human Rights Watch researchers visited three mining sites inKéniéba circle, in the Kayes region of Western Mali — Baroya(Sitakili commune), Tabakoto (Sitakili commune), and Sensoko(Kéniéba commune) — and one mine in Worognan (Mena commune)in Kolondiéba circle, in the Sikasso region of Southern Mali (see map).Human Rights Watch interviewed over 150people—including 41 children working in mining areas (24 boys and 17girls)—for this report.[1]Thirty-three of these children worked in gold mining, and the other eight,among them seven girls, worked as child laborers in other sectors such aschildcare, domestic work, agriculture, or in small scale enterprises. Five ofthe forty-one children were immigrants; two were from Burkina Faso, and threewere from Guinea. We also interviewed three young adults, ages eighteen andnineteen, two of whom were working in a gold mine, and one as a sex worker at amining site.While the majority of the children interviewed lived withtheir parents, five lived with relatives or other guardians, and seven wereliving on their own.We also interviewed a wide range of other actors in miningareas, including parents and guardians of child workers, adult miners, teachersand principals, health workers and health experts, village chiefs, tombolomas(traditional mining chiefs), NGO activists, and sex workers. Inaddition, Human Rights Watch researchers held meetings with gold traders inmining areas and in Bamako, with representatives of UN agencies and donorgovernments.  We interviewed the Minister of Labor and Civil Service andhis staff, as well as officials in the Ministry of Mines, the Ministry ofHealth, the Ministry of Environment and Sanitation, the Ministry of Education,and the Ministry of Promotion of Women, Child and Family Affairs. We alsointerviewed local government officials in Kéniéba andKolondiéba circles.We also interviewed international companies importing goldor other products through complex supply chains, including two companiesimporting gold from Mali’s artisanal mines. Outside Mali, we alsointerviewed several international experts on artisanal gold mining, mercuryuse, and health effects of mercury.Interviews with child laborers were carried out in a quietsetting, without other adults present. The names of the interviewees were keptconfidential. All names of children used in this report are pseudonyms. Wearranged for a local NGO to intervene in the case of one child who was abusedat home. When we interviewed children, we adapted the length and content of theinterview to the age and maturity of the child. Interviews with children underthe age of 10 did not last longer than 15 minutes, while those with olderchildren took up to an hour.Most interviews were conducted in Bambara through the helpof an interpreter. Bambara is the mother tongue of about four million Maliansof the Bambara ethnic group; it is also a lingua franca in Mali and severalother West African countries. Three interviews with Guinean children and onewith an 18-year-old from Guinea were conducted in French. One interview with an18-year-old sex worker was conducted in English.One challenge during this research was the assessment of thechildren’s age. Some children did not know their exact age. Parents orguardians were also sometimes unable to state the precise age of the child. InMali, almost half of all births are not registered, making itdifficult to obtain information on the real age of the children we interviewed.[2] We onlyconsidered interviewees as children when we were certain that they werechildren, judging their age by their own assessment, the assessment ofrelatives, and their physical appearance. Because of this, we did not includethe statement of a boy who claimed he was 18, even though he looked younger.In addition to interviews, we carried out desk research,consulting a wide array of written documents from government, UN, NGO, media,academic, company, and other sources.I. The Context: Gold Mining in MaliMali’s Gold EconomyGold has been mined for many centuries in Mali. Large WestAfrican kingdoms, including the Mali Empire (approximately 1235-1400), builttheir wealth on gold from the Bambouk region of Western Mali and theTrans-Saharan gold trade.[3]Gold has remained a central commodity during colonialism and in Mali’spostcolonial economy.Since 1999, gold has been Mali’s number one exportcommodity, followed by cotton. In 2008, gold accounted for about 75 percent ofall Malian exports.[4]While gold prices have dramatically increased over the last decade, prices forother commodities, such as cotton, have fallen. Mali is currently the thirdlargest gold producer on the African continent, after South Africa and Ghana,and the thirteenth largest gold producer in the world.[5] Since 2005,Mali’s gold production has been around 50 tons per year—worth morethan US $2.9 billion at September 2011 prices.[6]The main gold mining regions lie in Western and SouthernMali, specifically in the Kéniéba area on the Senegalese-Malianborder (historically known as Bambouk); the area around Kangaba less than 100kilometers southwest of the capital; and in several areas in the Sikasso region(see map). While mining in Kéniéba and Kangaba dates hundreds ofyears back, many mines in the Sikasso region have been opened in recent years.The gold belt in the Sahel zone includes several other countries, such asGuinea, Senegal, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Niger, and Nigeria.Historically, Malian miners have practiced artisanal mining,known as orpaillage in French. Today, the practice still exists.Artisanal or small-scale mining is carried out by individuals, groups,families, or cooperatives with minimal or no mechanization, usinglabor-intensive excavation and processing methods. Artisanal miners (orpailleurs)operate with limited capital investment, often in the informal sector of theeconomy, and are not employed by a large company.[7] Mali’s artisanalmines produce an estimated four tons of gold per year, according to officialrecords; the real number might be higher, though.[8] Due to rising goldprices, artisanal mining has attracted increasing numbers of people in Mali andthe West African region over the last decade.[9]The majority of gold produced today comes from largeindustrial mines. Among the important multinational companies in Mali are AngloGold Ashanti, Randgold (both South African multinational companies), IAMGOLD,Avion Gold (two Canadian corporations), Resolute Mining (from Australia), andAvnel Gold Mining (from the United Kingdom). These companies operate several largeindustrial mines, such as the Morila, Sadiola, Yatela, and Loulo mines, injoint ventures with the Malian government; the government holds a minoritystake of about 20 percent.[10]A new mining law is currently underway; it will increase the government sharein industrial mines, and oblige mining companies to implement local developmentprojects.[11]Despite its wealth in gold, Mali remains a very poorcountry. The 2010 Human Development Index, which measures health, education andincome, ranks Mali as 160th out of 169 countries.[12] About 50 percent ofthe population is living on less than one dollar per day,[13] and social indicatorsare very low. Almost 20 percent of all children die before their fifthbirthday, and adults have, on average, attended school for only 1.4 years.[14] Humanrights and development organizations have commented critically on the limitedbenefit of Mali’s gold sector for the wider population, including a lackof revenue transparency.[15]Artisanal Gold MiningThere are over 350 artisanal mining sites across Western andSouthern Mali; their precise number is unknown even to the government.[16]Estimates put the number of artisanal gold miners in Malibetween 100,000 and 200,000.[17]Around20 percent of artisanal gold miners are children.[18] Based on theseestimates, the number of child laborers in Mali’s artisanal mines isbetween 20,000 and 40,000.The work process is organized by groups of artisanal minerswho agree at the outset how they will divide the gold mined. Groups may consistof adults and children. Artisanal mines have attracted workers from many partsof Mali, as well as from other countries in the West African subregion, such asGuinea and Burkina Faso.Under the Mining Code, artisanal mining is legal inspecified geographical areas called artisanal gold mining corridors (couloirsd’orpaillage).[19]In reality, most artisanal mining sites lie outside these corridors.[20]The government usually tolerates these activities, in partbecause mayors and other local authorities, as well as traditional authorities,sometimes benefit financially from the presence of artisanal mines. In thecontext of decentralization during the 1990s, oversight over and taxing ofartisanal mining has been relegated to the local authorities.[21] Sometimes, artisanalminers have to pay money or part of their gold to traditional authorities whohave customary ownership over the land. According to customary practices thatare still relevant today, traditional authorities—such as villagechiefs—are considered the owners of all land belonging to a particulararea.[22]They have the authority to open or close a mine. On behalf of the villagechief, the tomboloma (traditional mining chief) deals with managementissues at the mine. He assigns each group of miners a shaft and, in some areas,receives a payment for it.[23]He also manages conflicts among miners.Mayors also sometimes charge for shafts or get other revenuefrom the mine.[24]A mayor in Kolondiéba circle moved his office from the regular town hallin the commune’s central town to a mining site when the mine was openedduring 2010, and was receiving one third of each payment for each newlyassigned shaft when we visited. His tomboloma explained:The task of the tomboloma isto organize the space, set boundaries for each shaft, and guarantee security ofthe site. When I allow a miner, or a group of miners, to work there, I getmoney, and so do the mayor and the chef de village. Depending on thequality of the ore, the miner has to pay between 10,000 and 12,500 CFA francs(approximately between US $20.73 and US$25.91). One third of this amount goesto the tomboloma, one third goes to the mayor, and one third to the chefde village.[25]In addition, miners frequently pay part of their earnings tomore wealthy and powerful gold miners who rent out machines and equipmentminers cannot afford to buy themselves. Such gold miners are persons of statusand influence in the community, most commonly traditional authorities (or‘notables’) or local government officials. For example, one mayortold Human Rights Watch that he “owned” a mine where he was rentingout machines.[26]His advisor had 70 to 80 people working for him on eight sites.[27] The relationshipbetween the wealthy gold miners and the ordinary artisanal miners sometimesresembles a relationship between an employer and an employee. Some wealthy goldminers also lend money to poorer miners, creating a burden of debt.Communityleaders at one mining site described how the debt creates severe pressure onthe artisanal miners, who try to pay the money back within a month, and theycited this as one of the reasons why parents send their children to work in themines.[28]Artisanal miners who have been assigned a particular shaftsometimes hire others to work for them. They are considered “owners”of the shaft. Several artisanal miners in the Kéniéba regionexplained that they had to give two out of three bags of ore to the“owner” of the shaft.[29]In some areas, miners have set up cooperatives or economicinterest groups to invest together in equipment, improve efficiency of the workprocess, and increase income.[30]Child Labor and Migration inWest AfricaChild labor is very common in Mali and other parts of WestAfrica. In the context of poverty, child labor is a common strategy to increasehousehold income. Mali’s official figures state that about two-thirds ofchildren in Mali work, and about 40 percent of all children between the ages offive and fourteen perform hazardous labor. In absolute figures, an estimated2.4 million children are doing work that is considered harmful.[31] Child labor putschildren at a disadvantage in accessing an education and the wider labormarket, and exposes children to a range of human rights abuses, including laborexploitation, violence, and trafficking.[32]The majority of children in Mali work in agriculture. Othersectors include domestic work—almost entirely performed by girls—husbandry, fishery, handicraft, commerce, and artisanal mining, includingartisanal gold mining and quarrying. Another form of child labor is the forcedbegging by pupilsof Quranic schools (talibés) who areexploited by their teachers.[33]There is a long history of child migration in West Africa.[34] Youngerchildren are often sent to live with relatives, a practice called confiage (childfostering).[35]For adolescents—older children under the age of 18—leaving thevillage and seeking economic independence have been an important rite ofpassage in the past and present.[36]While child fostering and migration can benefit achild’s access to education and upbringing, it can also lead toexploitation and trafficking.[37]Trafficking of children into various work sectors has increasingly become aproblem in West Africa, including Mali.  Most of the trafficking is donethrough small, informal networks, including families and acquaintances. Inaddition to internal trafficking, there is cross-border trafficking betweenMali and its neighboring countries.[38]II. The Legal FrameworkInternational Human Rights LawMali has ratified a great number of international treaties,including the International Covenant on Social, Economic and Cultural Rights(ICESCR), the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and its OptionalProtocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography,and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons,especially Women and Children.[39]Furthermore, Mali has ratified binding ILO Conventions, in particular the WorstForms of Child Labor Convention (Convention 182) and the Minimum Age Convention(Convention 138).[40]At the regional level, Mali is a state party to the African Charter on Humanand People’s Rights and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare ofthe Child.[41]In Mali, international treaties have primacy over national legislation.[42]Child LaborChild labor is defined by the ILO as work that is“mentally, physically, socially, or morally dangerous and harmful tochildren” and “interferes with their schooling.”[43]International law does not prohibit all types of work for children. Certain typesof activities are permitted when they do not interfere with the child’sschooling and do not harm the child.[44]The Minimum Age Convention and Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention spell outin detail what types of work amount to child labor, depending on thechild’s age, the type and hours of work performed, the impact oneducation, and other factors.According to the CRC, all children have the right to beprotected from economic exploitation.[45]Economic exploitation refers to situations where children are taken advantageof for the purpose of material interests, including through child labor, sexualexploitation, and trafficking.[46]The Worst Forms of Child LaborThe Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention defines the worstforms of child labor as “all forms of slavery or practices similar toslavery, such as the sale and trafficking of children … and forced orcompulsory labor”, as well as “work which, by its nature or thecircumstances in which it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safetyor morals of children.”[47]The latter type of work is also defined as hazardous work.According to the ILO, mining counts among the most hazardoussectors and occupations.[48]Under the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, hazardous work includes work that exposeschildren to abuse, work underground, work with dangerous machinery, equipment,and tools, work that involves the manual handling or transport of heavy loads,work in an unhealthy environment that exposes children to hazardous substances,agents, or processes, or to temperatures damaging to their health, and workunder particularly difficult conditions such as working long hours.[49] TheConvention calls upon states to define hazardous occupation in nationallegislation.[50]Minimum AgeFor work other than the worst forms of child labor,international law requires states to set a minimum age for admission intoemployment and work. The Minimum Age Convention states that “the minimumage shall not be less than the age of compulsory schooling and, in any case,shall not be less than 15 years.”[51]As an exception, developing countries are allowed to specify a lower minimumage at 14 years at the moment of ratification.[52]The Minimum Age Convention also permits light work from theage of 13. Light work is defined as work “which is not likely to beharmful to their health and development; and not such as to prejudice theirattendance at school, their participation in vocational orientation or trainingprograms […] or their capacity to benefit from the instruction received.”[53]The Right to EducationBoth the CRC and the ICESCR lay down the principle of freeand compulsory primary education.[54]In addition, higher education, including secondary schooling as well asvocational training, should be made available and accessible to all.[55] States arerequired to protect children from work that interferes with their education.[56]While the rights under the ICESCR are subject to progressiverealization, states have a “minimum core obligation to ensure thesatisfaction of, at the very least, minimum essential levels of each of therights.” These are not subject to progressive realization but have to befulfilled immediately.[57]In particular, states have to “provide primary education for all, on anon-discriminatory basis.[58]They also have to ensure that primary education is free of charge andcompulsory. To realize the right to primary education, states have to developand implement plans of action; where a State party is clearly lacking infinancial resources, the international community has an obligation to assist.[59]The CRC urges states to implement measures, where necessary,within the framework of international cooperation.[60] Similarly, the AfricanCharter on the Rights and the Welfare of the Child provides that “everychild has the right to an education” and stipulates that free andcompulsory basic education should be achieved progressively.[61]The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard ofHealthThe right to the highest attainable standard of health isenshrined in international human rights law. The ICESCR, the CRC, the AfricanCharter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and the African Charter on theRights and the Welfare of the Child recognize the right to physical and mentalhealth as well as the right of access to health care services for the sick.[62] Severalinternational and regional legal instruments also require states to protectchildren from work that is harmful to their health or physical development.[63]With regards to hazardous work environments, state partiesto the ICESCR have the obligation to improve “all aspects ofenvironmental and industrial hygiene,” for example, through preventivemeasures to avoid occupational accidents and diseases, and the prevention andreduction of the population’s exposure to harmful substances such asharmful chemicals.[64]The full realization of the right to the highest attainablestandard of health has to be achieved progressively.[65] In addition, statesface core obligations that have to be met immediately, including essentialprimary health care, access to health services on a non-discriminatory basis,and access to an adequate supply of safe and potable water.[66] Obligations ofcomparable priority include the provision of reproductive, maternal, and childhealth care, and of education and access to information concerning the mainhealth problems in the community.[67]Protection against Violence, Sexual Abuse, andTraffickingThe CRC and other international treaties to which Mali is aparty protect children from violence and abuse. Although parents or legalguardians have the primary responsibility for children in their care, stateshave an immediate obligation to protect children from all forms of physical ormental violence, injury and abuse, neglect or negligent treatment,maltreatment, or exploitation, including sexual abuse.[68] Sexual exploitationand abuse of children is prohibited in all forms.[69]Trafficking in persons is prohibited under internationallaw.[70]Having a slightly broader scope than trafficking in adults, trafficking inchildren is defined as “the recruitment, transportation, transfer,harboring or receipt of a child for the purpose of exploitation.”[71]Exploitation includes “at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitutionof others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labor or services, slaveryor practices similar to slavery, servitude, or the removal of organs.”[72]Trafficking of children is also classified as a worst form of child labor.[73]International Human Rights Obligations ofBusinessesAlthough governments have the primary responsibility forpromoting and ensuring respect for human rights, private entities such ascompanies have human rights responsibilities as well. This basic principle hasachieved wide international recognition and is reflected in internationalnorms, most recently with the adoption of the Guiding Principles on Businessand Human Rights by the UN Human Rights Council in June 2011.[74]The Guiding Principles were elaborated by John Ruggie,former United Nations’ special representative of the secretary general onthe issue of human rights and transnational corporations and other businessenterprises. The Principles lack guidance with regards to government regulationof companies’ human rights impacts and have failed to call for mandatorymonitoring and reporting of companies’ human rights impacts. Nonetheless,they serve as a useful guide to many of the human rights obligations ofbusinesses and of the governments that oversee their activities. The Principlesplace particular emphasis on the concept of human rights due diligence—theidea that companies must have a process to identify, prevent, mitigate, andaccount for their impact on human rights. According to the Guiding Principles,corporations should monitor their impact on an ongoing basis and have processesin place that enable the remediation of adverse human rights impacts they causeor to which they contribute.[75]Businesses can also choose to join the UN Global Compact, avoluntary initiative which incorporates human rights commitments. The 10principles of the Global Compact cover general human rights, labor rights, andenvironmental and anti-corruption standards that are derived from the UniversalDeclaration on Human Rights and other texts. Businesses committing to thisvoluntary corporate responsibility initiative agree to “uphold theeffective abolition of child labor.”[76]In May 2011 the Organization for Economic Cooperation andDevelopment (OECD) adopted a Recommendation of the Council on Due DiligenceGuidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected andHigh-Risk Areas.[77]The Recommendation is not legally enforceable, but calls upon member states andothers to implement a due diligence framework in the mineral supply chain, anda model supply chain policy. The model policy states, “We will neithertolerate nor by any means profit from, contribute to, assist with or facilitatethe commission by any party of… any forms of forced or compulsory labor… [and] the worst forms of child labour[.]”[78] The OECD is now in theprocess of developing supplements relating to specific minerals, including asupplement on the gold supply chain.[79]National Laws on Human RightsUnder the 1992 Malian labor law, children are allowed towork from the age of 14, in violation of international law, which sets the ageat 15.[80]Malian law prohibits forced, compulsory, and hazardous labor, or work thatexceeds children’s forces or may harm their morals, for anyone under age18.[81]The government has drawn up a national list of hazardouswork for children, which prohibits the use of children in many forms of laborin traditional gold mining. Specifically, it prohibits digging of shafts,cutting and carrying of wood for underground shafts, transport of rock from theshaft, crushing, grinding, panning in water, and the use of explosives,mercury, and cyanide.[82]A decree also stipulates how much weight children are allowed to carry,according to their age, gender, and mode of transport.[83]Mercury is not prohibited in Mali, but it is listed in thegovernment’s list of dangerous waste, subjecting it to strict rules fortrade.[84]According to the law on education, education is free (gratuit)in Mali; this means that any school fees are illegal.[85]The same law also stipulates that education is compulsory; parents have anobligation to place their children in school during a nine-year period of basiceducation (enseignement fondamental), starting at age six.[86]The Penal Code contains protections against violence, childneglect, and child trafficking.[87]Child trafficking is defined as displacement of a child in conditions that areexploitative and turn the child into a commodity.[88] A new initiative for aseparate anti-trafficking law is currently underway.[89]The Child Protection Code spells out key protections forchildren, such as the right to be treated equally and the right to be free fromviolence, neglect, sexual abuse, and exploitation.[90] The Code specificallybans economic exploitation, including trafficking or child labor that harms thechild’s education, health, morals, or development. It puts the minimumage for child labor at 15.[91]III. Hazardous Child Labor in Mali’sArtisanal Gold MinesI work at the mining site. I look after the other childrenand I carry minerals. It is hard. Sometimes my arms hurt from it.… Once Ihad an accident. I injured my finger. I wanted to carry a rock and it fell onmy foot. I was taken to the health center. This happened about two monthsago.… I work with mercury. You mix it in a cup and put it on the fire. Ido this at the site.… I would like to leave this work.­—Mamadou S., estimated age six, Baroya, Kayesregion, April 3, 2011It's my stepmother who makes me work there. I don't wantto. My real mother left. My stepmother takes all the money they pay me….I don't get any money from the work…. Our work starts at 8 a.m. andcontinues the whole day…. I take the minerals [ore] and pan them. I workwith mercury, and touch it. The mercury I was given by a trader…. He saidmercury was a poison and we shouldn't swallow it, but he didn't say anything elseabout the mercury…. I don't want to work in the mines. I want to stay inschool. I got malaria, and I am very tired when I work there [at the mine].—Mariam D., estimated age 11, Worognan, Sikassoregion, April 8, 2011It is estimated that between 20,000 and 40,000 children workin Mali’s artisanal gold mines.[92]Girls and boys are both active in artisanal gold mining, in roughly equalnumbers.[93]They work under conditions that result in short-term and long-term healthproblems and bar them from getting an education. Their right to health, toeducation, and to protection from child labor and abuse is violated on a dailybasis.Children are sent into child labor to increase the familyincome. Many parents of child laborers are artisanal miners, and they oftenearn very little. Artisanal miners frequently have to pay money or part oftheir ore or gold to traditional or local authorities, or to miners who outrent machines or hire them as their workforce. Some artisanal miners are alsoin debt, putting pressure on them to send their children to work in the mines,in order to boost family income.Most children go with a parent or sibling to the mine, andwork alongside them. Others, however, are sent to live and work with anotherfamily, following a tradition of child fostering, or live and work bythemselves. Other adults, such as relatives or even strangers, sometimes alsotake advantage of the vulnerability of children, and economically exploit themby sending them to work in the mines without pay.The government has failed to effectively address child laborin artisanal mining. It has not enforced current law banning hazardous forms ofchild labor, and has done too little to make education available and accessiblein artisanal mining areas. The government has also failed to address childprotection issues, mining-related health problems, and environmental healthissues related to mercury in artisanal mining.Hazardous Child Laborthroughout the Mining ProcessDigging Shafts and Working UndergroundDigging and constructing shafts or pits is the first phaseof the gold mining process, and is physically demanding. Boys as young as sixdo this work. One boy, about six years of age, complained that digging shaftscaused him pain in the palms of his hands.[94] Another boy, Moussa S.,also about six years old, told Human Rights Watch:I dig shafts, with a pickaxe. It is really difficult. Ihave pain sometimes, for example headaches.[95]Hamidou S., estimated to be eight years old, told us that healso dug shafts with a pickaxe, resulting in back and neck pain.[96]Shafts are estimated to be at least 30 meters deep, andsometimes more.[97]Those who climb into shafts and work underground are considered doing“man’s work”, even though some are also children. Oumar K.,about 14, described his experience:I climb into shafts, something like 30 meters deep. Istarted this year. Before that, I worked in mining too for about three years– pulling the rope [with a bucket out of the shaft].  The work withthe bucket was very tiring.... The shaft is worse…. When you are in theshaft, you are alone and do all the work…. This year, a shaft collapsed,but no one died. It had rained a lot and one part of the shaft slipped and camedown. It collapsed on two people. We dug other shafts to get them out. They hadback pains but no other injuries.[98]There are very few security precautions to ensure thatshafts are stable or that those underground can get up safely. Oumar K.explained that he took turns with another person once every hour to ensure thatthe person underground still had enough strength to climb up.[99]Some miners perform magic rituals that they believe willprotect them from accidents. The boys working underground put on a brave face,but barely manage to conceal their fear and frustration. Ibrahim K., whomigrated from neighboring Guinea to Mali to work in artisanal mines, said:I am 15 but I work as a man. I work in a team of 10 people.I climb up and down the shaft and work in the shaft. If you say you are tired,they pull you out and you rest. The big men don't mind. Some only work twohours, I work all day….It's dangerous—there are often collapses. People areinjured. Three died in a cave-in. The little children don't come down into thehole. What they do about safety is that the big men bring sacrifices [such as]butter, lamb, chicken…. I have had problems since working there—myback hurts and I have problems urinating. No one says anything to me aboutsafety….I don't like working here. I would do anything to go backto Guinea. But I can't save any money. There is a lot of suffering; it's veryhard here because of not having enough money.[100]“Pulling the Rope” and Transporting OreOutside the shaft, children and adults pull up the ore withbuckets. This task is commonly called tirer la corde (“pulling therope”). Several children told us that pulling and transporting the orecaused them pain and that they wanted to stop this work. Karim S., a boy whoworked at Worognan mining site with his older brother, told us about his pain:I pull the buckets up…. It hurts in the arms andback. When it hurts I take a break.... I once took some traditional medicinefor the pain in my arms, but it did not really help.[101]Lansana K., a 13 -year-old boy who digs shafts and pulls upheavy buckets, complained:It is really difficult. It can make you sick.... I havealready had headaches.… I also sometimes have back pain, shoulder pain,and muscle pain generally.[102]Once the ore has been pulled out of the shaft, it has to betransported to places where it is bagged for storage or crushed, ground, andpanned. Most workers—adults and children—carry the ore on theirshoulders, while some others use small carts to transport the load.Several boys interviewed complained about pain from transporting ore. One ofthem was 15-year-old Djibril C., who said:It's very difficult—it’s very heavy. I carry it[the ore] on my shoulders and head all day long. Sometimes I take a break toeat. I have had pain in my shoulders and chest since I started working there[two months ago].[103]Another boy, who was 14 years old, told us that hetransported the ore from the shaft to the place where it is put into sacks.Although he used a cart with a donkey for this, he said he often felt stifffrom lifting weight and being bent over, concluding: “I feel that thework is too much for me.”[104]Some children also carry heavy loads of water in the mines,mostly for use in gold panning (and sometimes for drinking). This is mostlydone by girls and poses the same health problems as other transport work.[105]Crushing OreHard and rocky ore must be crushed and ground before it canbe panned for gold. When crushing machines and mills for grinding areavailable, miners rent them to break and grind up the earth.[106] The machines are loudand produce a lot of fumes. Men and adolescent boys usually operate themachines, and they often spend many hours a day at crushing machines or millswithout any protective gear.[107]When there are no machines to crush the rock, artisanalminers pound it manually, usually with a hammer or a pestle and mortar. Thiswork is sometimes carried out by girls or boys.[108] It can lead toaccidents, as well as short-term and long-term back injury.PanningOnce the ore has been ground to a fine sandy quality, it iswashed (or panned) for gold. Gold panning is the basic technique to recovergold from ore. The circular shaking of ore and water in a pan causes the goldto settle to the bottom of the pan, while the lighter material can be washedoff the top. This work is largely considered women’s and girls’work.[109]Of the 10 girl miners we interviewed, nine said that they panned for gold. Someboys pan for gold, too.[110]Several girls mentioned back pains, headaches, and generalfatigue caused by gold panning.[111]Eleven-year-old Susanne D. said:My back sometimes aches because I am bending down. I havenever been to a health center [to treat this], but I take tablets sometimes.When I tell my mother that it hurts, she tells me to take a break.[112]Aminata C., a 13-year-old girl from Baroya mine, told us:I do gold panning and mixing [amalgamation]. I often feelpain everywhere, I have headaches and stomach aches. When I tell my dad aboutthe pain, he gives me paracetamol.[113]Sometimes, prior to panning, the ore is further concentratedinto a gold-rich material through sluices. Sluices are inclined troughs thatare lined in the bottom with a carpet or other material that captures goldparticles.[114]Children also do this work.“I Work with Mercury Every Day”: The Use of Mercury forAmalgamationArtisanal gold miners in Mali and all over the world usemercury—a white-silvery liquid metal—to extract gold from ore,because it is inexpensive and easy to use.[115]In Mali, amalgamation is often carried out by women and children (girls and boys).[116]Mercury is mixed into the ground-up, sandy ore and binds to the gold, creatingan amalgam. After the amalgam has been recuperated from the sandy material, itis heated to evaporate the mercury, leaving gold behind.The use of mercury in Mali’s artisanal mining sitesput child laborers at grave risk of mercury poisoning, primarily throughmercury vapor. Mercury is a toxic substance that attacks the central nervoussystem and is particularly harmful to children.[117]Of the 33 children interviewed working in artisanal mining,14 said they were themselves carrying out amalgamation. The youngest was sixyears old.[118]Susanne D., 11, told us how she works with mercury:Once the ore is panned, you put a bit of mercury in. Yourub the ore and the mercury with your two hands. Then, when the mercury hasattracted the gold, you put it on a metal box and burn it. When I havefinished, I sell the gold to a trader. I do this daily. I usually get about 500CFA francs (equivalent of US$ 1.08) for the gold… I know mercury isdangerous, but I don’t know [understand] how. I do not protect myself. Onsome days I do the amalgamation with my mother, on others by myself.[119]None of the children we spoke with knew why mercury isdangerous or how to protect themselves. Some had never heard at all that thereis any health risk associated with the use of mercury. Fatimata N., a girl fromBurkina Faso, told us:I started gold mining at a small age. I pan for gold, Ialso work with mercury. I put the mercury in with the sand and the water. I mixit with my bare hands. Then I put the mercury in my pagne [a wrap-aroundskirt she wears]. The mercury that I squeeze out, I keep it in a small plasticbag. I also burn it. I have never heard that this is unhealthy. I work withmercury every day.[120]Some artisanal miners consider mercury a powerful, magicsubstance.  Mohamed S., 16, who carries out amalgamation, explained:No one has ever told me that mercury is dangerous. We aretold that it has magic powers… to capture the gold out of minerals. Wework without any protection here…. This work exhausts me and often makesme sick—I have stomachaches, malaria, and cough. When I tell my fatherabout these sicknesses, he gives me extracts from traditional plants.[121]Although mercury is a dangerous product under Maliangovernment regulations, the mercury trade is flourishing. Frequently goldtraders also deal in mercury. Traders told us that they receive mercury fromcountries in the subregion, notably Ghana and Burkina Faso.[122] Mercury traders arepresent in gold mining areas and sell mercury on site. Human Rights Watchlearned of one town where mercury was even sold in a shop that had about 25kilograms of mercury in stock.[123]In some areas, traders provide mercury for free to the miners, so miners willsell the gold to them.Mercury traders provide mercury directly to children. MariamD. in Worognan said:I work with mercury and touch it. The mercury, I was givenby a trader….  He said mercury was a poison and we shouldn't swallowit, but he didn't say anything else...  I am very tired when I work there[at the mine].[124]Another boy told us that he received mercury from the localtrader. Oumar K. said he mixes mercury and the sandy ore and then takes theamalgam back to the trader, who burns it while Oumar K. watches. Asked abouthealth risks, he said that he did not know that mercury is dangerous.[125]Mercury Poisoning of Children in ArtisanalMines—an“Invisible Epidemic”Mercury, a toxic substance that attacks the central nervoussystem, is particularly harmful to children. It can cause, among other things,developmental problems. There is no known safe level of exposure.[126]Mercury can also attack the cardiovascular system, the kidneys, thegastrointestinal tract, the immune system, and the lungs. Symptoms of exposureto mercury include tremors, twitching, vision impairment, headaches, and memoryand concentration loss. Higher levels of mercury exposure may result in kidneyfailure, respiratory failure, and even death. The chemical can also affect women'sreproductive health, for example by reducing fertility and leading tomiscarriages.[127]Most people are exposed to dangerous levels of mercury either throughinhalation of mercury vapor or through the consumption of mercury-contaminatedfish.[128]Artisanal miners, including child laborers, are exposed to mercury through the inhalation of vapors thatdevelop when the amalgam is smelted. They are also exposed to mercury throughskin contact, though the health risk is less severe compared to inhalation ofmercury vapor. [129]Researchers have described mercury intoxication an “invisibleepidemic.”[130]Although there are no studies on Malian children, a study onmercury exposure of children in artisanal gold mines in Indonesia and Zimbabwefound that children living in the mines had significantly higher levels ofmercury in their blood, hair, and urine than those living elsewhere.[131]Child laborers—those living in the mining area and working withmercury—had the highest level of mercury concentration in blood, hair,and urine. They also showed symptoms of mercury intoxication, such ascoordination problems (ataxia), tremors, and memory problems. The main causefor this was the exposure to mercury vapors when burning the amalgam to recoverthe gold.[132]Mercury is particularly harmful to unborn babies andinfants, and can be transmitted in utero and through breast milk. It istherefore of concern that women miners work with mercury when they are pregnantor breastfeeding.[133]In addition, small children inhale themercury vapor when they are present near amalgamation sites, either atthe mine or in the home. During one visit, we observed a woman with a baby onher lap assisting another woman with amalgamation by holding the mercury in herhands.[134]Children are also exposed to mercury through contaminatedwaters and the consumption of fish that live in them.[135] Women miners inSensoko told us that they regularly empty the water used for amalgamation intothe river.[136]This is dangerous because in water, mercury may convert into its mosttoxic form, methylmercury, which accumulates in fish and reaches the populationthrough fish consumption.[137]In Worognan, HumanRights Watch researchers observed how artisanal miners empty water on theground, right next to houses, after being used for amalgamation. A local goldtrader confirmed that it was a common practice to empty water on the ground inresidential areas.[138]TheUse of Mercury in Artisanal Mining: A Global Toxic ThreatMercury is used by artisanal miners in at least 70countries around the world including countries across the Sahel gold belt.There are 13 to 15 million artisanal miners working worldwide who risk beingdirectly exposed to mercury; many of them are women and children.[139]The chemical is affecting the environmental health of many more peopleglobally. An estimated 1,000 tonnes of mercury are released from artisanalminers each year—around 400 tonnes go into the atmosphere, and around600 tonnes are discharged into rivers, lakes, and soil. China, Indonesia, andColombia are among the countries with the highest estimated emissions.[140]Mercury is the cheapest and easiest gold extractionmethod. Mercury-free gold extraction methods require more capital, training,and organization than many artisanal miners have access to. Industrial mineshave phased out the use of mercury and switched to cyanide processing, whichposes another set of serious health risks. Occasionally cyanide has beenpromoted as an alternative to mercury for artisanal miners, and resulted inthe parallel use of both mercury and cyanide. This is particularly dangerous,as cyanide can exacerbate mercury’s negative impacts on theenvironment.In the absence of a safe and practicable mercury-freealternative, several methods are being promoted by the UN and NGOs to reducethe use of and exposure to mercury, such as emission-reducing technology(small containers that retain mercury vapor, known as retorts, or fumehoods), recycling mercury, and methods to concentrate the gold beforeamalgamation.[141]In recognition of the global threat posed by mercury, a global treaty for thereduction of mercury is underway and scheduled for adoption in 2013.[142]“EverythingHurts:” Other Health Consequences of Child Labor inArtisanal Gold MiningRespiratory DiseasesChildren in mining areas suffer from respiratory diseases,ranging from bronchitis to pneumonia and tuberculosis (TB).[143] In the mining areas,respiratory diseases are partly caused by the dust emanating from artisanalmines during the work process, and can affect child laborers as well as otherchildren living in the vicinity. Mory C., an 11-year-old boy from Baroya,complained:In the mine, I transport the ore from the shaft to thepanning [place].... Most often, I have pain in the joints and in the chest.[144]Respiratory diseases are common among miners around theglobe, and one disease, silicosis, has been specifically associated withmining.[145]Doctors in Mali do not have the equipment and capacity to diagnose silicosis,so there are no data on the prevalence of silicosis for the country.[146]Musculoskeletal ProblemsOf 33 child laborers interviewed, 21 said that they sufferedfrom back pain, neck pain, headaches, or pains in their arms, hands, or joints.Digging, pulling, lifting, and carrying heavy ore caused such pain. For example,Oumar K. complained about the health consequences of digging shafts, workingunderground, and pulling up heavy buckets:When you leave the mine and you arrive home, everythinghurts, particularly your chest and back. I’ve also had some problems withbreathing, I would sometimes cough.[147]Such hard labor can affect children’s long-termgrowth, leading to skeletal deformation of the back and neck, and acceleratingjoint deterioration.[148]Extended periods of bending over to dig or pan, andrepetitive movements, such as crushing rock with manual tools, can result insimilar pain and in long-term physical consequences.[149]Injuries from AccidentsChildren in mining areas risk injury from sharp tools,flying and falling rock, and frequently collapsing shafts. For example, inFebruary 2011, a 15-year-old boy in Tabakoto cut himself with a hoe in thetibia (shinbone).[150]Children crushing stone may be cut by flying rock shards or cut themselves withtools.[151]The transport of ore can also lead to accidents, as isillustrated by the experience of Mamadou S., who was about six years old:Once I had an accident. I injured my finger. I wanted tocarry a rock and it fell on my foot. I was taken to the health center. Thishappened about two months ago.[152]The father of Mamadou S. insisted that work in the mine wasgood for the education and training of his son, and claimed that Mamadou wasfour years old.[153]Child laborers sometimes fall down shafts when they workunderground, or fall while climbing down or up, as do adults.[154] A nurse in Tabakototreated an 11-year-old boy who fell into a shaft and fractured his hand.[155]As described above by Oumar K., a child laborer, shafts docollapse.[156]These frequently result in fractures, open wounds, back injuries, and otherinjuries, and can even lead to death.[157]A doctor in Kolondiéba circle noted that there are shaft collapses inMpékadiassa and Worognan mines every month, although Human Rights Watchhas not been able to verify this.[158]Several cases of mine collapses illustrate the potentialdanger for child laborers, even though no children were affected in theseincidents. In April 2010, an adult died at a Kéniéba mine whenhis head was smashed during a shaft collapse, and two others died from othershaft collapses in the area during the same year.[159] At least threeworkers were killed in a shaft collapse in Worognan mine in late 2010 or early2011, spreading fear among many workers. While the mayor put the number ofvictims at three and tried to downplay the incident, other workers at the minesaid that the number of victims could have been higher.[160] A Ministry of Laborofficial also witnessed a shaft collapse during a visit to a mine inKéniéba region.[161]Even children who do not participate in the gold miningvisit the mines and are exposed to risks. This includes children who are takenby their parents to the mine due to lack of childcare. Older siblings faced thedifficult task of protecting younger siblings from falling into shafts andother accidents.[162]A doctor in Kéniéba treated two children who fell into a shaft ina mine near Kéniéba. The children were around five and six yearsold.[163]In Baroya, a boy of about three years fell into a shaft and injured his arm.[164]Working Hours and Pay: Between Family Supportand ExploitationWorking HoursThe children we interviewed said work days often lasted foras long as 11 hours, from 7 or 8 a.m. to   about 6 p.m.[165] AnILO study on child labor in artisanal mining in Mali found that childrenaveraged nine hours of work a day.[166]The work day is nearly continuous. For example, Haroun C., 12, who has neverattended school, told Human Rights Watch that he works at the mine from 9 a.m.to 7 p.m., and that his joints hurt him at night.[167] Some children saidthey took lunch breaks or rested for a moment when they felt exhausted or inpain.[168]Artisanal mines usually have one day of rest per week foreveryone, including children. This is thought of as a day for the spirits ofmining.[169]Some child laborers attend school, but work full days ingold mining during holidays and weekends. They sometimes also work at the minesafter school or skip lessons to go the mines.[170] Of 33 child minersinterviewed, 16 went to school. Most of these children were younger andattended primary school. One child laborer who attends school was 12-year-oldIssa S., who complained the impact of long work hours on his health:I work here with my father. I pull up the buckets with ore.It is ore mixed with water. During school holidays, I am here every day from7am to 6.30pm, except Monday [rest day]…. I started working here when Iwas 10. My job has always been to pull the buckets up…. I have backachesfrom the heavy loads, on the lower back. It is really heavy. I would reallylike to stop. I don’t have a break apart from lunch break.[171]PayChildren who work in artisanal mines are often not paid. Ifthey do get paid, they give most of the money to their parents or guardians;adolescents who are by themselves often send money to their parents. Whenchildren work for people other than their parents, they face an additional riskof abuse and exploitation.Children’s Economic Contribution towards TheirOwn FamilyMany children contribute to the production process but donot obtain the gold at the end of it. Their work is considered part of a groupwork product.[172]Some child laborers get paid. Pay is irregular, variesgreatly, and is based on the amount of gold mined.[173] Most commonly, childlaborers give the money to their parents or guardians, to add to the familyincome. Of 17 children who told us that they were earning money, 13 had to giveit to their parents or guardians.[174]When parents are not present, children sometimes earn moneyto send it to them. One such child was Nanfadima A., 11, who said:I live in Tabakoto with my uncle, the younger brother of myfather. My parents are at another gold mine, further away.… I take thegold and bring it to the trader in Tabakoto. I give the money to my father. Iget 2,000 or 3,000 CFA francs (about US$4.36 to US$6.54) for one piece of gold,say, two times per week.[175]A 15-year-old boy, Abdoulaye M., also sent money home:I have come to earn money in Baroya. My parents are inManantali, they told me to come here and look for money. So my older brotherbrought me here and he comes [regularly] to pick up the money that I haveearned.[176]Another boy, Tiémoko K., 15, also earned money forhis parents who lived far away. He was subjected to the same exploitative rulesas adult artisanal miners, having to give two-thirds of his ore to another goldminer who is considered the owner of the shaft:My parents are in Kita, I have come here to Baroya with thehelp of a friend of my father. I am here to earn money for my parents. I havebeen here about 12 months. I earn between 3,000 and 4,000 CFA francs (about$6.54 to $8.73) a day. … I work for the owners of shafts. For every threebags we pull out, I get one.[177]Children Earning Their Own MoneySome adolescents earn money for themselves, particularlywhen they have migrated and live alone. Still, this was not always enough tosurvive. Ibrahim K., 15, said:The problem is having enough food. If we don't have enoughgold, we don't have enough money for food. Our team sells the gold to a dealerand we share the money.[178]Adolescents have occasionally earned a significant amount ofmoney, and kept some of it for themselves. The prospect of earning moneyencouraged them to work in artisanal mining, while they were largely unaware ofthe risks. One boy, Julani M., told us that he once earned 30,000 CFA francs(about $65) in two days, and that he bought clothes with the money.[179]Several adolescent girls told us proudly that they earned money. One of them,Fatimata N. from Burkina Faso, said that she had once earned 80,000 CFA francs(about $174), and kept a portion to buy herself clothes. She concluded:“The work is good for me.”[180]Aïssatou S., 17, earned her own money and used it for her trousseau(clothes and other items for a wedding). She said:I have got a little bit of money from the gold. Since thestart here, I have earned about 40,000 CFA francs (about $87). I have boughtclothes and cups for my trousseau from it.[181]Some parents also occasionally rewarded their children withsmall amounts of money or a decigram of gold. For example, Moussa S., who issix years old, sometimes gets 100 CFA francs (about $0.21) as a gift from hisfather.[182]Children’s Exploitation by GuardiansAccording to the ILO, about 20 percent of children inartisanal mining work for adults who are not their parents, such as an employeror a relative. This frequently results in economic exploitation.[183]One such case was Boubacar S., who lived with guardians. Hisbiological parents were working somewhere else, and placed him with a familywith whom they were acquainted. Boubacar said he earns about 1,000 CFA francs(about US$2.18) per day and has to hand over his earnings to his guardianimmediately. He told us in tears:I was at school but my stepfather took me out. I leftschool about six months ago, at the beginning of the school year. On Mondays mystepfather requires me to make bricks. On other days, I work in the mine andgive all the earnings to my stepfather. I get about 1,000 CFA francs per day. Igive it all immediately to my stepfather…. I transport the ore from theshaft to the place where they put it into sacks. I use the cart with the donkeyfor this.… I was first or second in class together with another girl. Iliked school…. There was also a problem that my step-parents had not paidthe school fees. So I had to repeat second grade because of that, not because Iwas doing badly in school… The work is hard. I often have belly aches andheadaches. I feel that the work is too much for me ... because of the weight. Iam often bent over.… My parents are [gold miners] in anothervillage…. My stepfather treats me as if I am not a human being.[184]Boubacar’s teacher confirmed that the boy was treatedbadly by his stepfather. The stepfather had told him that he would not pay theschool fees if the child refused to do the work he asked him to do.[185]Mariam D., the girl in Worognan who was very upset that herstepmother was taking the money she earned told Human Rights Watch:My stepmother takes all the money they pay for me.… Idon’t get any money from the work, my stepmother gets it. Shedoesn’t give me anything.[186]TraffickingConditions for child trafficking are ripe in Mali’sartisanal mines because of exploitative labor conditions, as described above.Children who migrate without parents and work for other adults are particularlyvulnerable to trafficking. According to the ILO, about two-thirds of childlaborers surveyed in Malian artisanal mines are migrants.[187]A regionalsurvey about artisanal mining found that 10 percent of child laborers inartisanal mines in Guinea, Mali, and Burkina Faso were foreigners from otherWest African countries who lived in the mines without their parents.[188]During our research, we met several children who werevictims of exploitation and whose situations might have amounted totrafficking. One was Boubacar S., 14, from Sensoko, in theKéniéba area, whose situation is described above.[189] Hewas living with guardians who treated him “as if I am not a humanbeing.” They forced him to work in artisanal mining and brick making. Hisparents were gold miners who moved to another gold mine in Mali; they were notin contact with him.[190]Human Rights Watch also interviewed children from BurkinaFaso and Guinea who might have been victims of trafficking. Salif E., 15, wassent from Burkina Faso to Mali by his parents, and travelled to Worognan minewith two other boys who were relatives. They were accompanied by the head ofthe Burkinabe community, who was Salif’s uncle, and they also worked forhim.[191]When we interviewed Salif, he had been in the mine for about three weeks andhad not yet been paid.Leaders of migrant communities play a key role in organizinglife of the foreign mining workers.[192]The head of the Burkinabe community in Worognan, Salif E.’s uncle,explained that around 60 persons were working for him. A local gold traderconfirmed that he employed several children.[193]CoercionThe majority of children in child labor dislike the workthey do, but do it to help their parents, according to a recent survey.[194]Even when children are not victims of trafficking, they often experience adegree of coercion when working in artisanal mining. The decision to sendchildren to work in the mines—whether by themselves, with the family, orother guardians—is almost always made by parents, and children havelittle say in the matter. This situation of coercion gets worse when parents orguardians exert psychological pressure or threaten physical abuse.Several children told us that they would like to leave goldmining work, if they could.[195]This was the case of Mariam D., whose stepmother made her work in the minewhenever there was no school and obliged her to hand over all the earnings. Thegirl was upset about this, but did not know how to get out of this situation.She told Human Rights Watch: “I don't want to work in the mines. I wantto stay in school.”[196]Aminata C., who is 13 years old, said she panned for goldand amalgamated gold with mercury. Although her father gave her pain medicinewhen she suffered from the effects of the hard work, she said her fatherinsisted that she continue working:I want to get out of this work, but if I refuse to go tothe mine, my parents beat me.[197]Hamidou S., who was about eight years old and in thirdgrade, said:I work on the mine during the holidays, usually every dayfrom morning to evening. I dig shafts with a pickaxe.I also dochildcare….  Sometimes my neck and back hurt because of the diggingwork.… My parents tell me to work at the mine.[198]In some cases, children feel they would like to leave thework, but cannot. In the above-mentioned ILO study, 39 percent of childreninterviewed stated that they could not stop and leave the gold mining work asthey wish.[199]Other Child Labor in Mining CommunitiesThe existence of artisanal gold mines often leads to thecreation of small commercial centers. Children perform many other forms ofchild labor in these communities. Some work in artisanal gold mining and doother work at the same time.Agriculture and domestic labor are the most common forms ofchild labor in Mali.[200]Boys frequently work in agriculture, sometimes leaving the mines during theharvest. Others work entirely in agriculture.[201]Many girls in mining communities do domestic labor, in theirown families or the host families they live with.[202] While most of thedomestic work is done in the home, some takes place at the mine. Women oftentake smaller children with them to the mine because they lack childcare, anduse their older children to look after the small siblings.[203] Children frequentlyhave to carry younger siblings on their back, feed them, and protect them frominjury. In one case, a mother told us that her four-year-old daughter waslooking after her little sister in the mine.[204]Children also work in other businesses. For example, theysell water or food, or make bricks or clothing.[205]In addition, children are involved in sex work, one of the worst forms of childlabor.[206]Attitudes to ChildLaborChild labor is common and is widely accepted in Mali. Arecent survey on attitudes towards child labor confirms that parents commonlyview child labor as acceptable.[207]Teaching a child how to mine gold is considered part of socialization.[208]Government officials also told Human Rights Watch that child labor was part ofMalian culture. A ministry official described child labor as“educative” (socialisant), as it teaches children the valueof work.[209]We interviewed a miner who claimed to own gold worth wellover US$10,000. He sent his son Mamadou S. to the mine although he did not needthe income. He said:I let my son do this for education. [Mamadou] collects thestones and carries them.[210]Community leaders in Worognan emphasized what they saw aspositive effect of children working in gold mining, namely that the communitynow had the means to buy larger items such as new roofs, bicycles, or machinesfor agriculture.[211]IV. Sexual Exploitation and ViolenceSexual ExploitationSexual exploitation is common in mining areas, particularlyin large mines that bring together many different populations from within andoutside Mali.[212]Child prostitution is inherently harmful and a worst form of child labor underinternational law. International law also prohibits sexual exploitation.Some girls self-identify as sex workers. NGOs working on HIVprevention and treatment in mining areas have reached out to adult and childsex workers in artisanal mines in the Sikasso and the Kayes region, includingin large sites such as Alhamdoulaye and Massiogo in Kadiolo circle,M’Pékadiassa in Kolondiéba circle, and Hamdallaye inKéniéba circle.[213]One NGO found that over 12 percent of the sex workers theyworked with were between the ages of 15 and 19. It also found that the largemajority of sex workers were foreigners, mostly from Nigeria and Côted’Ivoire.[214]In Worognan mine, in the Sikasso region, women and girls,mostly Nigerians, worked as sex workers. Stella A., an 18-year-old sex worker,told us about the climate of violence in which she works:I am from northern Nigeria. When I was 17, a woman broughtme from Nigeria to Bamako and left me there. My sisters [Nigerian women]brought me here a month ago…. Some bars do have young girls, 12 yearsold…. We have to avoid the fights. Some men come and are bad to us. Somemake us scared. They become aggressive when they're drunk…. There was nomoney in Bamako, but it was safer. Here it's more dangerous and not much money[either]. I haven't been hurt but I'm scared. I would like there to be morepolice.[215]Mariam D., about 11 years old, worked in Worognan mine anddescribed her surroundings:There are prostitutes there, girls older than me. They gowith the boys. I know some of the boys had hit the girls [sex workers] or hurtthem.… I have seen fights at the mine, between men. The gendarmes havecome, I saw them take a boy away in handcuffs, for hurting a girl.[216]Many girls engage in sexual relations to escape poverty,trading sex for food or other goods, without considering this sex work. Some ofthese girls come to work in small local businesses such as restaurants, but areencouraged by restaurant owners or other employers or guardians to engage insexual relations.[217]An advisor to a village chief interviewed by Save the Children described thesituation in a mine in Kadiolo circle:What is worse is that all the young girls have evenabandoned their apprenticeships in restaurants, and instead are selling goodson the street. And they sell the products on their plates as well as theirbody.[218]Traditional and local authorities in Kolondiébacircle have expressed concern about sexual exploitation in mines. A localgovernment official responsible for social affairs complained about transientrelationships masked as informal “marriages” between adult minersand girls or young women.[219]There is a heightened risk of HIV infection for girls whoengage in sex work or multiple sexual relations. While HIV prevalence is onlyone percent in Mali, it is significantly higher among sex workers. HIVprevalence was at 35 percent among sex workers in 2006.[220] Health workers andorganizations working on HIV concur that mining areas are high-risk zones forHIV infection, due to the presence of a large number of sex workers and menwithout family.[221]However, there is no data on HIV prevalence in mining areas.Sexual ViolenceThere have been some cases of rape in artisanal mining areas.Government officials in Kolondiéba circle described rape as common.[222]In December 2010, an eight-year-old girl was raped inM’Pékadiassa mine (Kolondiéba circle), allegedly by a53-year-old man.[223]According to security forces, there had been several other recent cases of rapein M’Pékadiassa, including of girls.[224] According to thegendarmerie, a 15-year-old girl was raped in Worognan mine in February 2011.[225] Asuspect was detained, but had not yet been tried when Human Rights Watchvisited the mine.[226]Gendarmes in Worognan said that the zone wasfrequently the scene of violence. They complained that they lacked staff and abuilding.[227]V. Limited Impact: Policy and Program Responses toChild Labor and AbuseThe Malian government has the primary political and legalresponsibility to address child rights violations in Mali. Mali’sdemocratically elected government has shown its will to address human rightsviolations by ratifying a large number of international human rightsinstruments. However, government policies and programs on child labor and therights of children have had a little impact because they lacked political andfinancial support, or have not been implemented.International donors have an important role to play insupporting the government in the realization of rights. In 2009, the five topdonors to Mali were the United States, the European Union, the AfricanDevelopment Bank, the World Bank, and China. Other important bilateral donorsinclude France, Canada, the Netherlands, Germany, and Japan.[228] While some donors areinvolved in initiatives relating to child labor and child protection, theseareas have not received the attention they should.UN agencies and NGOs are also addressing child labor andmining issues in Mali and other nations. While the ILO and NGOs have carriedout some important programs in Mali, these have been limited in scope.Unfortunately, the ILO has failed to follow up on a global campaign for theelimination of child labor in artisanal mining, in which 15 governments pledgedto end child labor in mining by 2015.Government Action onChild LaborIn 2006, the government created a National Unit to CombatChild Labor in the Ministry of Labor (Cellule nationale de lutte contre letravail des enfants, hereafter referred to as Child Labor Unit). The unithas conducted studies on child labor and drawn up a list of hazardous laborwhich prohibits almost all gold mining activities for children, such as diggingshafts, transporting rock, crushing and grinding ore, panning in water, andusing mercury.[229]However, the government’s efforts to end child laborhave been undermined by poor implementation of policies and have lacked a fullpolitical commitment from all government institutions. The Child Labor Unitoperates somewhat in isolation and lacks funding as well as political supportfrom other ministries.[230]Efforts to curb child labor have also been hampered by the small number oflabor inspectors in Mali.[231]Labor inspectors have been criticized for achieving little.[232] Besides, there havebeen very few labor inspections in the mining areas; the few that took placewere requested and funded by the ILO.[233]Most recently, the Child Labor Unit has led the draftingprocess for an action plan to combat child labor.[234] The action plan forthe elimination of child labor (Plan d’action pourl’élimination du travail des enfants au Mali or PANETEM) wasadopted in June 2011. It seeks to eliminate the worst forms of child labor by2015, and all child labor by 2020. During the first phase, it proposes toidentify children working in the most hazardous jobs or who have beentrafficked and withdraw them from these exploitative conditions. It also aimsto provide these children with access to education, vocational training, andsupport, and to offer income-generating activities for concerned families. Inaddition, the action plan envisages a law on child trafficking, prosecution ofchild traffickers and those responsible for commercial sexual exploitation, andan increase of the minimum age of employment from 14 to 15 to comply withMali’s international commitments.[235]Unfortunately, the action plan does not adequately address the disastroushealth implications of child labor, including the use of mercury in artisanalgold mines. It also lacks a strategy towards companies who might benefit fromchild labor directly or through their supply chains.[236]Despite these shortcomings, the action plan has created anopportunity to improve the lives of over two million children working inharmful conditions in Mali. It remains uncertain whether the government itselfwill fully support the action plan, at the risk of hurting the interests ofinfluential economic operators. The government also faces the challenge ofsecuring sufficient financial support for the US$100 million plan.[237]Donor and NGO Programson Child LaborThe Role of Donors in Addressing Child LaborMost programs on child labor in Mali are donor-funded andhave recently experienced drastic cuts. Until 2010, the US provided significantfunding to ILO/IPEC in Mali, which implemented child labor programs throughMalian partner NGOs.[238]One ILO/IPEC program included a regional study on artisanal mining in Mali,Niger, and Burkina Faso, and efforts to withdraw children working artisanalgold mining in all three countries.[239]Unfortunately, the US has stopped funding child labor programs in Mali sincethe start of 2011. This situation was not specific to Mali: US funding to IPECprograms around the world was reduced from US$49 million in 2010 to US$27million in 2011.[240]The European Commission (EC) has been another major donorfor ILO/IPEC in Mali for several years, but has decided to cut funds. In 2011,the EC will fund ILO/IPEC in Mali with US$202,000, less than half of itssupport in 2010.[241]The EC funds an ILO/ IPEC project called TACKLE, which aims to move childrenfrom work to school in Mali and 10 other countries, and which addresses childlabor in mining.[242]Other bilateral and NGO donors also fund child labor programs in Mali,including the Netherlands and Spain.[243]Programs to End Child Labor in Artisanal MiningSeveral Malian NGOs run programs that aim to withdrawchildren from child labor in artisanal gold mining, improve access toeducation, and raise awareness around child labor in mining communities. Someof these projects are funded by the above-mentioned donors.The NGO Réseau d’Appui et de Conseils (RAC) hasimplemented several successful programs with ILO/IPEC in support of childlaborers in Kéniéba’s artisanal gold mines. The NGO hassucceeded in withdrawing over 1,300 children from work in artisanal mining, andhas boosted access to education in artisanal mining communities (see box).[244]More recently, ILO/IPEC also started working with an NGO, Jiekatanie, on childlabor in Sikasso’s artisanal mines.[245]However, donors only provide funding for limited periods andfor specific projects. As ILO/IPEC funds come to an end, there is a risk thatcommunities will lack support, and that children who have stopped working inartisanal mining will start again.An EducationProject in Artisanal Mining AreasAs part of its global program to end child labor througheducation, ILO/IPEC has developed a program in several artisanal miningcommunities around Kéniéba, together with its partner NGORéseau d’Appui et de Conseils (RAC).[246] Thisprogram could serve as a model for similar efforts elsewhere.In three villages in the Kéniéba area,ILO/IPEC and RAC renovated old school buildings or built new ones, builtnurseries and hired nursery staff, provided furniture and education material,hired nursery teachers, and established free school meals. Beyond thisimmediate support, ILO/IPEC and RAC helped create a more supportiveenvironment for the school. They raised awareness around child labor in thecommunity through large meetings and radio spots and strengthened schoolmanagement committees charged with running the school locally.[247]They also worked closely with community leaders and localgovernment authorities to garner their support. Community leaders in each villagesigned a pledge that they will send their children to school and support thevillage school.[248]The project also supported the issuance of birth certificates by the localadministration and urged authorities to start supporting community schools inthe area, thus making a transition from community to public school.When the project started, enrolment rates were low. Theschool director in Baroya village told Human Rights Watch:Before [the project started], the population said thisschool is a haunted place. There was one child in sixth grade. Then, RACreally built this school up.[249]In Sensoko, the number of pupils rose from 36 in 2007 to97 in 2010, according to RAC. In addition, the newly-opened nursery had 64children. The director of the school said:The change started in 2009. Then, few children went toschool. Now, around 65 percent go to school. Before, perhaps 10 percent wentto school.[250]Overall, ILO and RAC found that 424 children were victimsof the worst forms of child labor in just these three villages and assistedthem in leaving work and getting access to education. The project also foundthat a much larger number of children were at risk of doing child labor, andprovided 1,360 children with material for school.[251]The ILO’s“Minors out of Mining” Initiative: Hollow Commitments?In 2005, the ILO started a major campaign to combat childlabor in artisanal mining worldwide. It brought together governments, tradeunions, and employers from around the world to join its call for “Minorsout of Mining!” with the goal of eliminating child labor in mining by2015.[252]It included a detailed program of action, including regularization ofsmall-scale mining operations and activities to withdraw children found to beworking in mining.In June 2005, 15 countries, including Mali, publiclycommitted to the goal of eliminating child labor in mining by 2015, and signeda pledge to this effect.[253]In addition, the US government, the Ghanaian government, the InternationalFederation of Chemical, Energy, Mine and General Workers' Unions (ICEM), andthe International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), an association of miningcompanies, pledged to support the ILO and governments in their efforts toeliminate child labor in mining.[254]Sadly, the initiative fizzled with no concrete achievementsor follow-up. ILO has complained about a lack of commitment among some of thesigning parties, including a change of leadership in the workers’ andemployers’ associations. ILO/IPEC has also complained about a lack of fundingfor work on child labor in mining.[255]Six years later, the initiative is largely forgotten.[256]Efforts to End ChildAbuse and TraffickingWhile the government has taken some steps to deal with childabuse and trafficking, the capacity of the government to prevent such childrights violations is very limited, and the child protection system in Mali isnot fully functional.[257]In 1999, the government established the National Directoratefor Child and Family Support, but the directorate has a vague legal mandate todevelop and carry out “programs and action plans in support of childrenand the family.”[258]The directorate has conducted a study on child abuse andruns two shelters in Bamako for abuse victims.[259] However, thedirectorate only addresses cases in an ad-hoc manner. Rural areas such asmining zones are far removed from its reach. Most existing child protectionwork, including efforts to prevent child abuse and trafficking, is undertakenby NGOs and community-based organizations, but even these organizations rarelywork in mining areas.[260]In recent years, the Malian government and its neighborshave made some efforts to combat trafficking in West Africa, laid out in the2006 ECOWAS Plan of Action Against Trafficking in Persons.[261] NGOs cooperate with theMalian police and UN agencies in identifying trafficking victims and in somecases return them to their home country.[262]However, there have been few prosecutions.[263]In some artisanal mining areas, NGOs have created localvigilance committees.[264]The committees composed of a range of actors—teachers, local authorities,and civil society actors—that carry out awareness-raising and preventionactivities on trafficking in the community. Unfortunately, studies haveobserved that local vigilance committees in Mali’s rural areas havesometimes prevented migration altogether, rather than differentiating betweenmigration and trafficking, curtailing children’s right to freedom ofmovement, and in some cases repatriating them against their will.[265]VI. A Poor Health Policy ResponseChild mortality is extremely high inMali. Almost one in five children—19 percent—die before their fifthbirthday. Diarrhea, pneumonia, and malaria are the three leading causes ofchild mortality in Mali, and are also very common in mining areas.[266]Children who work in artisanal mining are exposed to severaladditional grave health risks, connected to the unhealthy environment they livein and the hazardous work they perform. However, access to health care to treatthese mining-related health conditions is very poor, due to serious gaps inhealth policies. In particular, the government has failed to take effectivepreventative action on mercury, such as awareness-raising about the risksconnected to mercury, and introduction of technologies that reduce exposure tomercury.A Weak Health SystemMali is a country with poor access to health care, comparedto other West African countries. More than half of the population lives morethan five kilometers from the nearest health facility.[267] Mali also has anacute shortage of health workers. There is one physician per 20,000 patients,and three nurses or midwives per 10,000 patients, far below the Africa-wideaverage.[268]There are few health facilities per population, and overallaccess to local health services remains poor, despite efforts to bring healthservices closer to communities under the current health strategy.[269] Mali hasa pyramid health structure, with community health centers (Centres desanté communautaires, CSCOM) at the community level, referral healthcenters (Centres de santé de reference, CSREF) at the level ofthe health district, and regional and national hospitals at the top. The healthsystem relies on user fees that are paid by patients. As a result, access tohealth care is difficult for the poor, and community health centers areunderutilized.[270]Some specific health services are free of charge, notablyhealth care for children under the age of five, caesarean sections, andtreatment of HIV and a few other diseases. Access to health care has improvedin these specific areas.[271]Health Access Barriersfor Children in Mining AreasHealth care access in artisanal mining areas is often verylimited, despite the heightened risk of health problems stemming from mining.For example, there is only one referral health center, with few medicaldoctors, in the health district of Kéniéba, serving 208,000inhabitants. There are 19 community health centers, which are staffed withnurses and midwives.[272]In some mines, there is a health worker, such as a nurse,who runs a small pharmacy and refers cases to the nearest community healthcenter. However, many other mines have no public health facility. This is thecase in one of the largest artisanal mines in the Kéniéba region,Hamdallaye. [273]In the absence of public health services, several NGOs runHIV-prevention and treatment programs in artisanal mining areas, but havelimited resources to provide more general healthcare. They do generalawareness-raising, disseminate condoms, reach out to sex workers, and assistpatients in getting access to voluntary counseling and testing, and treatmentif necessary.[274]Artisanal mining areas also lack sexual and reproductivehealth services, including antenatal services and maternity wards.[275] Adoctor complained that mines do not have specialized services for survivors ofsexual violence either.[276]Some patients seek the help of traditional healers or resortto self-medication for their children.[277]Four child laborers told Human Rights Watch that they were regularly takingtablets against their pain.[278]Government Neglect ofMercury Related Health ConditionsThe government has done virtually nothing to research,diagnose, or treat mercury-related illnesses and conditions in Mali. It lacksdata on mercury intoxication of adults or children in artisanal mining areas.[279]There is little capacity in the Ministry of Health and throughout the healthsystem to diagnose mercury intoxication and to treat it.[280] In particular, thegovernment lacks a longer-term strategy on how to address the health threatfrom mercury, including mercury poisoning in children. The current healthstrategy on child health does not deal with the issue at all.[281] Even a recentenvironmental health report of the government hardly addresses the problem. Itsimply states that mercury is used in artisanal mining, but that the quantitiesare unknown.[282]Efforts to ReduceExposure to MercuryThe Ministry of Environment deals with issues related tomercury through its focal point on Strategic Approaches to InternationalChemicals Management (SAICM)[283]and hosted a regional conference on artisanal gold mining in Francophone WestAfrica in 2009, with a particular focus on the use of mercury.[284] However, there islittle concrete action on the ground, such as training for artisanal minersregarding the risks of mercury and the introduction of retorts or otheralternative technologies.With the support of United Nations Industrial DevelopmentOrganization (UNIDO), donors, and experts, the government will start to developan action plan for the reduction of mercury in artisanal mining in 2012.[285]International donors—France, the US, and the Global EnvironmentFacility—also agreed in mid-2011 to start several other projects onartisanal mining in Mali, Burkina Faso, and Senegal, with a focus on mercuryreduction.[286]This is a promising development, and it is hoped that the programs, which willbe implemented by NGOs and UNIDO, will give attention to the special situationof child laborers using mercury, and children’s exposure to mercury moregenerally.Towards an International Mercury Reduction TreatyAt the international level, states are currently negotiatinga legally binding instrument on mercury. In 2009 the Governing Council of theUnited Nations Environment Program (UNEP) agreed on the need to develop such atreaty, and it is scheduled for adoption in 2013.[287]  The currentdraft of the treaty does not foresee specific measures to protect childrenworking with amalgam.[288]Mali, together with Nigeria, is one of the African countriesrepresented on the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) for thetreaty, and therefore plays an important role in the drafting process. Forexample, Mali has taken a leading role in developing a common African positionin favor of mandatory national action plans to reduce mercury in artisanal goldmining.[289]VII. “I Have Never Been to School”– Access to Education for Child Laborers in MinesLack of access to education is oneof the causes of child labor in artisanal mining. Access to education isgenerally very poor in Mali and in the artisanal mining areas in particular. In2009-2010, the net enrolment rate was 60.6 per cent, and only 56.3 per cent ofchildren completed primary school.[290]Education policies have largely failed to benefit vulnerable groups, such aschild laborers in mining areas and in other sectors. In the mining areas,school buildings and infrastructure are lacking, and school fees createbarriers in impoverished mining communities. Furthermore, education authoritiesand schools themselves have largely failed to reach out to families of migrantchildren to ensure their education.Difficult Access toEducation in Artisanal Mining AreasLack of School Infrastructure in Mining CommunitiesSince many artisanal mines are located in remote areas,physical access to schools is often a problem. Many long-time mining villagesin the Kéniéba region do not have schools. For example, one ofthe large mines south of Kéniéba, Hamdallaye, did not have aschool when a local NGO visited in May 2010.[291]When new artisanal mining communities spring up in some areas, they are evenmore likely to have insufficient schools.[292]The public schools that do exist in mining areas are oftenin a very poor state. The large majority of schools are too small, lackingseparate classrooms for each year group.[293]For example, the school in Worognan has only two rooms for six grades, andtherefore only runs two grades at any time; during our visit, it was running afirst and a sixth grade class.[294]Other schools group several grades together and teach them in the same room.[295]About half of all schools do not have latrines—a practical problem thatdeters girls from school attendance—and lack a canteen, sportsfacilities, or a room for teachers.[296]Some mines have community schools, private schools, ormadrasas (Islamic schools). However, the demand for community-based schools isfairly low in mining areas; this means that the government has an even greaterobligation to ensure public schools are available.[297]School FeesSchool fees are unlawful in Mali, yet parents usually payschool fees for children who attend. Community schools charge fees, and evenpublic schools sometimes require parents to pay in money or in kind, forexample, food for the teacher.School fees discourage parents from sending their childrento school rather than to the mine. Teachers, parents, and child laborers toldus that school fees were one of the reasons why children do not attend school.A group of seven women in Sensoko, Kéniéba area, explained thatthey could not pay school fees for all of the children in a family, andtherefore sent some children to work full-time in the gold mine instead. Everymonth, they pay to the local school 800 CFA francs (about US$ 1.75) per child.This group of women had a total of 29 school-age children working in the mine;of these, 18 were also attending school.[298]Karim S., a child laborer at Worognan mine, talked about hisdesire to attend school:I have never been to school. My father enrolled my twoolder siblings [in school], but it did not work for me. I would like to go toschool, but my father refused.[299]Another child laborer, Oumar K., explained that he had beenin school but dropped out because his parents could not pay the school fees anylonger. He was in school until fourth grade, but was not allowed back after anillness because his parents had not paid the school fees. His three sisterswere also not attending school.[300]When parents in Mali have to make choices about schoolattendance, they send boys more frequently than girls. Girls are often used todo domestic work instead, or are married before reaching adulthood.[301]The situation is no different in mining areas. Susanne J., 11, told HumanRights Watch:I was enrolled for school, but then my brother was sent inmy place. I would like to go to school but [we] do not have the means.[302]Some parents justify their child’s work in the minewith the need to earn money for school fees. Lansana K., a school boy in fifthgrade, complained:I prefer to have free time than to work [at the mine]. Butmy parents say I have to work to buy the study material for school.[303]Similarly, Hamidou S., who is only in third grade, used themoney earned at the mine to buy school material.[304]The use of school fees to support schools results in otherproblems, too. Teachers confirmed that, “The big problem … is thatthe parents don’t all pay their part.”[305] A member of a schoolmanagement committee complained that they have “all the difficulties ofthe world” to get parents to pay their contribution to the school.[306] Asa result, teachers sometimes receive no salary, or only part of a salary.[307]The Situation ofMigrant ChildrenMany artisanal miners migrate from mine to mine. Thiscreates a serious problem for their children’s education. According tothe ILO, two-thirds of children working in artisanal mining are migrants.[308]Some children move with their parents from mine to mineevery couple of months. For example, in 2010, many artisanal miners migratedbetween several mines in the Sikasso region, namely the mines at Kola,Kékoro, Kalankan, and Worognan.[309]Fatimata N., an adolescent girl from Burkina Faso who never attended school,told us that she started gold mining at an early age. She first worked inmining in Burkina Faso, and then came with her guardians—her aunt anduncle—to Mali to mine gold there. They lived for about a month in aKékoro mining site (Bougouni circle), and then moved to Worognan.[310]An education official explained what happens when a new mineis being opened:Schools turn empty in the area. Children follow theirparents [to the mine]…. There is no one at home for them—to eat,you have to follow your parents. And for the parents, the child is [a] usefulworker.[311]Schools in mines seem poorly prepared for the arrival ofmigrants. One school director told us that there were no migrant children atall in his school, even though the community had received several thousandmigrants over the previous year. The school had 30 children enrolled, eventhough the number of residents was estimated to be above 4,000.[312]Child LaborersAttending SchoolSome child laborers do go to school. This creates a doubleburden for the children and often results in poor school performance. Mory C.,an 11-year-old boy from Baroya, told us about his experience:In the mine, I transport the ore from the shaft to thepanning [place]. When I come home, I am too exhausted to do myhomework. My parents are not concerned by this. Most often, I have pain inthe joints and in the chest. My father rubs me with shea butter and that isall.[313]Some children cannot keep up with school. Nanfadima A., 11,told us she had to repeat a class. She worked in the mine during schoolholidays and after school during the week:It is really difficult to combine school and work. Onecannot do the two at the same time. I am always tired.[314]Pupils who work in artisanal mining frequently do not turnup at school, resulting in high rates of absenteeism and dropout.[315]School directors and teachers described the negative effects of artisanalmining on pupils’ performance.[316]One teacher for grades five and six explained that about half of the childrenin his class were working at the mine. He said:The fact that children in fifth and sixth grade work in themine has consequences. They do not do their homework and are tired.[317]Education Policies: Failing to Reach Child LaborersThe Malian government aims to provide education for all, andsupport the education-related Millennium Development Goals,[318] through access toeducation up to grade nine (basic education), better access to education forgirls, teacher training, and non-formal education. Decentralization is a keyelement in the government’s strategy, aiming to strengthen communityownership over education.[319]Donors provide significant funding to the education sector, including sectorbudget support. In 2009, donors gave US$161 million in official assistance foreducation in Mali.[320]Donors have also helped fund a remarkable expansion of community schools.[321]However, education policies have given insufficientattention to children who are vulnerable due to their economic status, gender,family situation, health, or other reasons. The current government educationprogram fails to propose specific measures to reach out to vulnerable children,with the notable exception of children with disabilities and children innomadic communities.[322]Though the number of children enrolled in primary school hassignificantly increased since 1998, many children of primary school age arestill out of school.[323]Mali remains far below the average in Sub-Saharan Africa.[324] Access to secondaryeducation is even lower.[325]A significant number of children have never been enrolled in school. Of thosewho do, many do not attend school regularly and drop out early.[326]There is also a large gender disparity in education. The netenrolment rate for girls is 54.6 percent, compared with 66.8 percent for boys,and only 48.6 percent of girls complete primary school, compared with 64.1percent of boys.[327]In higher education, the gender gap is even bigger.[328] While the governmenthas emphasized increasing girls’ access to education, the majority of thechildren officially out of school are girls. In 2007-2008, over half the girlsbetween 7 and 12 were out of school.[329]As illustrated above, one reason for low enrollment is cost.Parents have to pay expenses for school, such as registration fees, books,materials, uniforms, or fees for the school management committee.[330] Inmany African countries, school fees and indirect costs of schooling are majorobstacles to obtaining an education for the poor. By contrast, the abolition ofschool fees has been proven to increase school enrollment and attendancesignificantly, particularly among the poor and among girls; it is also requiredby international law.[331]Other obstacles to schooling include the distance to school and the quality ofeducation.[332]High student-teacher ratios, little or no teacher training, and insufficientsupplies adversely affect the quality of education.[333]An alternative to the public school system are communityschools that are largely independent. A community school is any not-for-profitschool created and managed by a community or association. Official localauthority recognition is granted for any school meeting a set of simplecriteria.[334]The recognition of community schools has expanded the access to education, buthas formalized the paying of school fees and lowered education standards, asthe majority of teachers are untrained.[335]One strategy to improve access to education in areas withhigh degrees of mobility and migration is the creation of mobile schools. Innorthern Mali, mobile schools have been established for nomadic groups inrecent years. Teachers move together with the nomads and teach in tents thatare provided by the community.[336]The experience from northern Mali could serve as a useful model forMali’s mining zones.Social ProtectionMeasures to Improve Access to EducationSocial protection schemes could boost access to educationfor child laborers in artisanal mining zones and elsewhere. Social protectionis a set of policy measures aimed at increasing access to basic social servicesand reduce vulnerability to economic and social shocks. It comprises socialassistance (such as cash transfers and free school meals), social services forpoor households, as well as social insurance and related legislation.[337]Until now, Mali has not had a consistent social protectionpolicy and has implemented social protection measures only partially, withoutparticular attention to the needs of vulnerable children. Cash transferprograms have been used in several countries to support access to education forvulnerable children.[338]An earlier, successful social protection scheme forvulnerable children in Mali has been ended.  From 2002 to 2007, Mali had acash transfer program for mothers, aiming to enable them to send their childrento school. It also covered artisanal mining areas in the Kayes region. Underthis bourse maman (mothers scholarship), destitute mothers were given amonthly stipend (the equivalent of US$11) if they agreed to send their childrento school and keep them at school. If children dropped out of school, the cashtransfers were ended.[339]The program was modeled after a successful cash transfer program inBrazil, the bolsa familia.[340]Although the bourse maman program led to increased enrollment rates andlower drop-out rates, it was ended, possibly due to skepticism among somedonors towards cash transfer programs.[341]The current government policy recognizes the importance offree school meals as an incentive for poor families to send their children toschool. The government has proposed a law to set up a National Centre forSchool Canteens, tasked with coordination and oversight over the creation ofschool canteens.[342] At present, schoolcanteens are being established in 166 communes affected by drought and hunger,notably in northern Mali. Artisanal mining zones in western and southern Maliare currently not benefitting from such free school meals. By thegovernment’s own admission, the number of school canteens is far toosmall in Mali.[343]A newly adopted government plan on social protection couldfinally bring change, if properly implemented. After a long process ofconsultations, the Malian government drafted a national action plan on socialprotection in 2010, and adopted it in August 2011. The action plan includes acash transfer program for vulnerable populations and free school meals.[344] Attime of writing it had not been decided if the program would target vulnerablechildren and orphans in particular.[345]VIII. The Gold Traders’ ResponsibilityGiven the prevalence of child labor in Malian artisanalmines, it is likely that, unless domestic and international companies tradingin artisanal gold implement adequate due diligence processes, gold producedthrough the use of child labor will find its way into their supply chains.International norms require businesses to identify their impact on human rightsthrough due diligence, prevent human rights violations that could occur throughtheir action, and mitigate and account for human rights abuses that do occurbecause of their action. Human Rights Watch is aware of only two companies,Kaloti Jewellery International from Dubai and Tony Goetz from Belgium, thathave put in place due diligence processes. Other companies trading in artisanalgold from Mali may have implemented such processes, although Human Rights Watchhas not been able to establish this. Human Rights Watch has not been able toobtain information on the processes and policies of many companies which tradein gold from artisanal mines.At the national level, the government of Mali has failed totake action to engage businesses on their responsibility in this area.The Responsibility of GoldTraders in MaliAll over Mali’s artisanal mining zones, small goldtraders buy the gold mined by children and adults. Sometimes, the tradersassist with amalgamation; in other cases, they buy the raw gold afteramalgamation.Gold prices vary and have risen to record heights in 2011.In April 2011, traders paid artisanal miners between 10,000 CFA francs (aboutUS$21.94) and 17,500 CFA francs (about $38.40) per gram of gold.[346] InBamako, traders paid between 21,000 and 21,200  CFA francs (about $46.06and $46.40) for a gram of gold, when gold was trading at about 21,400  CFAfrancs (about $46.94) per gram internationally.[347]Most of the gold from artisanal mines is sold by localtraders, who visit the mines, to larger traders in Bamako, sometimes throughmiddlemen. These larger traders run trading houses that are usually registeredas limited companies. Trading relationships are often stable andwell-established; several traders in the mining areas confirmed that theyalways sold to the same trading house in Bamako.[348] In one case, asmaller gold dealer described his counterpart in Bamako as his“boss,” and in another case, a Bamako-based trader showed a list ofpeople buying gold for him in mines.[349]Some wealthy gold miners also trade in the gold from “their” mineor shaft; one such gold miner in the Kéniéba area established hisown company in Bamako, cutting out the middlemen altogether.[350]There is also trade with gold across the borders to Guineaor other neighboring countries, going both ways.[351] While some of thegold is smuggled from Mali’s mines to neighboring countries, moresignificant amounts of gold are being imported, for example from Guinea andBurkina Faso.[352]Traders in Mali and the subregion have a responsibility toensure that they are not buying gold mined by children, but many of the tradersinterviewed by Human Rights Watch showed little awareness or concern abouttheir responsibility.[353] One trader inKéniéba denied that there are children below the age ofadolescence working in the mines.[354]Another one acknowledged the problem, but said he could not do anything tochange the situation.[355]The owner of a trading house in Bamako maintained that he did not know anythingabout child labor, and that he had never visited an artisanal mine.[356]Another trader in Bamako said he knew nothing about the risks associated withmercury use.[357]Many traders even buy gold directly from children, a clearindication of their tacit support for child labor.[358]One trader commented:Child labor is not good. The gold goes to their head[affects their attitude]. They lose track of education. But I cannot influencethe parents. Sometimes parents send children here to sell me gold.[359]The Role of ArtisanalMiners’ AssociationsMalian artisanal miners and mining operators are organizedin several associations, including the Uniondes opérateursminiers au Mali (UNOMIN), the Fédération nationale desorpailleurs au Mali (FNOM), and the Association des femmesminières au Mali (AFEMIN). In some cases, they have helped minerscreate cooperatives or economic interest groups, or provided them withequipment.[360]Professionalizing the artisanal mining sector could help increase miners’income and, as a result, reduce child labor.[361]However, so far, this has not been the case. Worse, therehas been insufficient emphasis among certain organisations on problems such aschild labor, mercury use, and exploitation of poor miners. For instance,members of the newly established Mali Mining Chamber, the representative bodyfor small- and large-scale mining businesses, denied that child labor is aproblem.[362]The president of the Mining Chamber told Human Rights Watch:There is no child labor in the artisanal gold mines.…A child cannot do this work. Some might look like children but are adults.[363]He also defended the use of child labor, should it occur, bysaying that parents in different work sectors in Mali often take their childrento work with them.  Another member of the Mining Chamber defended childlabor as part of a child’s upbringing (socialization).[364]In contrast, the head of the National Federation of MalianGold Miners expressed concern about the use of child labor and said he was keento take action on this.[365]The Responsibility of International Gold Trading CompaniesMali’s official figures put the amount of artisanallymined gold exported per year at around four tonnes, worth around US$230 millionat September 2011 prices. However, the real amount might be higher, as some ofthe gold is probably smuggled out the country. A further set of figuresobtained from the Ministry of Industry, Investment and Business of Mali, statesthat during the first half of 2011, nine international companies boughtartisanally mined gold worth over US$83 million.[366]Swiss CompaniesExport statistics obtained from the Ministry of the Economyand Finances of Mali show that Switzerland is the most important tradingpartner in artisanally mined gold for Mali.[367]Between January 2009 and May 2011, US$34 million worth of artisanally minedgold were exported from Mali to Switzerland.[368]Between January and June 2011, the Swiss company Decafin wasthe sole recipient of the exports to Switzerland, according to the dataobtained from the Ministry of Industry, Investment and Business.[369]Decafin is a Geneva-based company, founded in 1977, that trades in preciousmetals and also operates as a finance institute.[370] In a letter toDecafin, Human Rights Watch described the use of child labor in artisanal goldmines, and asked the company to provide information on its policies andprocedures on the prevention of child rights violations, and how it monitorsthe situation of children in artisanal mines. Decafin, through its lawyer saidthat Decafin “only acts at the end of the supply chain” and that it“has no contacts whatsoever with the producing companies nor with theMalian government.”[371]Following a meeting with Human Rights Watch, the company sent a second letterthrough its lawyer, stating that it acts at the end of a supply chain composedof at least four intermediaries and is unable to exert any pressure onproducers in, or the government of, Mali. However, the company said that itwould question its suppliers and the Mali Mining Chamber about the conditionsin which the gold is mined. The letter also described the Guiding Principles onBusiness and Human Rights as the company’s code of conduct.[372]Dubai CompaniesThe second most important destination for artisanally minedgold from Mali is the United Arab Emirates, and specifically Dubai. Companiesin the United Arab Emirates bought approximately US$18 million worth of goldbetween January 2009 and June 2011.[373]The statistics obtained from the Ministry of Industry,Investment and Business name four companies which, it states, are based inDubai and bought artisanally mined gold in the first half of 2011: KalotiJewellery International, Mayer, Globe Gold, and Salor DMCC.[374] Human Rights Watchhas been unable to obtain contact details for Mayer, Globe Gold, and SalorDMCC, and therefore has not been able to reach them. As a result it is notknown to Human Rights Watch whether these companies operate due diligenceprocedures in relation to any artisanally mined gold which may have beenproduced through the use of child labor.In response to a letter outlining the findings of HumanRights Watch’s research on child labor in Mali’s artisanal mines,Kaloti Jewellery International shared with Human Rights Watch its policy onchild labor and other human rights issues.[375]The company also shared documents signed by two Malian traders in which theystated that “the undersigned hereby guarantees that these Metals areconflict-free, free from child labor and have been sourced through propermining channels, based on personal knowledge”.[376] Kaloti JewelleryInternational informed Human Rights Watch that it recently suspended all goldimports from its Malian clients, a step that Human Rights Watch neitherrecommended nor supported, due to the potentially harmful economic consequencesfor artisanal mining communities, including children.[377] The managing directorof Kaloti also expressed interest in supporting initiatives to end the use ofchild labor in this sector, for example projects to improve access toeducation.[378]Human Rights Watch continues to be in dialogue with Kaloti Jewellery Internationalabout measures that international companies should take to curb child labor.Companies in Other CountriesMali also exports gold to several other European and NorthAmerican countries, Thailand, and China. One trader reported that internationalbuyers have come occasionally straight to the mines and bought there.[379]According to the figures obtained from the Ministry of theEconomy and Finances, between 2009 and 2011, the third largest business partnerafter Switzerland and the United Arab Emirates was Belgium.[380] During the first ofhalf of 2011, a Belgian company, Tony Goetz, imported about 60 kilograms, worthclose to US$ 3 million.[381]In response to a letter from Human Rights Watch about the use of childlabor in Mali’s artisanal gold mines, Tony Goetz stated that“artisanal mines that make use of highly toxic mercury are not among thesuppliers of Tony Goetz NV,” and that their suppliers have acknowledgedthat they do not use child labor. The company also said that “the amountof gold purchased from Malian suppliers by Tony Goetz represents only a verynegligible amount of the total purchases of the company (i.e. less than 0.5% ofthe total purchases).”[382]Government MiningPolicies: Failure to Regulate Artisanal MiningThe Malian government policy on mining is primarily focusedon large-scale mining, which accounts for the majority of Mali’s goldexports, and the need to attract international investors. Where the governmentdoes deal with artisanal mining, its approach is mostly characterized by alaissez-faire attitude and a neglect of the pervasive poverty, child labor, andmercury use in artisanal mines. The government tolerates most artisanal miningactivities, including those outside the legally established mining corridors.According to one official, 97 percent of artisanal mining sites lie outside thecorridors.[383]The government has failed to regulate and support the sector, a step that couldincrease miners’ incomes and help eliminate child labor.One reason for this situation is that many local governmentofficials and traditional authorities benefit from artisanal mining, by raisingfees for shafts or getting part of the gold production as customary owner ofthe land.[384]Sometimes, local government officials even become gold miners themselves,and receive considerable income through the miners working for them. Anofficial from the ministry of mines said that there are “conflicts ofinterest when the mayor is gold miner.”[385] As a result, localgovernment authorities—who have oversight over artisanal mining—donot take their regulatory role seriously, and are unlikely to take action onchild labor. One government official told Human Rights Watch: “Mayorssometimes make money with the mines, so they don’t provide goodoversight”.[386]It is therefore not surprising that government officials at the central levelconsider artisanal mining “difficult,” and that the governmentusually avoids addressing child labor.[387]While shying away from some of the difficult issues, thegovernment has recognized the need to get better information about the sector.It is presently carrying out a study on the economic output of artisanal goldmines in Mali, jointly with the World Bank.[388]According to one official from the Ministry of Mines, there is a desire toregulate the sector better, for example, by clearly demarcating areas that areprohibited for artisanal mining.[389]Government officials have announced the closure of mines that are located inclassified forests or near water currents, but it remains unclear whether thispolicy will be implemented.[390]In Kolondiéba circle, the government announced the closure of a mine,but then closed the site only for the rainy season, when most artisanal minersleave to work in agriculture for a few months.[391] While it is possiblethat some artisanal mining sites will be closed in the future as part of aneffort to protect the environment, it seems unlikely that larger parts of thesector will be outlawed or severely restricted. The new draft mining lawcontinues to use the concept of mining corridors, but strengthens involvementof the Ministries of Mines and Environment, indicating a desire to controlartisanal mining to some extent from the central government.[392] The recentestablishment of the Mali Mining Chamber also indicates support for the sector,in particular wealthier artisanal miners and gold traders.Regional andInternational Initiatives towards Mining BusinessesThe Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative(EITI) in MaliIn August 2011, Mali became a member of the Extractive IndustriesTransparency Initiative (EITI).[393]EITI is a voluntary global initiative that requires its members to discloseinformation about oil, mining and gas company payments to governments. Itbrings together governments, companies, and civil society. Countries who applyto become EITI members have to undergo a process of validation.[394]EITI is almost entirely focused on the obligations ofgovernments and of international oil, mining, and gas companies, and giveslittle attention to national and international companies trading in gold fromartisanal mines. Nevertheless, by committing to transparency standards in thelarge-scale mining sector, the Malian government has established an importantprinciple that could be extended to the artisanal mining sector in the future.Civil Society Action on the Mining Sector in MaliMost Malian civil society groups working on mining focus onthe large-scale mining sector. They monitor and document the conduct of thegovernment and large-scale mining companies with regards to transparency,environmental impacts, and benefit for the local population. NGOs provide animportant counter-perspective to the government, for example, by submitting ashadow report on the government to EITI or by documenting the environmentaldamage caused by mining companies.[395]Occasionally, civil society groups also work on artisanalmining. Fondation  pour le Développement du Sahel, one ofthe leading NGOs in this area, has carried out a small study on mercury use inKangaba.[396]West African Common Mining Policy and Mining CodeAt the regional level, the Economic Community of WestAfrican States (ECOWAS) adopted a directive on mining in 2009, and is about toadopt a mining policy in 2011. A legally binding mining code is scheduled for2014.[397]The aim of this process is to harmonize approaches to mining and avoid a raceto the bottom in which states offer incentives for international miningcompanies without sufficiently protecting state revenue.The directive underlines the obligation of states, holdersof mining rights, and other mining businesses to respect human rights,including child rights, to protect the environment, and to work transparently.However it hardly mentions artisanal mining.[398]The policy, which ministers validated in June 2011 and whichwill be adopted later in 2011 by heads of state, addresses artisanal miningissues.[399]It calls for the regulation and development of artisanal mining, and commitsmember states to improve artisanal mining activities through changes in theregulatory framework as well as the formation of cooperatives of artisanalminers, programs of technical and financial assistance, and othercapacity-building measures. It also calls on states to “promote theharmonious co-existence between large-scale mineral operators and ASM[artisanal and small-scale mining] operators.”[400]The future mining code could become an important regionaltool if it contains a clear prohibition of child labor in artisanal goldmining, and mandates measures to reduce the use of mercury in artisanal mining.International Efforts to Create a Child-Labor Free Gold Supply ChainBusinesses are increasingly recognizing that they have toadhere to human rights standards, including child rights and environmentalstandards. A range of voluntary standards and codes has been developed at theinternational level, some of them general, others specific to the miningsector. However, so far their impact has been very limited in Mali’sartisanal mining sector.Some initiatives seek to specifically ensure a child laborfree supply chain of artisanally mined gold. Most importantly, twoorganizations with experience in fair trade labeling and artisanal gold miningrecently published the “Fairtrade and Fairmined Standard for Gold fromArtisanal and Small-Scale Mining.” Under this fair trade label, producershave to be organized in artisanal and small-scale miners’ organizations,adhere to ILO Conventions 138 and 182, and exclude the use of hazardous childlabor in artisanal gold mining. The standard also requires producers to helpadolescents access training and employment opportunities.[401] Furthermore,producers are to use mercury reducing techniques, and to abandon certain riskypractices, such as whole ore amalgamation, amalgam burning in homes, andmercury use by children, pregnant women, and persons with certain chronicdiseases.[402]The fair-trade label presents an opportunity to promote bestpractices and to highlight the need for due diligence. However, there aredifficulties with its implementation. It is generally difficult to guaranteethe validity of the fair trade label, as the use of child labor in allegedlycertified products has shown.[403]At present, the label is limited to Latin America, but during 2012, severalAfrican countries will be assessed for participation in the scheme.[404]The above-mentioned regional project on mercury reduction will examine thefeasibility of introducing the label in Africa, including in Mali, in thefuture.[405]Businesses active in the diamond and gold market have alsostarted an initiative to promote ethical standards, and come together to createthe Council for Responsible Jewellery. The organization operates a system ofcertification for its members, who undergo independent verification to qualify.[406]International NGOs have embarked on a promising campaign“No Dirty Gold” that urges retailers to make changes in the goldmining industry, in particular regarding the environmental damage caused bygold mining. The campaign has developed a set of broad principles and is urgingretailers to sign on to them. The principles include adherence to internationalconventions and the respect of labor standards, but do not mention child labor.[407]ConclusionChild labor in Mali’s artisanal gold mines exposeschildren to grave health hazards and often prevents them from getting aneducation. Child miners also sometimes suffer economic exploitation, coercion,trafficking, and physical and sexual abuse.Children are sent into child labor to increase the familyincome; in addition, child labor is socially accepted and viewed as usefuleducative experience. Many parents of child laborers are artisanal minersliving in poverty and who only earn a fraction of the gold they mine, as theyhave to pay fees to traditional or local authorities and to miners who hirethem as workforce or who rent out machines.The government of Mali has failed to address child labor inartisanal gold mining effectively. While it has taken some important measuresto protect children’s rights, it has not put its full political weightbehind these efforts. Existing initiatives tend to be isolated and lack fullpolitical and financial support. In addition, central government policies havesometimes been undermined by the laissez-faire attitude of local governmentofficials. In the context of decentralization, the central government hasrelegated much responsibility for crucial areas such as education, health, andartisanal mining to local authorities, but these authorities have not doneenough to address child labor and children’s poor access to education andhealthcare.Child labor policies have not fully been implemented andlack teeth. There have been hardly any inspections of child labor in artisanalgold mines, and the law on child labor is not being enforced.The government’s education policies have failed tobenefit child laborers, including those in artisanal mining areas, and failedto adapt to their needs. School fees, lack of school infrastructure, and poorquality of education deter many parents from sending their children to school.The government has largely failed to make education accessible and availablefor vulnerable children such as child laborers.Mining policies focus on industrial mining, carried out byinternational companies, and have largely neglected problems related toartisanal mining, including child labor. The government tends to supportpowerful, wealthy miners and traders in the sector, and benefits financiallyfrom artisanal mines at the local level, but is providing virtually no supportfor ordinary artisanal miners.In the area of health policy, the government has failed todevelop a strategy and concrete measures to prevent or treat health problemsrelated to mercury use or other mining-related conditions in artisanal miningzones.Donors, UN agencies, and civil society groups haveundertaken some useful initiatives on child labor, education, or artisanalmining in Mali, but these have been piecemeal, suffered from lack of reliablefunding, and lacked consistent political backing.  In particular, the ILOis suffering a funding crisis after the United States and the EuropeanCommission drastically reduced their funding. At the international level, theILO has failed to follow up on its 2005 call to action “Minors out ofMining,” in which 15 governments—including Mali—committed toeliminating child labor in their artisanal mining sector by 2015.Malian and international gold companies have not done enoughto address child labor in the supply chain, for example, by monitoring themines that supply them to check if no child labor is being used, and bypressing suppliers to end the use of child labor if it is being found. TheMalian government has not held traditional authorities and powerful miners atthe mining sites to account, for example through regular labor inspections, norhas it urged national traders to ensure a child-labor free supply chain.Hazardous child labor in Mali’s artisanal mines canonly be ended if different actors—government, civil society, UN, donors,artisanal miners and gold traders and companies—prioritize itselimination, give their full political support to it, and provide financialsupports to efforts aimed at ending it.The government needs to ensure that relevant nationalministries—the Ministry of Labor and Civil Service, the Ministry ofMines, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Environment and Sanitation, theMinistry of Education, and the Ministry of Promotion of Women, Child and FamilyAffairs—as well as local authorities all work together. Differentgovernment ministries and institutions should take the lead on differentrecommendations, spelled out below, depending on their expertise, and workclosely with all other ministries concerned.As a first step, the government should immediately take stepsto end the use of mercury by children working in artisanal mining. In addition,the government and all stakeholders concerned should come together to supportand implement the recently adopted National Action Plan on Child Labor. Theyshould also take steps to improve access to education in artisanal miningareas, including through an abolition of all school fees, state support forcommunity schools, and a social protection scheme for vulnerable children. Inorder to strengthen artisanal mining communities and improve environmentalhealth, the government and others should provide support and capacity-buildingto artisanal miners, including on technologies that reduce the use of mercury,and address the health impact of mercury on artisanal miners, in particular onchildren. A national roundtable on hazardous child labor in artisanal miningshould serve as forum to bring the relevant actors together and create momentumfor concerted action.Malian and international companies should recognize theirresponsibility regarding child labor and other human rights issues, through duediligence processes and pressure on suppliers and the government to bring abouta measurable reduction of child labor. An immediate and total boycott of goldfrom Mali is not the answer to human rights violations in Mali’sartisanal gold mines. Boycott risks reducing the income of impoverishedartisanal mining communities and may even increase child labor as families seekto boost their income.RecommendationsTo the Government of MaliEnd Child Labor in Artisanal Gold Mines, Including Mercury UseImmediately take steps to end the practice of child laborersworking with mercury, in particular by:disseminating information the harmful nature of mercury forchildren;engaging communities on how to organize mining work without theinvolvement of child laborers in work processes requiring mercury;reiterating the ban on hazardous child labor, including work withmercury;instructing labor inspectors to carry out labor inspections on theuse of mercury by children.Give full political backing and sufficient financial support forthe recently adopted National Action Plan on Child Labor, including to programsfor the withdrawal of children working in mines.Monitor and enforce the implementation of Convention 182 and thenational list of hazardous work for children with regards to child labor inartisanal mining. Carry out regular labor inspections in artisanal mines,including on child sex work, and sanction those who use child labor incontravention of the law.Strengthen the role of labor inspectors in identifying childlabor by increasing the number of labor inspectors and training them on childlabor issues, or develop a community-based monitoring system linked to theofficial inspectorate. Local authorities should support labor inspections andassist in enforcing the law on child labor. National authorities need to haveoversight over local authorities to ensure that they take responsibility inthis regard.Call a national roundtable on child labor in artisanal mining, todraw the attention of policymakers and businesses to the issue, and help garneractive support from all stakeholders for concrete measures against child laborin artisanal mining. The roundtable should involve relevant governmentministries, local authorities, civil society, all relevant UN agencies, donors,experts, and gold traders inside and outside Mali. The roundtable, or meetingsof a smaller number of stakeholder representatives, should become a regular yearlyevent that keeps track of progress in this area.Urge gold traders and companies to take steps towards theelimination of child labor from their supply chain and to support child laborprograms, and remind them at every opportunity of the prohibition of hazardouschild labor. Suspend licenses of gold traders who do not carry out regularmonitoring activities or who fail to take concrete action if child labor isfound.Develop a national action plan for the reduction of mercury inartisanal mining, with attention to the particular situation of children andpregnant women living and working in artisanal mining areas. The action planshould be developed in close consultation with NGOs working on child labor inartisanal mining, environmental NGOs, experts, and UN agencies.Take measures to reduce the use of mercury in artisanal goldmining, for example through the introduction of retorts, and urge gold tradersand companies to reduce the use of mercury in their supply chain.On the international level, push for a strong internationaltreaty on mercury reduction, including a ban on the practice of children andpregnant women working with mercury.Improve Access to Health Care for Children in Artisanal Gold Mining AreasDevelop a comprehensive public health strategy and program totackle chronic mercury exposure and its long-term health consequences in Mali,with a particular focus on child health. This program should seek the input ofoccupational health experts and mercury experts.Conduct surveillance on mercury exposure and intoxication inartisanal mining communities, with a particular focus on child health.Provide training on mercury intoxication to health authoritiesand health providers in mining zones.Start a pilot program for testing and treatment ofchildren’s mercury intoxication in an artisanal mining area, with a viewto expanding it to all affected areas.Conduct a public awareness-raising program on the health risks ofmercury use in artisanal mining areas, with an emphasis on the risks tochildren, including at child health and reproductive health clinics.Ensure that the national action plan for the reduction of mercuryin artisanal mining includes a strong health component, such as gathering ofhealth data, training of health workers, and inclusion of health centers inawareness-raising activities.Improve access to primary health care for children, reproductivehealth services, and HIV services in artisanal mining areas, for example,through well equipped mobile clinics with skilled health workers.Improve Access to Education for Children Working in Artisanal Gold MiningCarry out a nationwide campaign on child labor and the right toeducation, including outreach with mining communities. The campaign should becoordinated by the national authorities, who need to have oversight over localauthorities. As part of this campaign, local authorities should:inform communities about the prohibition of worst forms of childlabor in artisanal mining;inform communities about the importance of education, and the lawon compulsory education;engage families whose children do not attend school;as a last resort, sanction families who refuse to send childrento school, in violation of Malian law.Enforce the principle of free education by lifting school feesand taking effective steps to remove other financial barriers to schooling, inline with the Malian education law.Take specific steps to improve access to education in artisanalmining areas, in particular through:the improvement of school infrastructure in mining areas, such asthe construction of new schools and expansion of existing schools, deploymentof additional teaching personnel, and the creation of mobile schools in areaswith many immigrant children;greater state financial support for community schools in miningareas;a program of outreach and dialogue with parents or guardians ofchildren working in artisanal mines, with the aim of enforcing schoolattendance in artisanal mining areas, which is compulsory by law;programs that allow children beyond the enrollment age to accessnon-formal education institutions and transition back into the formal educationsystem;the establishment of nurseries and other early learning andchildcare institutions.Implement the national social protection plan with particularattention to the needs of vulnerable children, through:the establishment of a social protection scheme that benefitsvulnerable children, including child laborers in mining areas, and that tiescash transfers to regular school attendance;free school meals, including in schools in artisanal miningareas.Provide vocational training, apprenticeships, and safe workopportunities for youth aged 15 to 17 in artisanal mining areasUrge mining traders and companies to undertake and supportefforts to improve access to education in artisanal gold mining areas.Protect Children Working in Artisanal Mining Areas against AbuseMonitor and enforce the implementation of the Child ProtectionCode in artisanal mining areas, in cooperation with UNICEF and NGOs.Investigate and punish, in accordance with internationalstandards of due process, those responsible for child trafficking, physical andsexual violence against children, or labor exploitation.In cases of exploitation, physical or sexual abuse, ortrafficking, intervene to remove the child from abusive environments and returnhim or her to their family, if this is in the best interest of the child. Iffamily reunification is not feasible or desirable, place children with fosterfamilies, and ensure continued monitoring of the child’s situation.Provide medical and psychological assistance, legal support, andmeasures of rehabilitation for children who are victims of trafficking,physical and sexual violence, or labor exploitation.Carry out a mass public campaign and sensitization activitiesabout the rights of child laborers, including the right to education, healthcare and labor rights, and make clear that violence against children,exploitation, and trafficking are all illegal, prosecutable offenses.Improve the Livelihood of Artisanal Mining CommunitiesSupport artisanal mining communities by providing training onimproved mining techniques, and assist artisanal miners in efforts to set upcooperative or economic interest groups.Offer income-generating activities in other sectors, such asagriculture, and encourage artisanal mining communities to diversify theirincome.To the Economic Community ofWest African States (ECOWAS)Ensure that the future ECOWAS Mining Code prohibits the use ofchild labor in artisanal mining, and recommends specific actions to memberstates towards the elimination of child labor in artisanal mining.Ensure that the future ECOWAS Mining Code prohibits the use ofmercury by pregnant women and child laborers.Ensure that the future ECOWAS Mining Code mandates governments totake steps to reduce the use of mercury in artisanal gold mining, includingthrough training, capacity-building and introduction of mercury-reducingpractices.ToDonor Countries and the World Bank, and Relevant UN Agencies, such as ILO,UNICEF, UNIDO, UNEP, and WHOProvide financial, technical, and political support to the MalianGovernment of Mali and civil society actors for the above-mentioned measures.In particular, provide political, financial, and technicalsupport for:The National Action Plan on Child Labor, including to programsfor the withdrawal of children working in artisanal mines.Child labor programs in Mali, including national NGOs.Measures to end the use of mercury by child laborers.Measures to introduce technologies that reduce the use of mercuryin artisanal gold mining, such as retorts.Measures to improve access to education, including a socialprotection scheme that benefits vulnerable children and that ties cashtransfers to regular school attendance. Donors should press for an abolition ofschool fees and implement this in their own education programs. A national roundtable on child labor in artisanal mining, withthe aims outlined above.The US, the European Commission, and Other Donors shouldalso provide support to ILO/IPEC for child labor programs on in Mali.UNICEF should also carry out a program with a focus onthe children’s rights in artisanal mining areas in Mali.The ILO should also renew the “Minors out ofMining” initiative by calling an international conference on the issue,following up on the national level with governments who committed to eliminatechild labor in artisanal mining, for example, through national roundtablesinvolving relevant stakeholders, providing financial and technical support forchild labor programs, and calling upon other governments to commit to the goalsof the initiative.The US, France, the Global Environment Facility, and UNIDOshould also ensure that their current programs on mercury reduction inartisanal gold mining in Mali and the sub-region include measures to end theuse of mercury by child laborers.To Malian and InternationalCompanies Trading in Artisanal GoldTake Measures to Ensure a Child-Labor Free Supply ChainMalianand international companies buying gold from Mali’s artisanal minesshould establish a thorough due diligence process, including regular monitoringof child labor in artisanal mining. Monitors should be independent and theresults of monitoring should be published. Companies should visit artisanalmines to ensure they have accurate information about child labor. The duediligence process must also include procedures to address adverse human rightsimpacts.Malian and international companies should carry outcapacity-building with their suppliers by training them on how to identify andaddress child labor.If there are reports that child labor is being used, companiesshould conduct specific investigations into these reports.In the event that child labor occurs, Malian and internationalcompanies buying the gold should take action to address the situation. Inparticular the companies should:Immediately inform the national and local government authoritiesand urge them in writing to take measures to end use of child labor inartisanal gold mining within a specified time frame, for example, to seekmeasurable improvements within one year through labor inspections and improvedaccess to education;Immediately inform the Mining Chamber and urge them, in writing,to take measures to end use of child labor in artisanal gold mining within aspecified time frame, for example, to develop and disseminate a code of conducton child labor in mining sector within one year;Immediately inform suppliers and urge them to take measures toend the use of child labor in their supply chain within a specified time frame,such as two years, in order to facilitate children’s transition out ofwork. Concrete measures could, for example, be awareness-raising sessions onchild labor in artisanal mining communities, direct support for educationprojects, and pressure on national and local authorities to take measures toend child labor, as outlined above. Significant improvements could be a steeprise in school enrollment rates, a notable reduction of child labor, or the endof child labor in amalgamation and other processes involving mercury.Directly support measures to end child labor, for example,through projects that improve access to education and withdraw children fromchild labor.Develop and publish a code of conduct or policy on child labor ifthey have not done so yet. Implementation of such a code or policy should beindependently monitored by a credible third party.Cooperate with associations of gold miners and the Mining Chamberto develop a sector-wide code of conduct on child labor in Mali’sartisanal mines.Publicly express support for the National Action Plan on ChildLabor, measures to end child labor in artisanal mining, and a nationalroundtable on child labor in artisanal mining.ToMalian Associations of Artisanal Gold MinersDevelop a code of conduct or policy for Mali’s artisanalgold mining sector, obliging members to undertake measures towards the eliminationof child labor in artisanal gold mining.Urge members to implement the recommendations mentioned above.Support a national roundtable on child labor in artisanal mining,with the aims outlined above.To All GovernmentsSupport a strong international legally binding instrument onmercury that requires governments to implement mandatory action plans formercury reduction in artisanal gold mining. The action plans should includestrategies to end the use of mercury by children and pregnant women working inmining, and public health strategies to address the health effects of mercurypoisoning.AcknowledgementsThis report was researched andwritten by Juliane Kippenberg, senior researcher in the Children’s RightsDivision of Human Rights Watch.Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor, participated in thefield research. Judit Costa, associate in the Children’s Rights Division,and Katharina Theil, Roland Algrant intern in the Children’s RightsDivision, assisted with desk research. Katharina Theil also provided an earlydraft of the section on international law.The report was reviewed by Zama Coursen-Neff, deputydirector of the Children’s Rights Division; Matt Wells, researcher in theAfrica division; Jane Cohen, researcher in the Health and Human RightsDivision; Chris Albin-Lackey, senior researcher in the Business and HumanRights Division; Agnes Odhiambo, researcher in the Women’s RightsDivision; Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor; and Babatunde Olugboji, deputyprogram director of Human Rights Watch.Production assistance was provided by Judit Costa and NoahBeaudette, associates in the Children’s Rights division; Anna Lopriore,creative manager; Grace Choi, publications director; Kathy Mills, publicationsspecialist; and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager.We would like to thank Ben Silverstone of Doughty StreetChambers in London; Susan Gunn and Benjamin Smith of the International LaborOrganization; Marcello Veiga, Professor of Mining Engineering at the Universityof British Columbia (Canada); and Stephan Böse O’Reilly, AssistantProfessor of Public Health, University for Health Sciences, Medical Informaticsand Technology (Austria), for providing critical advice on specialist issuesand commenting on this report, or sections of it.Most of all, we would like to thank the many Malian childrenwho took the courage to share their stories with us. We are also grateful forthe support and hospitality by NGO activists, traditional authorities, miners,teachers, health workers, and others we met in the course of conducting thisresearch. We would also like to thank the Malian government for its openness todiscuss the issues of this report with us.Annex IHuman Rights Watch does not have information on whether theexporters listed below operate policies and/or due diligence procedures inrelation to the trading of artisanally mined gold which may be produced throughthe use of child labor.Click to expand ImageClick to expand ImageAnnex IIHuman Rights Watch has not been able to make contact withany of the individuals or companies named below, except for Decafin, Kaloti andTony Goetz. Other than in relation to these three companies, therefore, HumanRights Watch has no information on whether the individuals or companies listedhere operate policies and / or due diligence procedures in relation to thetrading of gold which may be produced through the use of child labor.Human Rights Watch assumes that the name“Kaloute” refers to “Kaloti”.Click to expand ImageAnnex IIIClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageAnnexIVClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageAnnexVClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand Image[1] Two local consultants carried out 16 of the 41interviews with children. In this report, the word "child" refers toanyone under the age of 18. The Convention on the Rights of the Child states,"For the purposes of the present Convention, a child means every humanbeing below the age of 18 years unless under the law applicable to the child,majority is attained earlier." Convention on the Rights of the Child(CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2,1990, ratified by Mali on September 20, 1990. When this report uses the termadolescents, it refers to older children.[2]UNICEF, “Mali Statistics,” http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/mali_statistics.html(accessed July 26, 2011).[3]Jacob E. Mabe, ed., Das Afrika-Lexikon (Stuttgart: J.B.Metzler Verlag, 2001), p. 373; Joseph Ki-Zerbo, Die GeschichteSchwarzafrikas (Frankfurt am Main: Fischer, 1990), pp. 131-145.[4]Claire Mainguy, “Natural resources and development: The gold sector inMali,” Resources Policy, vol. 36 (2011), pp. 123-131.[5]Ibid.[6] Ministère des Mines, “2009 Annuaire Statistique dusecteur mines et géologie,” December 2010, Bamako, p. 9. Asof September 2011, gold was trading at over $1800 an ounce.[7]Thomas Hentschel, Felix Hruschka, and Michael Priester, “Artisanal andSmall-Scale Mining: Challenges and Opportunities,” (London: InternationalInstitute for Environment and Development and WBCSD, 2003),http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/9268IIED.pdf (accessed June 1, 2011), p. 5; Samuel J.Spiegel, “Socioeconomic dimensions of mercury pollution abatement:Engaging artisanal mining communities in Sub-Saharan Africa,” EcologicalEconomics, vol. 68 (2009), pp. 3072-3083.[8]Ministère des Mines, “2009 Annuaire Statistiquedu secteur mines et géologie,” December 2010, Bamako, p. 9. Thehead of the Malian federation of artisanal gold miners estimates the totalproduction to be as high as 20 tons per year. Human Rights Watch interview withMorike Sissoko, president of the Fédération nationale desorpailleurs au Mali (FNOM), Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[9]Sadia Mohammed Banchirigah, “How have reforms fuelled the expansion ofartisanal mining? Evidence from sub-Saharan Africa,” Resources Policy,vol. 31 (2006), pp. 165-171.[10]Oxfam, “Hidden Treasures. In search of Mali’s gold-miningrevenues,” 2006, http://www.oxfamamerica.org/files/hidden-treasure.pdf(accessed June 1, 2011); Mainguy, “The gold sector in Mali,” ResourcesPolicy, pp. 123-131; Olof Drakenberg, “Mining in Mali - A backgroundnote for the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency,” July2010, http://www.hgu.gu.se/Files/nationalekonomi/EEU/Helpdesk/EnvPolicyBrief/2010/Mining%20in%20Mali%20%20a%20background%20note%20for%20Sida%20final.pdf(accessed June 1, 2011).[11]Ministère des Mines, “Code Minier (Projet)”, May 28, 2010; HumanRights Watch interview with Aliou Haidara, Publish What You Pay, Mali, Bamako,February 16, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with government official,Ministry of Mines, April 6, 2011.[12]United Nations Development Program (UNDP), “International HumanDevelopment Indicators,” 2010, http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/MLI.html(accessed June 1, 2011).[13]UN, “Millennium Development Goal Indicators,” July 7, 2011, http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg/SeriesDetail.aspx?srid=580(accessed June 1, 2011). The figure for Mali is from 2006.[14]UNDP, “International Human Development Indicators”.[15]Oxfam, “Hidden Treasures”; International Federation for HumanRights, “Gold Mining and Human Rights in Mali,” September 2007, http://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/Mali_mines_final-en.pdf(accessed June 1, 2011); Human Rights Watch interview with Hon. MoussaCoumbere, Kolondiéba, April 7, 2011.[16]Seydou Keita, “Etude sur les mines artisanales et lesexploitations minières à petite échelle au Mali,”International Institute for Environment and Development, August 2001, pp. 10-11.[17]A study from 2001 found that there are more than 200,000 artisanal gold minersin Mali. In 2009, a Malian government official put the number also at 200,000at a workshop presentation. See UNIDO/Direction nationale de l’assainissement et du contrôle despollutions et des nuisances, “Atelier sous-régionald’information des pays de l’Afrique de l’Ouest francophonessur les problèmes liés à l’orpaillage. Rapportde synthèse,” December 2009, p. 28. An ILO study cites theNational Directorate for Geology and Mines as saying that there are about100,000 artisanal gold miners in Mali. International LabourOrganization (ILO), “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail desenfants dans l’orpaillage au Burkina Faso, au Mali et au Niger. Voletpays Mali,“ March 2010, p.9.[18]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail desenfants,”  p. 9.[19]Ordonnance no.99-032/P-RM  portant Code Minier en Républiquedu Mali, August 19, 1999, art. 57.[20]Human Rights Watch interview with government official, Ministry of Mines, April6, 2011.[21]Code Minier, art. 57. International Institute for Environment and Development(IIED), “Legal tools for citizen empowerment: Increasing localparticipation and benefit in Mali’s mining sector,” 2008, http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/12554IIED.pdf(accessed June 24, 2011), p. 21.[22]The Land Tenure Code recognizes customary practices relating to land tenure,with some exceptions. USAID Mali, “Mali Land Tenure AssessmentReport”, September 2010, pp. 7-8, 20; Netherlands DevelopmentOrganization (SNV)/ Helvetas Mali/ Pact/ Deutscher Entwicklungsdienst/ DeutscheGesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, Guide juridique. Les ressources naturelles, les collectivités et leursterritoires (Bamako: Communiconcon 2007), pp.12-13.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with tomboloma and mayor,Worognan, April 9, 2011; ILO, “Etude transfrontalière des enfantsdans l’orpaillage,” p. 32; SeydouKeita,“Etude,” pp. 16-17.[24]Human Rights Watch interview with official from National Directorate for Mines,Bamako, February 15, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with governmentofficial, Ministry of Mines, Bamako, April 6, 2011; Human Rights Watchinterview with village chief and community leaders, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[25]Human Rights Watch interview with tomboloma and mayor, Worognan, April9, 2011.[26]Human Rights Watch interview with mayor of Tabakoto, Tabakoto, April 3, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with advisor to mayor, Baroya, April 3, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 4,2011; Seydou Keita, “Etude,” p. 16.[27]Human Rights Watch interview with advisor to mayor, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[28]Human Rights Watch interview with village chief and community leaders, Baroya,April 3, 2011.[29]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiémoko K., 15, Baroya, April 3, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Yacouba C., 16, Baroya, April 3, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with village chief and community leaders, Baroya, April3, 2011. The practice is also identified by Seydou Keita, “Etude,”p. 16.[30]Seydou Keita, “Etude,” pp. 16-17; Emailcommunication from Sidiki Coulibaly, ONG Réseau d’Appui et deConseils (RAC), May 23, 2011.[31]Ministère du Travail et de la Fonction Publique, “Pland’action national pour l’élimination du travail des enfantsau Mali,” April 2010, p. 10.[32]Understanding Child’s Work (ILO/UNICEF/World Bank Group),“Comprendre le travail des enfants au Mali”, Rome, May 2009, pp.i-iii.[33] ILO/IPEC Mali,  “Etude CAP. Travail des enfants auMali,” Bamako, September 2008, pp. 29-33; Understanding Child’sWork, “Comprendre le travail des enfants au Mali,” pp. 25-30; USDepartment of Labor, “2009 Findings on the Worst Forms of ChildLabor,” 2010, http://www.dol.gov/ilab/programs/ocft/pdf/2009OCFTreport.pdf(accessed August 9, 2011), pp. 417-425. On forced begging, see also HumanRights Watch, Off the Backs Of the Children: Forced Begging and Other AbusesAgainst Talibés in Senegal, April 2010,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/04/15/backs-children-0.[34]Loretta E. Bass, Child Labor in Sub-Saharan Africa, (Boulder: LynnRienner 2004); Morten Bøås and Anne Hatløy, “ChildLabour in West Africa: Different Work – Different Vulnerabilities,”International Migration, vol. 46 (3), 2008, pp. 3-25.[35]Fafo Institute of International Studies, “Travel to Uncertainty. A studyof child relocation in Burkina Faso, Ghana and Mali,” Oslo 2004,http://www.fafo.no/pub/rapp/440/440.pdf (accessed June 1, 2011).[36]Sarah Castle and AïsseDiarra, “The International Migration of Young Malians: Tradition,Necessity or Rite of Passage,” London School of Hygiene and TropicalMedicine, October 2003 (unpublished paper).[37]Child trafficking occurs when children arerecruited, transferred, transported, harbored, or received for the purpose ofexploitation. Exploitation can mean sexual exploitation, forced labor orservices, slavery or practices akin to slavery, or servitude. For details, seesection II.[38]Understanding Child’s Work, “Comprendre le travail des enfants auMali,” pp. 44-46; US Department of State, “Trafficking in PersonsReport, 10th edition,” June 2010,http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/142979.pdf (accessed June 24,2011), pp. 227-228; Human Rights Watch, Borderline Slavery – ChildTrafficking in Togo, vol.15, no. 8(A), April 2003,http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/togo0403.pdf.[39]International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16)at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3,1976, ratified by Mali on July 16, 1974; Optional Protocol to the Convention onthe Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and ChildPornography, adopted May 25, 2000, G.A. Res. 54/263, Annex II, 54 U.N. GAORSupp. (No. 49) at 6, U.N. Doc. A/54/49, Vol. III (2000), entered into forceJanuary 18, 2002, ratified by Mali on May 16, 2002; Protocol to Prevent,Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,Supplementing the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime(Trafficking Protocol), adopted November 15, 2000, G.A. Res. 55/25, annex II,55 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 60, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (Vol. I) (2001), enteredinto force December 25, 2003, ratified by Mali on April 12, 2002.[40]ILO Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for theElimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention), adopted June 17, 1999, 38 I.L.M. 1207, entered into force November19, 2000, ratified by Mali on July 14, 2000; ILO Convention No. 138 concerningthe Minimum Age for Admission and Employment (Minimum Age Convention), adoptedJune 26, 1973, 1015 U.N.T.S. 297, entered into force June 19, 1976, ratified byMali on March 11, 2003.[41]African [Banjul] Charter on Human’s and Peoples’ Rights (BanjulCharter), adopted June 27, 1981, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 I.L.M. 58(1982), entered into force October 21, 1986, ratified by Mali on December 21,1981; African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, OAU Doc.CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), entered into force November 29, 1999, ratified by Malion June 3, 1998.[42]Constitution, art.116.[43]ILO/IPEC, “About Child Labor,” http://www.ilo.org/ipec/facts/lang--en/index.htm(accessed on June 21, 2011). See also ILO, Child Labor – A textbookfor university students, (Geneva: ILO, 2004), p. 16.[44]ILO, Child Labor, p. 17.[45]CRC, art. 32.[46]The Committee on the Rights of the Child devoted one day of its fourth sessionto a general discussion on the issue of economic exploitation. See CRC/C/20, 4thsession, October 4, 1993, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CRC/Documents/Recommandations/exploit.pdf(accessed June 20, 2011), pp. 3-4.[47]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, art. 3.[48]International Labor Organization, Programme on Safety and Health at Work andthe Environment, “Hazardous Work,” http://www.ilo.org/safework/areasofwork/lang--en/WCMS_DOC_SAF_ARE_HAZ_EN/index.htm(accessed June 8, 2011).[49]ILO, R 190, Worst Forms of Child Labor Recommendation, 1999, http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/cgi-lex/convde.pl?R190(accessed June 6, 2011), para. 3.[50]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, art. 4.[51]Minimum Age Convention, art. 2(3).[52]Minimum Age Convention, art. 2(4).[53]Minimum Age Convention, art. 7.[54]CRC, art. 28(1)a; ICESCR, art. 13(2)a. The Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention, art. 7, also stipulates that States shall take measures to “ensureaccess to free basic education.”[55]CRC, art. 28; ICESCR, art. 13.[56]CRC, art. 32.[57]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), General CommentNo. 3, art. 2, para. 1, The Nature of States Parties Obligations, UN Doc.E/1991/23, annex III at 86 (1990), para. 10.[58]CESCR, General Comment No.13, art. 13, The Right to Education, UN Doc.E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 57.[59]CESR, General Comment No.11, Plans of Action for Primary Education, UN DocE/C.12/1999/4 (1999), paras 6-9.[60]CRC, art. 4.[61]African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, art. 11. The Protocolto the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights ofWomen in Africa urges states to “promote the enrolment and retention ofgirls in schools and other training institutions” (art 12, 2(c)),http://www.africa-union.org/root/au/Documents/Treaties/Text/Protocol%20on%20the%20Rights%20of%20Women.pdf(accessed September 8, 2011).[62] ICESCR, art. 12;Banjul Charter, art. 16; CRC, art. 24; African Charter on the Rights and theWellbeing of the Child, art. 14.[63]CRC, art. 32(1); Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, art. 3(d); AfricanCharter on the Rights and the Wellbeing of the Child, art. 15(1).[64]CESCR, General Comment No. 14, Article 12, The Right to the Highest AttainableStandard of Health, UN Doc. E/C.12/2000/4 (2000), para. 15.[65]OHCHR, WHO, “The Right to Health,” p. 23.[66]CESCR, General Comment No. 14, para. 43.[67]CESCR, General Comment No. 14, para. 44.[68]CRC, art. 19(1).[69]CRC, art. 34; African Charter on the Rights and Wellbeing of the Child, art.16(1), art. 27.[70]Trafficking Protocol, art. 2; CRC, African Charter on the Rights and theWellbeing of the Child, art. 29.[71]Trafficking Protocol, art. 3(c).[72]Trafficking Protocol, art. 3(a).[73]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, art. 3(a).[74]United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the SpecialRepresentative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights andtransnational corporations and other business enterprises, John Ruggie: GuidingPrinciples on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations“Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,” A/HRC/17/31, March21, 2011, http://www.ohchr.org/documents/issues/business/A.HRC.17.31.pdf(accessed August 11, 2011), principle 12. There is, however, as yet no sharedunderstanding of the full scope of businesses’ human rightsresponsibilities, whether these are or should be binding under internationallaw, and if so, how they can best be enforced.[75]Ibid., principles 15-24.[76]United Nations Global Compact, “The Ten Principles,” http://www.unglobalcompact.org/AboutTheGC/TheTenPrinciples/index.html.(accessed June 9, 2011), principles 5, 7, 9.[77]OECD, “Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Mineralsfrom Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas,” December 2010,http://www.oecd.org/document/36/0,3746,en_2649_34889_44307940_1_1_1_1,00.html(accessed August 11, 2011). Although the OECD Recommendation was initiated byconcern regarding minerals from conflict areas, it also concerns minerals fromnon-conflict areas—so-called high risk areas—where any of thesehuman rights violations occur, including the worst forms of child labor.[78]Ibid., Annex II, Model Supply Chain Policy for a Responsible Global SupplyChain of Minerals from Conflict- Affected and High-Risk Areas.[79]OECD, “Working Group Meeting on Due Diligence in the Gold SupplyChain,” May 4, 2011, http://www.oecd.org/document/44/0,3746,en_2649_34889_47679852_1_1_1_1,00.html(accessed August 11, 2011).[80]Loi n° 92-020 portant code du travail en Républiquedu Mali, September 23, 1992, art.187, http://www.droit-afrique.com/images/textes/Mali/Mali%20-%20Code%20du%20Travail.pdf(accessed June 6, 2011). As an exception, developing countries areallowed to specify a lower minimum age at 14 years at the moment ofratification. Mali, however, did not make use of this provision.MinimumAge Convention, art. 2(4).[81]Code du travail, art.185 ; Loi n° 00-26  bis / AN-RMportant ratification de l’ordonnance N° 00-006/P-RM  autorisantla satisfaction de la convention n° 182 sur l’interdiction des piresformes du travail des enfants, June 16, 2000.[82]Order No.09-0151/MTFPRESGcompletingthe list ofhazardous work prohibited forchildren under18 years,(Arrêté n° 09-0151/MTFPRE SG complétant laliste des travaux dangereux interdits aux enfants de moins de 18 ans), February4, 2009.[83]Décret n° 96-178/ P-RM portant application de diversesdispositions de la loi n° 92 -020 du 23 septembre 1992 portant code dutravail en République du Mali, art. D 189.23.[84]Décret n° 07-135/P-RM fixant la liste des déchetsdangereux, 2007.[85]Loi n° 99-046 portant loi d’orientation surl’éducation, December 28, 1999, art.7.[86] Loi n° 99-046 portant loi d’orientation surl’éducation, arts.  26, 34.[87]Loi n° 01-079 portant Code pénal, August 20, 2001.[88]Codepénal, art. 244.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with a member of National Assembly, Hon. MoussaCoumbere, Kolondiéba, April 7, 2011.[90] Code de protection de l’enfant, Ordonnance N° 02-062/P-RM,June 5, 2002. The Code is an ordinance, a legally binding standardadopted by the government without parliamentary approval.[91]Ibid., arts. 20, 58.[92]For the estimates of numbers, see section I.[93]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail des enfants”,p.5.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Alpha K., estimated age six, Baroya, April 3,2011.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Moussa S., estimated age six, Baroya, April3, 2011.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamidou S., estimated age eight, Baroya,April 3, 2011.[97]Save the Children found shafts up to 50 meters deep. Save theChildren, “Recherche sur les enfants travailleurs dans les placers auMali, Burkina Faso, en Guinée,” December 2008, p. 28.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Oumar K., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April 4,2011.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Oumar K., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April 4,2011.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim K., age 15, Worognan, April 9, 2011.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Karim S., estimated age 14, Worognan, April8, 2011.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Lansana K., 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Djibril C., estimated age 15, Worognan, April8, 2011.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with Boubacar S., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April4, 2011.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Anne M., age 11, Baroya, April 3, 2011;Human Rights Watchinterview with Susanne D., age 11, Worognan, April 8, 2011; ILO, Girls inMining. Research Findings from Ghana, Niger, Peru, and United Republic ofTanzania, (Geneva: ILO 2007), pp. 3-5.[106]For the description of different machines used in artisanal gold mining, see UNIndustrial Development Organization (UNIDO)/Global Mercury Project,“Manual for Training Artisanal and Small-Scale Gold Miners,”2006,http://www.globalmercuryproject.org/documents/non_country%20specific/training%20manual%20for%20miners%20Marcello%2015.pdf(accessed June 24, 2011).[107]Observations during Human Rights Watch visits to artisanal mines.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with seven women gold miners, Sensoko, April 4,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Seydou S., 16, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with seven women gold miners, Sensoko, April 4,2011; Save the Children, “Recherche sur les enfants travailleurs,”December 2008, p. 31; ILO, Girls in Mining.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdoulaye M., age 15, Baroya, April 3, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Seydou S., age 16, Baroya, April 3, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Tiémoko K., age 15, Baroya, April 3,2011.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Nanfadima A., estimated age 11, Tabokoto,April 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Susanne D., age 11, Worognan,April 8, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Rokia K., age 13, Baroya,April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Aminata C., age 13, Baroya,April 3, 2011.[112]Human Rights Watch interview with Susanne D., age 11, Worognan, April 8, 2011.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Aminata C., age 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[114]UNIDO/Global Mercury Project, “Manual for Training.”[115]On the use of mercury in artisanal mining globally and in Africa, see Kevin H.Telmer and Marcello M. Veiga, “World Emissions of Mercury from Artisanaland Small Scale Gold Mining”, 2008,http://www.mercurywatch.org/userfiles/file/Telmer%20and%20Veiga%202009%20Springer.pdf(accessed August 11, 2011); Samuel J. Spiegel,”Socioeconomic dimensionsof mercury pollution abatement: Engaging artisanal mining communities inSub-Saharan Africa”, Ecological Economics, vol. 68 (2009), pp. 3072-3082.For the situation in Mali, see Fondation du Sahel pour leDéveloppement, “Etude sur le mercure: cas de l’orpaillagetraditionnel dans le cercle de Kangaba,” November 2010.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with seven women gold miners, Sensoko, April 4,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Dorine S., woman gold miner, Tabakoto,April 2, 2011.[117]For more details on the health impact, see section below.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Mamadou S., estimated age six, Baroya, April3, 2011.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Susanne D., age 11, Worognan, April 8, 2011.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatimata N., estimated age 15, Worognan,April 9, 2011.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohamed S., age 16, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 1,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba,April 4, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with seven women gold miners,Sensoko, April 4, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader,Worognan, April 9, 2011.[123]Local NGO interview with shop owner, Kéniéba area, April 2, 2011.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Mariam D., age 11, Worognan, April 8, 2011. Thetrader was probably ill-informed himself, since he did not mention that themost severe risk stems from inhalation of mercury vapor; swallowing metallicmercury is usually less dangerous.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Oumar K., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April 4,2011.[126]Stephan Bose-O’Reilly et al., “Mercury Exposure andChildren’s Health,” Current Problems in Pediatric and AdolescentHealth Care, vol. 40, (2010), pp. 186-215.[127]“Mercury Toxicity and How it Affects Our Health”, 1998,  http://www.mercurysafety.co.uk/hlthinfo.htm (accessed September 8, 2011)[128]Marcello Veiga and Randy Baker, “Protocols for Environmental and HealthAssessment of Mercury Released by Artisanal and Small-Scale Gold Miners”,Global Mercury Project, 2004,pp. 68-74.[129]Ibid.[130]Samuel J. Spiegel, “Occupational Health, Mercury Exposure, andEnvironmental Justice: Learning from Experiences in Tanzania”, AmericanJournal of Public Health, vol. 99, supplement 3, (2009), pp. 550-558.[131]Stephan Bose-O’Reilly et al., “Mercury as serious health hazard forchildren in gold mining areas,” Environmental Research, vol. 107,(2008), pp. 89-97.[132]Ibid. See also ILO, Children in hazardous work. What we know. What we needto do, pp. 32-36.[133]Stephan Bose-O’Reilly et al., “Mercury Exposure andChildren’s Health,” pp. 190-191.[134]Human Rights Watch visit to Baroya mine, April 3, 2011.[135]Stephan Bose-O’Reilly et al., “Mercury Exposure andChildren’s Health,” pp.188-189; Blacksmith Institute/Green CrossSwitzerland, “World’s Worst Pollution Problems Report 2010. Top SixToxic Threats,” 2010, pp. 33-38,http://www.gci.ch/communication/publications (accessed July 8, 2011). Mercuryin its organic form accumulates in fish, which is a source of food in Malianmining areas.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with seven women gold miners, Sensoko, April 4,2011.[137]Veiga and Baker, “Protocols”, p. 67.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Worognan, April 9, 2011.[139]Blacksmith Institute/Green Cross Switzerland, “World’s WorstPollution Problems Report 2010. Top Six Toxic Threats.”[140]Kevin H. Telmer and Marcello M. Veiga, “World Emissions of Mercury fromArtisanal and Small Scale Gold Mining”; Kevin Telmer, “Mercury inASM, Extent, Causes and Solutions,” powerpoint presentation, 2009.[141]Kevin H. Telmer and Marcello M. Veiga, “World Emissions of Mercury fromArtisanal and Small Scale Gold Mining,” p.164; Samuel J. Spiegel,“Socioeconomic dimensions of mercury pollution abatement.”[142]See section VII below.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Keita Ntji, CSREF Kolondiéba, atgroup interview with préfet and six officials, Kolondiéba, April8, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with private doctor,Kéniéba, April 4, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Coulibaly,CSREF, Kéniéba, April 2, 2011; Local NGO interview with nurse,CSCOM, Tabakoto, Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Mory C., age 11, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[145]Brendan Girdler-Brown et al., “Three Decadesof Silicosis: Disease Trends at Autopsy in South African Gold Miners,” EnvironmentalHealth Perspectives, no. 118, vol. 3 (2010), p. 421.[146]HRW interview with pulmonologist, Hospital Point G, Bamako, March 29, 2011.[147]Human Rights Watch interview with Oumar K., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April 4,2011.[148]ILO, Children in hazardous work. What we know. What we need to do,(Geneva: ILO 2011), http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/@publ/documents/publication/wcms_155428.pdf(accessed August 12, 2011).[149]Ibid.; ILO; Girls in Mining, p. 7.[150]Local NGO interview with nurse, CSCOM, Tabakoto, Kéniéba, April2, 2011.[151]ILO, Girls in Mining, p.3-5; ILO, Children in hazardous work.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with Mamadou S., estimated age six, Baroya, April3, 2011.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with father, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with private doctor, Kéniéba, April4, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Oumar K., estimated age 14, Sensoko,April 4, 2011.[155]Local NGO interview with nurse, CSCOM, Tabakoto, Kéniéba, April2, 2011.[156]See section III.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with health worker, CSCOM, Kéniéba,April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Coulibaly, CSREF,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Keita Ntji, CSREF Kolondiéba, atgroup interview with préfet and six officials, Kolondiéba,April 8, 2011.[159]Human Rights Watch interview with private doctor, Kéniéba, April4, 2011.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with mayor, Worognan, April 8, 2011; Human RightsWatch interview with Ibrahim K., age 15, Worognan, April 9, 2011. Human RightsWatch interview with Binta M., age 15, April 9, 2011.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Boucary Togo, director of the National Unitto Combat Child Labor, Bamako, March 29, 2011.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with private doctor, Kéniéba, April4, 2011.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Coulibaly, CSREF, Kéniéba,April 2, 2011.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with Lansana K., 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with Issa S., age 12, Tabakoto, April 2, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Salif E., age 15, Worognan, April 9, 2011.[166]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail des enfantsdans l’orpaillage,” p. 39.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Haroun C., age 12, Tabakoto, April 2, 2011.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with Djibril C., age 15, Worognan, April 8, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Susanne D., 11, Worognan, April 8, 2011.[169]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail des enfants dansl’orpaillage,” p. 39; Human Rights Watch interview withrepresentative of RAC, Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[170]Human Rights Watch interview with Nanfadima A., estimated age 11, Tabokoto,April 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with seven women gold miners, Sensoko,April 4, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with school director, Worognan,April 8, 2011.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with Issa S., age 12, Tabakoto, April 2, 2011.[172]The ILO study found that 55 percent of children working with their family arenot paid. ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur letravail des enfants dans l’orpaillage,”  p. 55. Thestudy looked at the situation of children working with their parents and thoseliving and working with other persons.[173]This was also the finding in a regional study: Save the Children,“Recherche sur les enfants travailleurs,” p. 51. It found thatchildren “do not receive a salary but a meager amount depending on themood of the employer.”[174]This included two children who were told to earn money for school materials.[175]Human Rights Watch interview with Nanfadima A., estimated age 11, Tabokoto,April 2, 2011. It was not clear whether her father picked up the money or howshe otherwise sent him the money.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdoulaye M., age 15, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiémoko K., age 15, Baroya, April 3,2011.[178]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim K., age 15, Worognan, April 9, 2011.[179]Human Rights Watch interview with Julani M., estimated age 16, Worognan, April8, 2011.[180]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatimata N., estimated age 15, Worognan,April 9, 2011. She sent most of the money to her parents in Burkina Faso.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with AïssatouS., age 17, Worognan, April 9, 2011.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with Moussa S., age six, Baroya, April 3, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Hamidou S., estimated age eight, Baroya,April 3, 2011.[183]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail desenfants dans l’orpaillage,” p. 58.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Boubacar S., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April4, 2011. Boubacar first described his guardian as “father,” thenlater explained that he was a guardian and not the biological father, and wenton to call him a “stepfather”.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher from Sensoko, Kéniéba,April 2, 2011[186]Human Rights Watch interview with Mariam D., estimated age 11, Worognan, April8, 2011.[187]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail desenfants dans l’orpaillage,” pp. 34-35.[188]Save the Children, “Recherche sur les enfantstravailleurs,” pp. 37-38.[189]See subsection on pay.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Boubacar S., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April4, 2011.[191]Human Rights Watch interview with Salif E., age 15, Worognan, April 9, 2011.[192]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail desenfants dans l’orpaillage,”p. 60.[193]Human Rights Watch interview with head of Burkinabe community, Worognan, April9, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Worognan, April 9, 2011.[194]ILO/IPEC, “Etude CAP”, p. 44.[195]Human Rights Watch interview with Madjou, estimated aged seven, Tabakoto, April2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Mamadou S., estimated age six,Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Issa S., age 12,Tabakoto, April 2, 2011.[196]Human Rights Watch interview with Mariam D., estimated age 11, Worognan, April8, 2011.[197]Human Rights Watch interview with Aminata C., age 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[198]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamidou S., estimated age eight, Baroya,April 3, 2011.[199]ILO,”Etude transfrontalière sur le travail desenfants dans l’orpaillage,” p. 58.[200]On child labor in Mali, see section I.[201]Human Rights Watch interview with Abderrahmane S., age 14, Baroya, April 3,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Julani M., estimated age 16, Worognan,April 8, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Alexandre A., age 11,Worognan, April 8, 2011.[202]Human Rights Watch interview with school director and teacher from Sensoko,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview withEvelyne, age 9, Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with RokiaK., age 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Fanta D.,age 12, Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Kadiatou K.,age 11, Baroya, April 3, 2011. On child domestic labor in neighboring Guineaand the use of Malian girls there, see Human Rights Watch, Bottom of theLadder: Exploitation and Abuse of Girl Domestic Workers in Guinea, June2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/06/14/bottom-ladder-0.[203]Human Rights Watch interview with school director and two teachers, Baroya,April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Moctar, age eight, Tabakoto,April 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Anne M., 10, Baroya, April 3,2011.[204]Human Rights Watch interview with woman gold miner, Tabakoto, April 2, 2011.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with Binta M., age 15, Worognan, April 9, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Christine, age 17, Worognan, April 9, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Rokia K., age 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[206]On sex work, see section IV.[207]ILO/IPEC, “Etude CAP”, p. 46.[208]On child labor as social practice, see Loretta E. Bass, Child Labor.[209]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of the National StatisticsInstitute (INSTAT), Bamako, April 6, 2011. An official of the Mining Chamberspoke of child labor as “socialization.” Human Rights Watchinterview with legal advisor, Mali Mining Chamber, Bamako, April 11, 2011.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with father, Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human RightsWatch interview with Mamadou S., estimated age six, Baroya, April 3,2011.[211]Human Rights Watch interview with village chief and elders, Worognan, April 8,2011.[212]Sexual exploitation of girls in mining areas is also common in many othercountries. ILO, Girls in Mining, p. 6.[213]Human Rights Watch interviews with representative of CLUEDUCA, May 27 and June8, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative ofSoutoura, June 30, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withrepresentative of SOS SIDA, August 12, 2011; SOS SIDA, “Rapportd’activités de la campagne de sensibilisation dans les zonesminières des cercles de Kadiolo et Sikasso,” December 2009.[214]These 15 to 19 year olds were 44 (of 357) sex workers who newly registered withthe NGO during the second half of 2010. Collectif du Grouped’Intervention au Mali pour la Promotion et le DéveloppementSocio-sanitaire (CO-GIMPDS), “Rapport suivi monitoring. 2èmesemestre 2010,” p. 10. Migration and trafficking of Nigerian womenand girls is common in West Africa. “Côte d’Ivoire/Nigeria:Combat Trafficking for Prostitution”, Human Rights Watch news release,August 26, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/news/2010/08/26/c-te-d-ivoirenigeria-combat-trafficking-prostitution.[215]Human Rights Watch interview with Stella A., Worognan, April 9, 2011. Anothersex worker and local gendarmes confirmed that there are underage girlsworking as sex workers in Worognan. However, we were unable to identify anychild sex workers for interviews. The gendarmerie is part of thesecurity force and sharing responsibility for internal security with thepolice. They are in charge of rural areas.[216]Human Rights Watch interview with Mariam D., estimated age 11, Worognan, April8, 2011.[217]Save the Children, “Recherche sur les enfants travailleurs,”pp. 42-43.[218]Save the Children, “Recherche sur les enfants travailleurs,”p. 39.[219]Human Rights Watch group interview with préfet and six officials,Kolondiéba, April 8, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with three gendarmes,Worognan, April 9, 2011.[220]Sex workers are defined as belonging to the “most-at-risk populations.”UNAIDS, “Global Report: UNAIDS report on the global AIDS epidemic 2010,”2010, http://www.unaids.org/documents/20101123_GlobalReport_Annexes1_em.pdf,(accessed July 5, 2011), p. 242. There are no more recent figures, and also nospecific figures on HIV among child sex workers.[221]Human Rights Watch interviews with Mr. Samoura, CLUEDUCA, May 27 and June 8,2011; Email communication from Mahamadou Camara, SOS SIDA, July 21, 2011; SOSSIDA, “Rapport d’activités”.[222]Human Rights Watch group interview with préfet and six officials,Kolondiéba, April 8, 2011.[223]Gendarmerie de Kolondiéba,  “Rape Statistics for Worognan andM’Pédiassa mining sites 2010-2011”,  (Statistique descas de viol dans les sites d’orpaillage de Worognan etM’Pédiassa 2010-2011), (on file with Human Rights Watch). HumanRights Watch does not have national-level statistics about sexual violence.[224]Human Rights Watch group interview with préfet and six officials,Kolondiéba, April 8, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with three gendarmes,Worognan, April 9, 2011.[225]Gendarmerie de Kolondiéba,“Statistiquedes case de viol dans les sites d’orpaillage de Worognan etM’Pédiassa, 2010-2011” (on filewithHuman Rights Watch).[226]Human Rights Watch interview with three gendarmes, Worognan, April 9,2011.[227]Human Rights Watch interview with three gendarmes, Worognan, April 9,2011.[228]Ministère del’Economie et des Finances, “Rapport Final,” January2011, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/61/1/47083517.pdf (accessed August 9, 2011),p. 17. The policy framework for development aid is laid down in thegovernment’s “Growth and Poverty Reduction StrategyFramework.” The current framework covers the period 2007-2011, and a newframework is currently being developed. Ministère de l’Economie etdes Finances, “Elaboration du CSRP 2012-2017 et Préparation de laRevue du CSRP 2007-2011 portant sur l’Année 2010,” May2011,http://www.mali-apd.org/IMG/file/pdf/DOCUMENTS_CLES/1_CSCRP/TDR_CSCRP_2012_2017_Mai%202011.pdf(accessed August 9, 2011), p. 3.[229]See also section II.[230]At the time of the creation of the Child Labor Unit, there was insufficientsupport in parliament for the institution, delaying a law on the unit byseveral years.Loi No. 10050 portant ratification de l’ordonnance mo.10-036/P-RMdu 5 août 2010 portant création de la cellule nationale de luttecontre le travail des enfants, December 23, 2010. The law was adoptedfour years after the creation of the unit.[231]There were 56 labor inspectors and 45 labor controllers in 2009. Emailcommunication from Boucary Togo, director of the Nation Unit to Combat ChildLabor, to Human Rights Watch, July 29, 2011.[232]Human Rights Watch interview with international agency representatives, Bamako,February 15, 2011; US Department of Labor, “2009 Findings on the WorstForms of Child Labor,” 2010, http://www.dol.gov/ilab/programs/ocft/pdf/2009OCFTreport.pdf(accessed August 9 2011), pp. 417-425.[233]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Boucary Togo, September 6, 2011:Human Rights Watch interview with Fatou Keita, ILO, Bamako, October 19, 2011.[234]Human Rights Watch interview with Boucary Togo, director of the National Unitto Combat Child Labor, Bamako, March 29, 2011.[235]Ministère du Travail et de la Fonction Publique,"Plan d’action national pour l’élimination du travaildes enfants au Mali," April 2010, pp. 54-100. On the minimumage for employment, see section II.[236]“Mali: Enforce New Plan to Curb Child Labor,” Human Rights Watchnews release, June 15, 2011,http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/06/15/mali-enforce-new-plan-curb-child-labor.[237]Email communication from Boucary Togo, director of the National Unit to CombatChild Labor, to Human Rights Watch, July 28, 2011.[238]InternationalLabour Organization, “Supplement to the IPEC ImplementationReport,” March 2011, http://www.ilo.org/ipecinfo/product/viewProduct.do?productId=16255(accessed August 3, 2011), p. 26. In 2010, the US funded ILO/IPEC in Mali withUS$465,000; in 2011, it stopped funding ILO/IPEC in Mali.[239]US Department of Labor, “ILAB in Mali”, undated,http://www.dol.gov/ilab/map/countries/mali.htm (accessed August 9, 2011); ILO,“Evaluation Summaries; Support for the Preparation of the Mali Time-BoundProgramme,” undated,http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_mas/---eval/documents/publication/wcms_126888.pdf(accessed August 9, 2011).[240]ILO, “Supplement,” p. 31.[241]ILO, “Supplement,” p. 26.[242]ILO, “Tackle child laborthrough education: moving children from work to school in 11 countries,”undated, www.ilo.org/ipecinfo/product/download.do?type=document&id=8511 (accessed August14, 2011)[243]ILO/IPEC, IPEC action against child labour – Highlights 2010,(Geneva: ILO, 2011),http://www.ilo.org/ipecinfo/product/viewProduct.do?productId=15735 (accessedAugust 9, 2011); Human Rights Watch interview with Fatou Keita and AlmoustaphaTouré, ILO/IPEC, Bamako, March 31, 2011.[244]Réseau d’Appui et de Conseils (RAC), “Rapportd’activités 2009”, Bamako, March 2010; Human Rights Watchinterview with Fouta Keita, ILO/IPEC Mali, February 15, 2011; See details of aRAC project below, in section VI.[245]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatou Keita and Almoustapha Touré,ILO/IPEC, Bamako, March 31, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview withrepresentative of Jiekatanie, Kolondiéba, April 7, 2011.[246]ILO, “Tackle child labor through education.” For a criticalperspective, see Gavin Hilson, “’A load too heavy:’Critical reflections on the child labor problem in Africa’s small-scalemining sector, Children and Youth Services Review, vol. 30 (2008), pp.1233-1245.[247]School management committees were established under the decentralized educationsystem to manage primary schools, and are composed of parents. They are giventechnical assistance, such as training and financial management, by educationauthorities at district level called centers d’animationpédagogique, or CAP. See also section VII. on education.[248]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of RAC, Kéniéba,April 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with representative of ILO Mali,Bamako, April 12, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with school director andtwo teachers, Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with villagechief and community leaders, Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watchinterview with school director and teacher from Sensoko, Kéniéba,April 2, 2011.[249]Human Rights Watch interview with school director and two teachers, Baroya,April 3, 2011.[250]Human Rights Watch interview with school director and teacher from Sensoko,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[251]RAC, “Rapport synthéthique sur les activitésréalisées dans le cadre du PA1/Tackle du 11 avril 2009 au 31 mars2011”, June 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Fatou Keita,ILO/IPEC, Bamako, April 12, 2011.[252]ILO/IPEC, Minors out of mining! Partnership for global action against childlabor in small-scale mining, (Geneva: ILO 2006).[253]The other countries who signed the pledge were Brazil, Burkina Faso, Colombia,Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Ghana, Mongolia, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru,Philippines, Senegal, Tanzania, and Togo.[254]ILO/IPEC, Minors out of mining!, p. 12.[255]Email communication from Susan Gunn, ILO/IPEC, to Human Rights Watch, August 8,2011.[256]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Nick Grisewood, Global MarchAgainst Child Labor, May 26, 2011.[257]Human Rights Watch interview with Ayouba Gouanlé, deputy directorDirection nationale de la promotion de l’enfant et de la famille, Bamako,March 30, 2011. For a definition of child protection, see UNICEF,“Strengthening child protection systems”, 2010, http://www.unicef.org/protection/index_52852.html(accessed September 5, 2011).[258]Ordonnance no. 99-010/PM-RM portant création de la directionnationale de la promotion de l’enfant et de la famille, April 1, 1999.[259]A study by the Directorate identified around 32,000 victims of exploitation andabuse in Mali. Human Rights Watch interview with Ayouba Gouanlé, deputydirector Direction nationale de la promotion de l’enfant et de lafamille, Bamako, March 30, 2011.[260]Human Rights Watch interview with Ayouba Gouanlé, deputy directorDirection nationale de la promotion de l’enfant et de la famille, Bamako,March 30, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with representatives of Environnementet Développement du Tiers Monde (ENDA) and Réseau d’actionFodé et Yagine (RAFY), Bamako, February 14, 2011.[261]Conférence ministérielle conjointeCEDEAO/CEEAC sur la lutte contre la traite des personnes,”Résolution sur la lutte contre la traite des personnes”,Abuja, July 7, 2007.[262]Human Rights Watch interview with representatives of ENDA and RAFY, Bamako,February 14, 2011.[263]US State Department, “Trafficking in Persons Report 2011”.[264]Guamina,“Présentation de quelques expériences de Guamina dans ledomaine du traffic des enfants,” undated, on file with Human RightsWatch; Human Rights Watch interview with members of local vigilance committee,Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with representative ofJiekatanie, Kolondiéba, April 9, 2011.[265]Castle et al., “The International Migration of Young Malians”; MikeDottridge and Olivier Feneyrol, “Action to strengthen indigenous childprotection mechanisms in West Africa to prevent migrant children from beingsubjected to abuse”, May 2007, http://www.childtrafficking.com/Docs/dottridge_oct07.pdf(accessed October 14, 2011).[266]World Health Organization, “Mali: health profile,” April 4, 2011,http://www.who.int/gho/countries/mli.pdf (accessed August 15, 2011). HumanRights Watch interview with Dr. Coulibaly, CSREF, Kéniéba, April2, 2011; CSREF Kéniéba, “Situation des maladiesprioritaires, en nombre absolu,” (undated); CSREF Kéniéba,“Situation des maladies à potentiel épidémique, ennombre absolu” (undated) (on file with Human Rights Watch).[267]Ministère de la promotion de la femme, de l’enfant et dela famille/ UNICEF, “Bulletin statistique 2009. La femme etl’enfant en chiffres au Mali,” August 2010, p. 40.[268]WHO, “Mali: health profile,” April 2011,http://www.who.int/gho/countries/mli.pdf (accessed July 12, 2011).[269]Ministère de la Santé, “Prodess IIProlongé 2009-2011. Composante Santé,”http://www.mali-apd.org/IMG/file/pdf/2_Description%20et%20fonctionnement%20des%20groupes%20thematiques/9_%20Sante/PRODESSIIPROLONGE.pdf(accessed August 15, 2011).[270]Mamadou Kani Konate, Bakary Kanté, Fatoumata Djènèpo,“Politique de santé communautaire et viabilitééconomique et sociale des centres de santé communautaires auMali: Etude de cas en milieu urbain et rural,”  draft, September2003,http://www.unrisd.org/unrisd/website/document.nsf/(httpPublications)/F4478C9C2C2D0794C1256E200039D082?OpenDocument(accessed August 15, 2011).[271]Ministère de la Santé,“L’approche sectorielle dans le domaine de la santé auMali”, December 2009,http://www.btcctb.org/files/web/publication/L'approche%20sectorielle%20dans%20le%20domaine%20de%20la%20Sant%C3%A9%20au%20Mali.pdf,pp. 75-76 (accessed July 12, 2011); Ministerial Leadership Initiative,“What do we know in 2011 about the new free care policies in Mali?”2011,http://www.ministerial-leadership.org/sites/default/files/events/event_files/Microsoft%20Word%20-%20Eng-Synthese2%20Free%20care%20Mali%204%2026%2011.pdf(accessed August 14, 2011).[272]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Coulibaly, CSREF, Kéniéba,April 2, 2011.[273]Human Rights Watch interview with private doctor, Kéniéba, April4, 2011.[274]Human Rights Watch interviews with representative of CLUEDUCA, May 27 and June8, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative ofSoutoura, June 30, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withrepresentative of SOS SIDA, August 12, 2011; SOS SIDA, “Rapportd’activités de la campagne de sensibilisation dans les zonesminières des cercles de Kadiolo et Sikasso”; Collectif du Grouped’Intervention au Mali pour la Promotion et le DéveloppementSocio-sanitaire (CO-GIMPDS), “Rapport suivi monitoring. 2èmesemestre 2010.”[275]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur les enfants dans l’orpaillage,”p. 44.[276]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Coulibaly, CSREF, Kéniéba,April 2, 2011.[277]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur les enfants dansl’orpaillage,” p. 44; Human Rights Watch interview with Dr.Coulibaly, CSREF, Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[278] Human RightsWatch interview with Karim S., estimated age 14, Worognan, April 8, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Lansana K., age 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Susanne D., age 11, Worognan, April 8, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Yacouba C., age 16, Baroya, April 3, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Aminata C., age 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[279] Human RightsWatch interview with director of environmental health and hygiene department,Ministry of Health, Bamako, March 29, 2011.[280]Human Rights Watch interview with Prof. Maiga, toxicologist, Bamako, March 29,2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative of RAC, June28, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with private doctor,Kéniéba, April 4, 2011.[281]Human Rights Watch interview with director of child health section, Ministry ofHealth, March 29, 2011.[282]Ministère de la Santé/ Ministère de l’Environnementet Assainissement, “Analyse de la situation et estimation des besoins ensanté et environnement au Mali dans le cadre de la mise en œuvre dela déclaration de Libreville“, June 2010, p. 24.[283]For more information on SAICM, see Strategic Approach to InternationalChemicals Management (SAICM),http://www.saicm.org/index.php?ql=h&content=home (accessed August 10 2011).[284]UNIDO/ Direction nationale de l’assainissement et ducontrôle des pollutions et des nuisances, “Ateliersous-régional d’information des pays de l’Afrique del’Ouest francophone sur les problèmes liées àl’orpaillage,” December 2009.[285]Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Oumar Cissé, SAICM focalpoint, Direction nationale de l’assainissement et du contrôle despollutions et des nuisances, Bamako, April 11, 2011.[286]The two international NGOs are the Artisanal Gold Council and the BlacksmithInstitute. Artisanal Gold Council, “Current Projects,” undated, http://www.artisanalgold.org/projects(accessed August 10, 2011); Global Environment Facility, “Project Title:Improve the Health and Environment of Artisanal Gold Mining Communities byReducing Mercury Emissions and Promoting Sound Chemical Management”,April 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Blacksmith focal point inSenegal, Bamako, April 1, 2011.[287]United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), “The NegotiatingProcess,” undated, http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/MercuryNot/MercuryNegotiations/tabid/3320/language/en-US/Default.aspx (accessedAugust 10, 2011).[288]UNEP, “INC Meeting Documents,” undated, http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/Mercury/Negotiations/INC3/INC3MeetingDocuments/tabid/3487/language/en-US/Default.aspx (accessedAugust 15, 2011), section F and Annex E.[289]INC3 African Group, “Submission by African Group on ASGM,” 2011, http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/Portals/9/Mercury/Documents/INC3/Africa%20additional%20submission%20ASGM.pdf(accessed September 28, 2011).[290]The net enrolment rate is the share of children of primary school age that arecurrently enrolled in school. Ministère de l’Education,de l’Alphabétisation et de Langues nationales, “AnnuaireNational des Statistiques Scolaires de l’Enseignement Fondamental(ANSSEF) 2009-2010,” 2010, p. 91.[291]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative of RAC, June 28,2011.[292]Ministère du Travail, de la Fonction Publique et de laRéforme de l’Etat, “Rapport de la mission deprospection pour l’élaboration et la mise en œuvre d’unprogramme d’action de lutte contre les pires formes de travail desenfants dans l’orpaillage traditionnel dans la région deSikasso du 5 au 8 septembre 2010,” September 2010, pp. 5-6.[293]Oxfam, “Delivering Education for All in Mali,” June 2009,http://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/delivering-education-for-all-mali-report-07-06-09.pdf(accessed on June 24, 2011), p.18.[294] Human RightsWatch interview with teacher, Worognan, June 8, 2011.[295] Human RightsWatch interview with school director and teacher from Sensoko,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with schooldirector and teachers, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[296]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur letravail des enfants dans l’orpaillage,” pp. 45-46; Human RightsWatch interview with representative of RAC, Kéniéba, April 2,2011; Human Rights Watch visits to schools in Baroya, Sensoko, and Worognan.For latrines, see UNICEF, “’Girl friendly/ child-friendly’schools provide a brighter future for Mali”, August 18, 2011,http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/mali_59595.html (accessed September 7,2011).[297]ILO,“Etude transfrontalière sur le travail des enfants dansl’orpaillage,” pp. 45-46.[298]Human Rights Watch interview with seven women gold miners, Sensoko, April 4,2011.[299]Human Rights Watch interview with Karim S., estimated age 14, Worognan, April8, 2011.[300]Human Rights Watch interview with Oumar K., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April 4,2011.[301]On the gender gap in Mali’s education system, see above.[302]Human Rights Watch interview with Susanne D., age 11, Worognan, April 8, 2011.[303]Human Rights Watch interview with Lansana K., age 13, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[304]Human Rights Watch interview with Hamidou S., estimated age 8, Baroya, April 3,2011.[305]Human Rights Watch interview with school director and teacher from Sensoko,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[306]Human Rights Watch interview with two members of school management committee,Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with school director,Worognan, April 8, 2011.[307]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of RAC, Kéniéba,April 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with school director and teacherfrom Sensoko, Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[308]ILO, “Etude transfrontalière sur le travail des enfantsdans l’orpaillage,” pp. 34-37.[309]Human Rights Watch interview with tomboloma and mayor, Worognan, April 9, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with head of Burkinabe community, Worognan, April9, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Angélique M., 16, Worognan,April 9, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with local NGO active in Kola mine,February 17, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with local governmentofficial in Bougouni, March 2011.[310]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatimata N., estimated age 15, Worognan,April 9, 2011.[311]Human Rights Watch interview with Yaya Sogodogo, CAP Director, at groupinterview with préfet and six officials, Kolondiéba, April8, 2011.[312]Human Rights Watch interview with school director, Worognan, April 8, 2011.[313]Human Rights Watch interview with Mory C., age 11, Baroya, April 3, 2011.[314]Human Rights Watch interview with Nanfadima A., estimated age 11, Tabokoto,April 2, 2011.[315]Human Rights Watch interview with school director, Worognan, April 8, 2011;ILO, “Etude transfrontalière des enfants dansl’orpaillage,“ pp. 45-46.[316]Human Rights Watch interview with school director and teacher from Sensoko,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[317]HumanRights Watch interview with school director and two teachers, Baroya, April 3,2011.[318]MillenniumDevelopment Goal (MDG) 2 aims to achieve universal primary education: “Ensure that, by 2015, childreneverywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course ofprimary schooling.” MDG 3 aims to “eliminate gender disparity inprimary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and in all levels ofeducation no later than 2015.” United Nations,“Millennium Development Goals”, http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/index.shtml(accessed August 8, 2011).[319]Government of Mali, “Programme décennal de développement del’éducation (PRODEC): Les grandes orientations de la politiqueéducative," 2000, p.8-9,http://www.education.gov.ml/IMG/pdf/1_GRANDES_ORIENTATIONS_2000.pdf (accessedAugust 1, 2011); Government of Mali, “Programme d’Investissementpour le Secteur de l’Education: Descriptif de la Troisième Phase 2010-2012,”March 18, 2010, pp.5-8,http://www.education.gov.ml/IMG/pdf/le_Descriptif_PISE_III_18mars10_VF.pdf(accessed August 9, 2011).[320]Education For All Fast Track Initiative,“Mali,” July 25, 2011,http://www.educationfasttrack.org/partners/developing-countries/mali/ (accessedAugust 9, 2011); Oxfam, “Delivering Education for All”, p. 24;Overseas Development Institute (ODI)/Mokoro, “Sector Budget Support inPractice. Case Study Education Sector in Mali,” November 2009, p. 12.[321]USAID, “Meeting EFA: Mali Community Schools”; Oxfam,“Delivering Education For All,” p. 19.[322]Government of Mali, “Programme d’Investissement pourle Secteur de l’Education 2010-2012”, pp. 15-16.[323]World Bank, Le système éducatif malien –Analyse séctorielle pour une amélioration de la qualité etde l’efficacité du système, (Washington : WorldBank, 2010), p. 10.[324]In 2009, the net school enrolment rate at the primary level was 77 percent inSub-Saharan Africa. See UNESCO, “Universal Primary Education,” UISFact Sheet, May 2011, no. 8,http://www.uis.unesco.org/FactSheets/Documents/fs8-2011-en.pdf (accessed onJune 28, 2011), p. 1. In 2009-2010, the gross school enrolment rate at primarylevel was 79.5 percent in Mali, also significantly below the regional average.The gross enrollment rate is the number of children enrolled in primary school,regardless of their age, divided by the population of the age group thatofficially corresponds to primary school level.[325]Ministère del’Education, del’Alphabétisation et de Langues nationales, “AnnuaireNational,” p. 88.[326]World Bank, Le système éducatif malien, p. XXIII.[327]Ministère de l’Education, del’Alphabétisation et de Langues nationales, “AnnuaireNational" pp. 85, 91.[328]World Bank, Le système éducatif malien, p. XXVI.[329]Oxfam, “Delivering Education for All”, p. 12.[330]Ibid., p. 19.[331]Klaus Deininger, “Does cost of schooling affect enrolment by the poor?Universal primary education in Uganda,” Economics of Education Review,vol.22, (2003); Samer Al-Samarrai and Hassan Zaman, “AbolishingSchool Fees in Malawi: The Impact on Education Access and Equity,” EducationEconomics, vol. 15, no. 3 (2007), p. 370.[332]World Bank, “Le systeme éducatif malien,” p. 14.[333]Oxfam, “Delivering Education For All,” p. 18; Ministère del’Education, “Annuaire,” p. 13.[334]USAID, “Meeting EFA: Mali Community Schools,” 2006, http://futureofschooling.org/uploads/USAID-MaliCaseStudy.pdf(accessed June 27, 2011), pp. 1-2.[335]Oxfam, “Delivering Education For All,” pp. 17-19.[336]Welthungerhilfe, “Mobiles Lernen: In Mali geht die Schule mit aufWanderschaft,” May 17, 2011, http://www.welthungerhilfe.de/mobile-schule-mali.html (accessed August 9, 2011); Human Rights Watch interviewwith representative of Ministry of Education, Literacy, and National Languages,Bamako, February 16, 2011. The government program foresees the introduction ofmore mobile schools for nomads in the future: Government of Mali,“Programme d’Investissement pour le Secteur del’Education 2010-2012,” pp. 29-30.[337]Overseas Development Institute/UNICEF, “Strengthening social protectionfor children in west and Central Africa,” 2009,http://www.unicef.org/wcaro/wcaro_22_UNICEF_ODIbriefing_paper__SocialProtection_LOW.pdf(accessed June 23, 2011), pp. 1-2.[338]Overseas Development Institute, “Tackling child vulnerabilities throughsocial protection: Lessons from West and Central Africa. BackgroundNote,” July 2010, London.[339]HumanRights Watch interview with Gustave Nébié, UNICEF, Bamako, March29, 2011; Overseas Development Institute, Government of Mali, UNICEF, “Laprotection sociale et les enfants en Afrique du l’Ouest et du Center: Lecas du Mali,” February 2009,http://www.unicef.org/wcaro/wcaro_mali_Protection_sociale_Mali_FR_s.pdf, pp.79-83.[340]WorldBank, “Bolsa Família: Changing the Lives of Millions inBrazil,” http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/LACEXT/BRAZILEXTN/0,,contentMDK:21447054~pagePK:141137~piPK:141127~theSitePK:322341,00.html(accessed June 24, 2011).[341]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Gustave Nébié, UNICEF,February 25, 2011; “Evaluation de l’initiative bourse-maman dans 09écoles de Kayes et de Mopti,” undated (on file with Human RightsWatch).[342]Draftlaw on National Centre for School Canteens (on file at Human Rights Watch).[343]Governmentof Mali, “Programme d’Investissement pour le Secteur del’Education 2010-2012,” pp. 28-30; Human Rights Watchinterview with representative of Ministry of Education, Literacy, and NationalLanguages, Bamako, February 16, 2011.[344]Government of Mali, “Plan d’action national d’extension de laprotection sociale 2010-2014 au Mali, Draft 3,” Sélingué,May 2010, pp. 24-26.[345]Human Rights Watch interview with Gustave Nébié, UNICEF, Bamako,March 29, 2011.[346]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 4,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Worognan, April 9, 2011;Human Rights Watch interview with Oumar K., estimated age 14, Sensoko, April 4,2011.[347]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Bamako, April 6, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 1, 2011.[348]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 4,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Worognan, April 9, 2011.[349]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 1,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Bamako, April 6, 2011.[350]Human Rights Watch interview with Morike Sissoko, president of the FNOM,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[351]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 1,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Morike Sissoko, president of the FNOM,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[352]Global Environment Facility, “Improve the Health and Environment ofArtisanal Gold Mining Communities”, p. 7. Human Rights Watch interviewwith gold trader, Bamako, April 6, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with goldtrader, Bamako, March 30, 2011.[353]Human Rights Watch interviewed 12 gold traders at mining sites, inKéniéba, and in the capital between March 30 and April 11, 2011.[354]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 1,2011.[355]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 4,2011.[356]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Bamako, April 11, 2011.[357]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Bamako, March 30, 2011.[358]Several children told us that they are selling their gold to tradersthemselves, and two traders also told us that they bought from children. HumanRights Watch interview with Nanfadima A., estimated age 11, Tabokoto, April 2,2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Oumar K., estimated age 14, Sensoko,April 4, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Susanne D., age 11, Worognan,April 8, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Fatimata N., estimated age 15,Worognan, April 9, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Abdoulaye M., age15, Baroya, April 3, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader,Worognan, April 9, 2011.[359]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 4,2011.[360]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative of the Associationdes femmes minières au Mali (AFEMIN), May 26, 2011; Human Rights Watchinterview with Morike Sissoko, president of the FNOM, Kéniéba,April 2, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Abdoulaye Pona, president ofthe Mali Mining Chamber, Bamako, April 11, 2011.[361]Hilson, “A load too heavy,” Children and Youth Services Review,pp. 1233-1245.[362]On the creation of the Mining Chamber, see Abdoul Karim Maïga,“Chambre des Mines du Mali: Abdoulaye Pona aux commandes,” L’IndicateurRenouveau, February 25, 2011,http://ankamali.net/economie/1313-lindicateur-renouveau-chambre-des-mines-du-mali--abdoulaye-pona-aux-commandes(accessed August 10, 2011).[363]Human Rights Watch interview with Abdoulaye Pona, president of the Mali MiningChamber, Bamako, April 11, 2011.[364]Human Rights Watch interview with legal advisor, Mali Mining Chamber, Bamako,April 11, 2011.[365]Human Rights Watch interview with Morike Sissoko, president of the FNOM,Kéniéba, April 2, 2011.[366]The total amount of artisanally mined gold exported during that period was 1722,5kg. This calculation is based on the gold price of June 30, 2011. For details, see Annex II, Ministère de l’Industrie, de  l’Investissementet du Commerce, “Situation des intentions d’exportation d’orartisanal du 1er janvier au 30 juin 2011,” Bamako, July14, 2011.[367]See Annex I, Ministère de l’Economie et des Finances,“Tableaux statistiques des exportations d’or des mines artisanalesau titre des années 2009, 2010 et 2011,” Bamako, July 19, 2011.[368]See Annex I. For the period 2009-2010, Human Rights Watch does not have thenames of companies in Switzerland that imported the gold.[369]See Annex II.[370]For more information on Decafin, see http://www.decafin.ch/ (accessed August15, 2011). In 2008, an article by the Associated Press also reported thatDecafin was buying gold from artisanal mines in Mali. Rukmini Callimachi andBradley Klapper, “Exploited Children Stories,” Associated Press,August 11, 2008, http://www.ap.org/media/pdf/calimachi.pdf (accessed August 15,2011).[371]Letter from Marc Henzelin, Lalive, to Human Rights Watch, August 10, 2011(translated by Human Rights Watch). See the Human Rights Watch letter and thefull response in Annex III.[372]Letter from Marc Henzelin, Lalive, to Human Rights Watch, September 27, 2011.[373]See Annex I.[374]See Annex II.[375]See Annex IV, Letter from Tareq El-Mdaka, Managing Director, Kaloti JewelleryInternational DMCC, to Human Rights Watch, July 30, 2011.[376]KalotiJewellery International DMCC, ”Source of Funds, Metals andEquities“. One of the declarations is of September 20, 2010; the otherone is undated.[377]Letter from Tareq El-Mdaka, Managing Director, Kaloti Jewellery InternationalDMCC, to Human Rights Watch, July 30, 2011.[378]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tareq El-Mdaka, Managing Director,Kaloti Jewellery International DMCC, November 2, 2011.[379]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Kéniéba, April 1,2011.[380]See Annex I. The estimate is based on June 2011 gold prices.[381]See Annex II.[382]See Annex V.[383]Human Rights Watch interview with government official, Ministry of Mines,Bamako, April 6, 2011.[384]See section II for details.[385]Human Rights Watch interview with government official, Ministry of Mines,Bamako, April 6, 2011.[386]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of international agency,February 14, 2011.[387]Human Rights Watch interview with government official, Ministry of Mines,Bamako, March 30, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with official fromNational Directorate for Mines, February 15, 2011.[388]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of the National StatisticsInstitute (INSTAT), Bamako, April 6, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview withgovernment official, Ministry of Mines, Bamako, April 6, 2011.[389]Human Rights Watch interview with government official, Ministry of Mines,Bamako, April 6, 2011.[390]Human Rights Watch interview with government official, Ministry of Mines,Bamako, April 6, 2011.[391]Human Rights Watch interview with préfet, Kolondiéba, April 8, 2011;Email correspondence from local NGO in Kolondiéba, June 1 and 6, 2011.There was one large-scale eviction in 2010 at the large artisanal mine ofMassiogo in the Sikasso region, but it occurred only after an industrial minewith an exploration permit complained to the government about the presence ofartisanal miners.After the company urged the government to expel the artisanalminers, tens of thousands of miners were evicted from Massiogo in May 2010;Email communication from representative of CLUEDUCA to Human Rights Watch, June7, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with government official, Ministry ofMines, Bamako, March 30, 2011.[392] Ministère des Mines, “Code Minier (Projet)”, arts. 42-46.[393]Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), “Mali,”January 10, 2011, http://eiti.org/node/74 (accessed August 11, 2011).[394]EITI, “What is the EITI,” http://eiti.org/ (accessed August 10,2011). Companies can also commit to the EITI standard, though there is nosimilar validation process. AngloGold Ashanti and Gold Fields are twointernational gold companies with operations in Mali who have committed to theEITI standard.[395]Human Rights Watch interview with Aliou Haidara, Publish What You Pay, Mali,Bamako, February 16, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with TiémokoSangare, Fondation pour le Développement du Sahel, Bamako, April 6,2011.[396]Fondation pour le Développement du Sahel (FDS), “Etudesur le mercure,” November 2010.[397]“ECOWAS sets up committee on mining reforms,” Oxfam (America) newsrelease, October 27, 2010, http://www.oxfamamerica.org/articles/ecowas-sets-up-committee-on-mining-reforms(accessed August 10, 2011); Human Rights Watch telephone interview withrepresentative of OXFAM, August 26, 2011.[398]ECOWAS, “Directive C/DIR.3/05/09 on the Harmonization of GuidingPrinciples and Policies in the Mining Sector”, Abuja, May 26-27, 2009,art.15.[399]“Ministers validate ECOWAS Mineral Development Policy”, PANAPRESS,June 7, 2011, http://www.panapress.com/Ministers-validate-ECOWAS-Mineral-Development-Policy--12-777113-100-lang2-index.html(accessed September 8, 2011).[400]ECOWAS Industry and Mines Directorate, “ECOWAS Mineral DevelopmentPolicy. Revised Draft,” April 2011, art. 2.8.[401]Alliance for Responsible Mining/ Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International,“Fairtrade and Fairmined Standard for Gold from Artisanal and Small-ScaleMining, Including Associated Precious Metals,” March 15, 2010, http://www.communitymining.org/attachments/034_Gold%20Standard%20Mar%202010%20EN.pdf (accessed August10, 2011), sec. 4.4.[402]Association for Responsible Mining/ Fairtrade Labelling OrganizationsInternational, “Fairtrade and Fairmined Standard,” sec. 3.1.[403]Paul Kenyon, “Chocolate: The Bitter Truth,” BBC, March 24,2010 http://news.bbc.co.uk/panorama/hi/front_page/newsid_8583000/8583499.stm(accessed August 15, 2011).[404]Human Rights Watch interview with Ronald Koepke, consultant on the goldstandard for ARM and Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International, March 7,2011.[405]Email communication from Aliou Bakhoum, ONG La Lumière, August10, 2011; Global Environment Facility, “Improve the Health andEnvironment of Artisanal Gold Mining Communities.[406]Responsible Jewellery Council (RJC), “Fast Facts,” undated, http://www.responsiblejewellery.com/downloads/Fast_Facts_RJC_Nov_2010.pdf (accessed August 10, 2011); Responsible JewelleryCouncil, “Principles and Code of Practices,” December 2009,http://www.responsiblejewellery.com/downloads/boxed_set_2009/S001_2009_RJC_Prin_COP.pdf(accessed August 10, 2011), p. 12.[407]Earthworks, “The Golden Rules,” undated, http://www.nodirtygold.org/goldenrules.cfm(accessed August 10, 2011).Related ContentDecember 6, 2011News ReleaseMali: Artisanal Mines Produce Gold With Child LaborHazardous Work, Mercury Poisoning, and DiseaseDecember 6, 2011News ReleaseMali: Artisanal Mines Produce Gold With Child LaborRegion / CountryAfrica MaliProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch