Fingers to the Bone: United States Failure to Protect Child Farmworkers | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the ReportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the ReportJune 2, 2000Fingers to the BoneUnited States Failure to Protect Child FarmworkersFINGERS TO THE BONEUNITED STATES FAILURE TO PROTECT CHILD FARMWORKERSI.  SUMMARY..II.RECOMMENDATIONSTo TheUnited States CongressTo the Wageand Hour Division, United States Department of LaborTo TheOccupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), United States Departmentof Labor, and to "State-Plan" StatesTo TheEnvironmental Protection AgencyTo AllStatesIII.ADOLESCENT FARMWORKERS IN THE UNITED STATES:  ENDANGERMENT AND EXPLOITATIONIntroductionFarmworkerPovertyVulnerabilityof FarmworkersFarm LaborContractorsHealth andSafety RisksPesticidesSanitationHazardousConditions; Work-Related IllnessesHeatIllnessesMusculoskeletalTraumaCarbonMonoxide Poisoning Incident in Washington StateHazardousEquipment; Work-Related InjuriesDepressionand Substance AbuseUnderageWorkersWage andHour ConcernsWage Fraud:Earning Less than Minimum WageExcessiveand Inappropriate Hours of WorkThe Effectof Long Hours on Health and EducationThe Effectof Farmwork on EducationSpecialRisks to GirlsSexualHarassmentIV.  U.S.LAWS AND THEIR ENFORCEMENT:AN ONGOINGFAILURE TO PROTECT CHILDREN..WORKING INAGRICULTURE..The FairLabor Standards Act and Enforcement by the Department of LaborProposedAmendments to the FLSA Regarding Child Labor in AgricultureEnforcementof the FLSA..InadequateResourcesChild Laborin Agriculture Not a PriorityIneffectiveSanctionsGrowers'Avoidance of LiabilityFailure toCoordinate with StatesThe WorkerProtection Standard and other Environmental Protection Agency Regulations andtheir EnforcementArizonaEnforcement of EPA RegulationsFieldSanitation Standards:  Federal OSHA and OSHA-Approved State Plans and theirEnforcementArizona OSHA..V.  FAILURETO COMPLY WITH INTERNATIONAL LAW...Violation ofInternational Non-Discrimination LawsILOConvention Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Elimination of the WorstForms of Child Labour (Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention)TheConvention on the Rights of the ChildAPPENDIX A:Selected Provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 201 - 219APPENDIX B:International Labor Organization Convention 182 and RecommendationsAPPENDIX C:Excerpts from the Convention on the Rights of the Child102I.  SUMMARYDamaris A., now nineteen, started working in thebroccoli and lettuce fields when she was thirteen years old and continued untilshe was nearly eighteen.[1]During the five months of peak season, she usually worked fourteen hours a day,with two fifteen-minute breaks and a half-hour for lunch.  She often workedeighty-five or ninety hours a week.  For months on end she suffered dailynosebleeds; several times her blood pressure plummeted and she nearly passedout.  She was exposed to pesticide drift and fell ill, yet was required to keepworking.  "I just endured it," she said, of her time in the fields.  "It wasvery difficult."Mark H. was twelve the summer he first worked inthe cotton fields of central Arizona, getting up at 3:00 a.m. and finishingwork at 2:00 p.m.  His parents, aunts, and uncles had all worked in the fieldsfor years.  "My dad started when he was ten years old, and he didn't finish'til he was twenty-two," Mark H. said.  Like his father, Mark H. missed a lotof school and eventually dropped out.  Now nineteen years old, he is strugglingto catch up on his education.  "A lot of my friends worked the fields, and a lotdropped out.  I was supposed to graduate last year and I didn't . . . I wouldtell kids just to finish school.  You can't get a good job without a diploma.With a diploma you can go to college.  You get more options."Two years ago, when he was fifteen, Benjamin C. cuthis finger badly with a broccoli-harvesting knife.  "That knife was so sharp,"he said, showing a three-inch long scar running the length of his finger.Instead of taking Benjamin C. to a local hospital or clinic, the fieldsupervisor sent him home to his parents' house in Mexico; from there, hisparents took him to a Mexican hospital.  This delayed by two or three hours hismedical care, and also circumvented the employer's responsibility underworkers' compensation law.  According to advocates, this is typical in theborder region.  "The foremen send them off with thirty bucks to Mexico," saidone.In the fields, the United Statesis like a developing country.[2]Agricultural work is the most hazardous and grueling area ofemployment open to children in the United States.[3]It is also the least protected.Hundreds of thousands of children and teenslabor each year in fields, orchards, and packing sheds across the UnitedStates.  They pick lettuce and cantaloupe, weed cotton fields, and bagproduce.  They climb rickety ladders into cherry orchards, stoop low over chiliplants, and "pitch" heavy watermelons for hours on end.  Many begintheir work days-either in the fields or en route to the fields-in the middle ofthe night.  Twelve-hour workdays are common.These hardworking youth labor under more dangerousconditions than their contemporaries working in nonagricultural settings.  Theyare routinely exposed to dangerous pesticides, sometimes working in fieldsstill wet with poison, often given no opportunity to wash their hands beforeeating lunch.  They risk heat exhaustion and dehydration, as their employersfail to provide enough water, or any at all.  They suffer injuries from sharpknives, accidents with heavy equipment, falls from ladders.  Repetitive motionsin awkward and punishing poses can interfere with the proper growth of theirbodies.  Lack of sleep¾because they areworking too many hours¾interferes withtheir schooling and increases their chances of injury.  Depression affects themmore often than other minors, a reflection of the cumulative stresses andburdens in their young lives.  Only 55 percent of them will graduate from highschool.Farmworker youth face persistent wageexploitation and fraud.  One-third of those interviewed by Human Rights Watchreported earnings that were significantly less than minimum wage.  Some earnedonly two or three dollars an hour.Incredibly, these juvenile workers are protected lessunder United States law than are juveniles working in safer occupations.Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), children working on farms may beemployed at a younger age than other working children¾twelve (even younger under some circumstances) as opposed tofourteen.  Employers may also work them for longer hours¾in agriculture, there is no limit to the number of hours achild may work.  In all other occupations, children under the age of sixteenare limited to three hours of work a day when school is in session.  Not onlythat, but the FLSA does not require overtime pay for agricultural work it doesfor other occupations.  Finally, juveniles in agriculture may engage inhazardous work at the age of sixteen; for all other occupations, the minimumage for hazardous work is eighteen.The Fair Labor Standards Act claims to prohibit "oppressivechild labor."  Yet the FLSA permits oppressive child labor in agriculture tocontinue.  The FLSA's bias against farmworker children amounts to de factorace-based discrimination:  an estimated 85 percent of migrant and seasonalfarmworkers nationwide are racial minorities;  in some regions, includingArizona, approximately 99 percent of farmworkers are Latino.[4]In addition to raising serious concerns under the Equal Protection clause ofthe U.S. Constitution, this discrimination may violate numerous provisions ofinternational law.It is discrimination in legal protection-de jurediscrimination against farmworker children as opposed to other workingchildren, with a doubly discriminatory effect against Latino children-thatleads directly to deprivation of other rights, most notably the right toeducation and the right to health and safety.  By allowing agriculturalemployers to work children for unlimited hours, United States law severelyundermines their opportunity to participate fully in universal education.Longer hours worked also increase the risk to children of pesticide exposure,repetitive-motion disabilities, fatigue and injuries, and depression andsubstance abuse.In addition, United States law and practice contravenevarious international law prohibitions on exploitative and harmful work bychildren, including standards set by the Convention on the Rights of theChild.  The United States appears to be headed toward noncompliance with the1999 ILO Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention as well, which will enter intoforce for the U.S. in December 2000.  It requires that member governmentsprohibit and eliminate "the worst forms of child labor."  The United States isoff to a dubious start in this regard, having claimed that it is already infull compliance with the convention and that no change to law or practice isnecessary.The failings of the FLSA are not the only way that theUnited States leaves its young farmworkers unprotected.  Congress exempts allfarms with fewer than eleven employees from enforcement of Occupational Safetyand Health Administration (OSHA) regulations.  This affects many juvenilefarmworkers' well-being directly, compromising their right to a clean and safework environment.The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), meanwhile, offersno greater protection from pesticide contamination for child laborers than itdoes for adults.  There is only one set of regulations and standards, whichtake as their model the adult male body.  The fact that children's bodies aretypically both smaller than adults' bodies and developmentally more vulnerableto pesticide-related damage has not been addressed.  The results of thisfailure to protect children are potentially deadly and are emerging daily allacross the United States.Even to the limited extent that U.S. laws do protectfarmworker youth, they are not adequately enforced.  The Department of Labor,charged with enforcing the child labor, wage and hour provisions of the FLSA,cited only 104 cases of child labor violations in fiscal year 1998.  (Estimatesare that there are approximately one million violations related to child laborin U.S. agriculture each year.)  The EPA leaves enforcement of its workersafety regulations to the individual states, but expresses little confidence intheir ability to perform this task.  The Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration, meanwhile, enforces its regulations in about half of thestates, with the other half enforcing their own OSHA-approved "State Plans."Despite the fact that agriculture is second only to mining as the mosthazardous occupation, a recent federal study found that OSHA devoted less than3 percent of its inspections to agriculture.  In Arizona, a State-Plan state,no farm inspections at all take place at the initiative of the IndustrialCommission of Arizona, the enforcing agency.The laws and enforcement practices of individual states areno better and sometimes worse.  Many states don't even have minimum agerequirements for children working in agriculture.  All but a handful of statesperform no enforcement whatsoever regarding juvenile labor in agriculture.When violations are discovered and cited, growers frequentlyescape accountability by hiding behind the farm labor contractors they employ.Farm labor contractors act essentially as middlemen between the growers and theworkers.  They are paid by growers to hire the necessary workers, get them tothe job site, ensure that the work is completed as desired, and pay theworkers.  When violations of the workers' rights are discovered, the growersfrequently emerge untouched by fines and citations, on the grounds that thefarm labor contractors and only the farm labor contractors are theworkers' employers.  For the most part, enforcement agencies have acquiesced tothe growers on this point.  Because farm labor contractors often have littlemoney and no liability insurance, the result is that judgments and fines gounpaid and the workers remain uncompensated.  Even when growers are cited andfined, however, sanctions are minimal and insufficient to deter futurewrongdoing.The result of these weak laws and enforcement efforts isthat, as a practical matter, farmworking juveniles have second-class status:they enjoy fewer rights than their non-farmworking peers and they are exploitedwhile the government looks the other way.  They are vulnerable to occupationalinjury and illness because their jobs are dangerous; they are worked too hardbecause employers don't have to limit their hours; and they are underpaidbecause the growers and farm labor contractors can get away with it.This report documents a wide range of troubling practices¾some legal under current, inadequatedomestic law, some blatantly illegal¾thataffect juvenile farmworkers.  Most of these practices affect adult workerstoo.  It is the widespread exploitation of adult workers, in fact, thatcontributes to the precarious situation of their sons and daughters who alsomust work in the fields.If adult farmworkers were paid a living wage¾as of 1999, average yearly earnings wereless than $7,500¾then their childrenwould be under less pressure to begin working at such young ages and for suchlong hours.  They would get more sleep and rest and more time to study.  Theywould be less likely to drop out of school and, with a high school diploma,would have more options available to them.This report recommends numerous changes to U.S. law.  Keyamong them:  that Congress amend the Fair Labor Standards Act to protect allworking children equally.  This means imposing, for the first time ever,limits on the number of hours children aged fifteen and younger can work inagriculture when school is in session.Simultaneously with this, however, Congress and theadministration must acknowledge that farmworker families need assistance on allfronts.  Enforcement of workers' rights, assurance of adequate housing,increased availability of traditional and nontraditional education, free andaccessible health care, and other assistance as necessary¾these are the minimum conditions necessaryto ensure that all children in the United States, including the children ofagricultural laborers, have the possibility of a safe, dignified, and healthystart in life.This report is based on interviews with more than thirtyfarmworker juveniles, most of them in Arizona, as well as with dozens offarmworker advocates and experts both in Arizona and nationally.  The reportalso draws upon government officials in the areas of labor, agriculture, andhealth and safety.  Except where otherwise noted, all names of farmworkerchildren interviewed have been changed in this report for the protection ofprivacy and to guard against employer retaliation.II.  RECOMMENDATIONSHuman Rights Watch makes the following recommendationsregarding the protection of juvenile farmworkers in the United States and urgestheir adoption as soon as possible:To The United StatesCongress·The Fair Labor Standards Act should be amended to increase theprotection extended to juveniles working in agriculture.  Such protectionshould conform with that offered to other working children in the United Statesand bring it into accord with international standards for the protection ofchildren.  Specifically, the act should be amended to:·Prohibit the employment of children aged thirteen and younger inagriculture, except for those working on farms owned and operated by theirparents.·Limit the number of hours that children aged fourteen and fifteencan legally work in agriculture to:  three hours a day on a school day andeighteen hours a week during a school week; eight hours a day on a nonschoolday and forty hours a week when school is not in session.·Prohibit before-school agricultural work by children aged fifteenand younger.  (Currently, there are no restrictions on early-morningagricultural work, although in nonagricultural occupations such work isforbidden for under-sixteen-year olds.)·Raise the minimum age for hazardous agricultural work toeighteen.·In addition, The Fair Labor Standards Act should be amended toimpose on sixteen and seventeen-year olds enrolled full time in school the samehourly restrictions on employment that apply to those fifteen and younger.·Regarding application of the Occupational Safety and Health Act,Congress should halt its yearly approval of a rider exempting farms with ten orfewer employees from OSHA jurisdiction.·Congress must address the educational and vocational needs offarmworkers.  This is urgent, particularly for those juveniles who have alreadydropped out of school.  The national program created for farmworker youth underthe Workforce Investment Act of 1998 should be adequately funded to enablestates to assist farmworker youth in completing their education and securingmeaningful job training and placement assistance.To the Wage and HourDivision, United States Department of Labor·The Wage and Hour Division should dramatically increaseagricultural workplace inspections targeting child labor and minimum wageviolations.  All violators should be sanctioned to the fullest extent of thelaw.  Furthermore, serious, repeat, and willful violators should be activelypublicized as such, both for deterrence purposes and to educate the publicregarding child labor rights.·The Wage and Hour Division should utilize The Fair LaborStandards Act's "hot goods" provision, which prohibits the interstate movementof goods produced in violation of child labor or minimum wage laws, wheneverpossible, favoring it over the traditional course of citations and relativelyinsignificant civil money penalties.·Joint liability between farm labor contractors and growers shouldbe pursued wherever possible in cases where a farm labor contractor has beenfound in violation of federal law.·The Wage and Hour Division should initiate immediately a programof concerted collaboration with state child labor enforcement agencies andother child protection bodies.  Such collaboration should encompassdata-gathering and dissemination, the prioritization of enforcement goals, andstrategies for achieving those goals according to available state and federalresources.  At an absolute minimum, WHD should collect and review stateenforcement data so as to determine the most urgent federal priorities andwhether duplication of efforts is occurring.·The Wage and Hour Division should collect, maintain, anddisseminate statistics regarding the following:·The number of children working in agriculture, disaggregated byage and state and, to the extent possible, by race and ethnicity;·The number of children injured while working in agriculture eachyear, disaggregated by the type and severity of injury;·The number of children sickened each year by occupationalexposure to pesticides.To The OccupationalSafety and Health Administration (OSHA), United States Department of Labor, andto "State-Plan" States·OSHA should vigorously enforce the Field Sanitation Regulations,which require employers to provide workers with drinking water, toilets, andhandwashing facilities.  Such enforcement must be proactive and includeagency-initiated, unannounced inspections.·OSHA should require that all states enforcing OSHA-approved"State Plans" do so in a vigorous manner, including frequent unannouncedinspections.·In all cases involving farm labor contractors, both federal OSHAand State-Plan states should initiate a policy of pursuing joint liabilitybetween farm labor contractors and growers.·Both federal OSHA and State-Plan states should encourage otherstate and federal agencies to report all violations observed in the field; uponreceipt of such information OSHA should immediately inspect the workplace inquestion.·Both federal OSHA and State-Plan states should collect, maintain,and make available annual statistics regarding:·The number of inspections carried out at agricultural workplaces;·Whether those inspections were agency-initiated, were in responseto information received from other agencies, or were the result of workercomplaints; and·The results of the inspections, including abatements, citations,and fines.·Both federal OSHA and State-Plan states should launch aggressivepublic education campaigns regarding field sanitation regulations; thesecampaigns should include toll-free numbers where workers and others can reportcomplaints by telephone.To The EnvironmentalProtection Agency·The Worker Protection Standard should be amended to:·Impose a minimum age of eighteen for all pesticide handlers;·Revise restricted-entry intervals (REIs), which prohibit entryinto an area treated by pesticides for a specified period of time following theapplication of the chemicals.  The revised REIs should distinguish betweenadults and children and impose more stringent REIs for children.  The revisedREIs also should incorporate an additional safety margin on top of what isdetermined necessary to ensure short and long-term safety, and should take intoaccount the combined effect of both occupational and non-occupationalexposures.The EPA currently uses an acute illness model that does not protect workersfrom long-term, chronic effects of pesticides.·The EPA should closely monitor states' enforcement of the WorkerProtection Standard and related pesticide regulations to ensure that suchenforcement is vigorous and meaningful.·The EPA should expand its program to educate workers regardingthe Worker Protection Standard, and should ensure that materials used areculturally, age, and language appropriate.·The EPA should ensure that state agencies responsible forenforcement of EPA regulations are staffed by a sufficient number of trained,bilingual (Spanish and English) compliance officers.  Training should beoffered to state compliance officers on an as-needed basis.·The EPA should collect, maintain, and make available stateenforcement statistics regarding farmworkers and pesticide safety.To All States·State child labor laws should be at least as protective asfederal standards.·All states should set or raise the minimum age for agriculturalwork to at least fourteen, with the exception ofchildren working on farms owned and operated by their parents.III.  ADOLESCENTFARMWORKERS IN THE UNITED STATES:  ENDANGERMENT ANDEXPLOITATIONIntroductionNobody knows how many adolescents work in agriculture in theUnited States.  The General Accounting Office recently cited an estimate of300,000 fifteen to seventeen-year olds working in agriculture each year, whileacknowledging that "methodological problems . . . likely result in anundercounting of the total number."[5]This estimate excludes those fourteen and under; in fact, children underfourteen are not included in any nationally-based surveys of farmworkers.  TheUnited Farm Workers union estimates that there are 800,000 child farmworkers inthe United States.  These estimates include both children working as hiredlaborers and children working on their parents' farms-a much smaller group.This report focuses on children working as hired laborers.Farmworkers aged seventeen and younger-all consideredchildren under U.S. and international law[6]-canbe found working all across the country.  Particularly large populations offarmworkers live and work in California, Texas, Florida, Washington, andArizona.  Migrant streams travel up each year through the Midwest, the easternseaboard, and into New York.  Virtually no state is without child labor inagriculture, and certainly no state is without its fruits, as the produce thatis harvested and packed by youngsters' hands may travel thousands of miles togrocery store shelves.Farmworker interviews cited in this report took placeprimarily in Arizona, the United States' third-largest producer of vegetablesand citrus.  In addition to being a "base state"-a state with asignificant resident farmworker population-Arizona is also one of several"source states," states from which migrant streams flow seasonally upand out into other parts of the country.  Approximately 100,000 people work asfarm laborers in Arizona.Human Rights Watch interviewed both migrant and seasonalagricultural workers for this report.  Migrant workers are those whose workrequires them to be absent overnight from their permanent place of residence;in practice, many may be absent from their permanent homes for months at atime.  Seasonal agricultural workers are those whose work does not require anovernight absence from their permanent residences.  The combined total ofmigrant and seasonal farmworkers in the United States is estimated at fourmillion.[7]Although our field research was concentrated in Arizona, theproblems we encountered are national in scope and were corroborated by expertsin various other states.  Laws governing child labor in agriculture areinadequate and out of date, enforcement is lax, and sanctions against violatorsare insignificant.  The differential treatment of children working inagriculture as opposed to children working in other occupations is indefensibleand discriminatory.Children come to agriculture at varying ages.  Reports ofchildren as young as four or five working alongside their parents are notuncommon.[8]Full time agricultural work, whether during school vacations and weekends oryear-round, usually begins in early adolescence.  The majority of workersinterviewed for this report began working in the fields between the ages ofthirteen and fifteen.  A recent California study also reported thirteen tofifteen as the most common ages at which children begin agricultural work,[9]and a Florida study found most young farmworkers began working by the age offourteen.[10]Farm work is low-paid, exhausting, stigmatized, and oftendangerous.  Agricultural workers labor under extreme weather conditions, frompre-dawn cold to intense desert heat, where temperatures are commonly wellabove 100 degrees Fahrenheit.  Their work is physically demanding, requiringsustained strength, endurance, and coordination.Twelve-hour days are routine, as are six and seven-day workweeks.  During peak harvesting seasons, children may work fourteen, sixteen, oreven eighteen hours a day, seven days a week.  Whether paid by the hour or onthe basis of piece-rates, they are not paid overtime wages-the law does notrequire it.Children undertake farm work because their families areextremely poor and no other work is available.  Those who live near towns leapat the chance to work instead at a fast-food restaurant or supermarket.  Thosein rural areas often have literally no other employment opportunitiesavailable.Farmworker PovertyAn intergenerational cycle of poverty plagues farmworkers.Most parents of farmworker children are themselves farmworkers.  The averageannual income for a two-earner farmworker family is just over $14,000 ayear,[11]wellbelow the official federal poverty level, which was $16,700 in 1999.[12]These low earnings make it difficult for farmworker parents to meet theirfamily's needs, which in turn puts pressure on their children to earn money assoon as possible-usually in the fields.  All of the juveniles interviewed byHuman Rights Watch were children of farmworkers.  All of them began workingeither in order to help their family meet their basic needs or in order to takecare of their own needs-for example, buying clothes for school-because theirparents were too poor to do so.The earnings of both adult and child farm laborers are lowfor several reasons.  To begin with, agricultural work pays poorly:  hourlyrates are rarely higher than minimum wage-$5.15 as of June 2000-whilepiece-rate wages under the best of conditions rarely result in an hourly wageabove $7.00-and often result in an hourly wage significantly below minimumwage, especially for children.  Overtime wages are not paid, as federal lawexempts agriculture from this requirement.   Furthermore, because the work isseasonal and workers usually must move to follow the crops, weeks and evenmonths may go by during which no income at all is brought in.According to farmworker advocates and workers themselves,unscrupulous employers further cut away at earnings with the following commonpractices:·Not paying the workers for their last two weeks of work at theend of the season;·Withholding social security payments, but then pocketing themoney instead of reporting it to the federal government;·Deducting from workers' pay the cost of work-related equipmentprovided by the employer, including safety equipment that the governmentrequires employers to provide;·Deducting from workers' pay the supposed costs of providingworker housing (which fewer and fewer employers do).  One Arizona employer, forexample, reportedly deducted from his workers' pay the entire cost of hisranch's use of electricity, despite the fact that the workers lived in shackslighted with a single bulb each;·Deducting from workers' pay a fee for transporting them to andfrom the work site.  For some workers, transportation time and expensesrepresent a huge burden.  Workers transported from the Yuma area of Arizona tothe agricultural area west of Phoenix, for example, travel two and a half hourseach way, for which they reportedly pay $12 of their $40 daily wage.·Failing to provide drinking water as required by law, and thenselling workers soda or beer for $1 or $1.50 each.Vulnerability ofFarmworkersChildren, being inexperienced and often unassertive, areeven more vulnerable to wage exploitation than are adults.  It is important tonote, though, that all farmworkers, especially those not unionized or otherwiseorganized,[13]are very vulnerable to exploitation and abuse.  Despite the recurring push bygrowers and some politicians for a "guestworker" program to bring inmore farmworkers from other countries-primarily Mexico-from the workers'perspective there is already an abundance of labor competing for the samegrueling jobs.  "There is lots of mistreatment at work by the farm laborcontractors, by the foremen.  They know if they kick one person out, there willbe ten more waiting to take the job," explains Emma Torres, coordinator ofa border health initiative and a member of the National Advisory Council onMigrant Health.  "So the workers don't complain.  Anything is better thanno job."[14]The dismal state of the Mexican economy is another factor inthe competition for agricultural jobs in the United States.  As of early 2000,the daily minimum wage in Mexico was equivalent to approximately four U.S.dollars.[15]Workers are further vulnerable because of language barriers,as many do not speak English, unfamiliarity with U.S. worker protection lawsand how to obtain assistance, and geographical isolation.  Many farmworkerswork and live in areas that are hours from the nearest city and far removedeven from towns.  "It's a whole different world," said Amelia Lopez,a former outreach worker in western Arizona.  "There is no one there.There is no housing.  They [the workers] don't have anyone to back them up. . .. I encountered a lot of people with blisters on their hands and with healthissues from pesticides.  When they confronted their employer they werefired-gone the next day."[16]In areas where a single grower is the only employer, controlover workers can be intense, even in their nonworking hours.  Several advocatesand government employees told Human Rights Watch that they had been deniedaccess to certain growers' lands, and that workers were too intimidated tospeak to them even when off the property of the grower.Investigator Frank Zamudio of the Arizona Department ofAgriculture's Pesticide Worker Safety program was denied access to PavichFarms, a prominent organic grape grower; he had to threaten to get a searchwarrant before he was finally allowed onto the land.  "The situation thereis hostile, suspicious," he said.  "Workers won't talk [to governmentworkers] on the premises."[17]Human Rights Watch witnessed employer intimidation ofworkers during a visit to the town of Aguila, Arizona, which is surrounded bythe cantaloupe fields of Martori Farms/Eagle Produce, Inc., operating on landleased from the state of Arizona.  Martori is virtually the only employer inAguila-"you either work with them [Martori] or you don't work,"according to former outreach worker Amelia Lopez.  Two adolescent girls tookHuman Rights Watch to see the company-owned single barracks room where theirfamily of six had previously lived-a tiny hot room with a battered old schoollocker, a stained mattress, and thousands of flies swarming outside.  Upon ourreturn to the girls' house, we learned that a Martori Farms employee had comeby the house to warn the girls' parents-both of whom work for Martori-that thecompany "could take the girls to court" for their association withus.Farm Labor ContractorsFarm labor contractors are central to the structure ofagricultural production in the United States.  Farm labor contractors range insize from single individuals to large corporations.  Under contract to agrower, a farm labor contractor typically is responsible for hiring andoverseeing the workers and ensuring that the work-planting, pruning, weeding,harvesting, etc.-is completed satisfactorily.  Farm labor contractors usuallyare paid a lump sum by the growers, which they then use to secure labor as needed.Government agencies and some courts often operate on theassumption that only the farm labor contractor, and not the grower, isthe employer of the farmworker.  Either the employer or the farm laborcontractor might set the rate at which wages will be paid, but it is the farmlabor contractor who recruits and contracts with the workers, pays the wages,is responsible for payroll deductions, and often transports the workers to thework site each day (usually for a fee).  Where a farm labor contractor is used,the grower may have no direct contact with the workers.This arrangement is problematic in that it allows growers toevade responsibility in the event of wage disputes, health and safetyviolations, or other unfair or illegal practices.  Often, a grower who utilizeda farm labor contractor can avoid responsibility for illegal acts and omissionson the grounds that the farm labor contractor, and not the grower, was the"employer."  Farm labor contractors generally have fewer resourcesthan growers and are less likely to satisfy judgments or fines that have beenlevied against them.  They are more likely to be un- or underinsured.  Farmlabor contractors can also be very flexible.  Although prohibited by law, it isnot unusual for farm labor contractors to evade responsibility for violationsby closing down operations, only to later resume under a different name, forexample by using a relative as a fraudulent front-person in the Department ofLabor certification process.Health and Safety RisksChildren working in agriculture face an alarming array ofdangers.  On a daily basis they may be exposed to carcinogenic pesticides,dramatically unsanitary conditions, heat-related illnesses, and hazardousequipment.  Their immature and still-growing bodies are more vulnerable thanadults' bodies to systemic damage, and their lack of experience makes them moresusceptible to accidents and work-related sicknesses.Despite their greater vulnerability, children are affordedno more protection than adults-to the contrary, they essentially receive lessprotection, in that health and safety standards now in place have beenformulated with adults in mind.  The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA)pesticide reentry intervals (REIs) for example-which set the minimum period oftime that workers must be kept out of a field after pesticides have beenapplied-are determined using the model of a 154-pound male.[18]Nor do Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards take intoaccount the special risks facing children.[19]PesticidesWhen I was fourteen I worked in the fields for twoweeks, chopping the weeds around the cotton plants. . . . I woke up one night,I couldn't breathe; I was allergic to something they were spraying in thefields.  I stopped breathing . . . I tried to drink water but I couldn't so Iran into my mom's room 'cause I didn't have no air in me and I was like[wheezing gasps] trying to get air in there but I couldn't . . .At the hospital they said I was allergic tosomething out there . . . something they were spraying. . . . They sprayed thefields in the morning.  We'd be out there when they were doing it, or when theywere leaving, or we could see them doing other fields.  They'd spray by plane.                                              -Richard M., seventeen years old[20]On June 27, 1997, seventeen-year-old migrantfarmworker JosJAntonio Casillas collapsed and died while riding his bike near his home inrural Utah.  Emergency workers found white foam streaming from his nose.According to JosJ'suncle, the day before he died the boy had been soaked with pesticide sprayedfrom a tractor; a week earlier he had also been sprayed, while working in apeach orchard.  After the second spraying he showed symptoms of severepesticide poisoning, including vomiting, sweating, diarrhea and headaches.  Hehad received no training from his employer regarding pesticide dangers and thesymptoms of exposure, and reportedly slept in his pesticide-soaked clothing thenight before his death.[21]Exposure to pesticides is a serious risk to allfarmworkers.  The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that as many as300,000 farmworkers suffer pesticide poisoning each year,[22]while the Natural Resources Defense Council estimates as many as 40,000 physician-diagnosedpoisonings occur each year.[23]Only a small percentage of pesticide-related illnesses are reported togovernment or health officials.[24]Few studies have been undertaken regarding pesticideexposure levels among agricultural workers¾andnone regarding juvenile farmworkers¾butthose that have show high rates of contamination.  Workers in Washington appleorchards, for example, were found to have sixteen times more pesticide residuein their urine than their nonfarmworker neighbors.[25]Thousands of pesticides are registered with the EPA andcurrently in use in U.S. fields.[26]Three hundred and fifty are registered for use on food crops.[27] Atleast 101 are probable or possible human carcinogens.[28]In addition to cancer, pesticide exposure has been linked repeatedly to braindamage, endocrine (hormone) disruption, and birth defects.[29]The risks are particularly acute for children.  In 1998, theNatural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) released Trouble on the Farm:Growing Up with Pesticides in Agricultural Communities, a comprehensivereport detailing the dangers to children of pesticide exposure.  According tothe NRDC:Children and infants are uniquely at risk frompesticides both because of physiological susceptibility and greater relativeexposure. . . .[30][T]heir bodies cannot efficiently detoxify and eliminatechemicals, their organs are still growing and developing, and  . . . they havea longer lifetime to develop health complications after an exposure.[Furthermore], children are disproportionately exposed to pesticides comparedwith adults due to their greater intake of food, water, and air per unit ofbody weight.[31]Children and adults working in the fields may be exposed topesticides in a variety of ways, including:  working in a field wherepesticides have recently been applied; breathing in pesticide "drift"from adjoining or nearby fields; working in a pesticide-treated field withoutappropriate protective gear, such as gloves and masks; eating withpesticide-contaminated hands; eating contaminated fruits and vegetables; andeating in a pesticide-contaminated field.  Fields are typically sprayed withpesticides on a weekly basis.[32]Workers may also be exposed to pesticides if they drinkfrom, wash their hands, or bathe in irrigation canals or holding ponds, wherepesticides can accumulate.  Despite the fact that such practices are commonlyreported and known to occur frequently, the pesticide level of irrigationcanals and holding ponds is not monitored.[33]Immediate signs of acute pesticide poisoning include nausea,vomiting, diarrhea, wheezing, rashes, headaches, and dizziness.[34]Long-term consequences may include childhood leukemia, kidney tumors, braintumors, brain damage, and learning and memory problems.[35]Many of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watchreported being exposed to pesticides and experiencing one or more symptoms ofpesticide exposure, most commonly headaches, nausea and vomiting, rashes, anddizziness.  Some were subjected to pesticide drift when adjacent fields weresprayed while they were working.  Others noticed the smell of pesticides in thefields where they worked and saw residue on leaves.When they sprayed-usually once a week-we would leavethe field for half an hour.Once they sprayed the field right next to where wewere working.  We all got horrible headaches.  One woman was vomiting.  Theforeman sent her home, but the rest of us had to keep working.-Damaris A., nineteen years old[36]We would smell pesticides once in awhile in thefields.  We would get headaches and rashes.  Red and itchy rashes all over ourhands and wrists.  For two or three days the rash would stay.  We would tellour supervisors, and they would say "it's normal-it's from theplants."  We know it's not from the plants!  But we'd have to keep workinganyway.-Dina V., nineteenyears old[37]None of the youth interviewed for this report had receivedtraining regarding the dangers of pesticides, safe usage, preventive measures,or what to do in the event of exposure.  Such training is required by theWorker Protection Standard of the EPA.[38]Some of the teens interviewed did not even know whatpesticides were.  Javier P., who began working in cotton and onion fields atthe age of fourteen, responded to a question about pesticides by saying,"Pesticides?  Was that the medicine they put on [the crops]?  No, I don'tknow anything about that."[39]Others were unaware of the dangers and symptoms of pesticidepoisoning.  A fifteen-year old girl, for example, reported that many of herfriends had become sick and thrown up while picking strawberries.  She attributedthese illnesses, however, to "lots of germs on the fruit," and saidher friends "got the flu from working in strawberries."[40]Human Rights Watch spoke with a boy who, when he was sixteenyears old, spent a summer using a pesticide backpack sprayer to treat weedsgrowing in the corn fields of a local landowner.  Twice a day, three times aweek, he mixed the pesticide and then sprayed it to cover the weeds' leaves.Asked if he wore gloves, a mask, or any protective clothing, he waved his handdismissively and said "Naw . . ."  The landowner had told him it wasnothing to worry about.[41]The Fair Labor Standards Act enumerates "Exposure toagricultural chemicals classified as Category I or II of toxicity" ashazardous agricultural conditions.  Accordingly, on a farm where the FLSAapplies, children aged fifteen and under are prohibited from handling categoryI and category II pesticides.  They may still handle pesticides of lowertoxicity, while juveniles aged  sixteen and older work without any pesticide-relatedrestrictions.The EPA's Worker Protection Standard regulates workers'involvement with pesticides.  It requires, among other things, the training ofall workers involved in mixing or applying pesticides, and the use ofprotective equipment and clothing when handling pesticides.  It does not setany minimum age requirement for mixing or applying pesticides.  A separate EPAregulation sets restricted-entry intervals.  REIs are no more stringent forjuveniles than for adults, despite the heightened risk of juveniles to sufferpesticide-related illnesses or injuries.Although there have been very few studies to date regardingpesticide exposure among children and youth working in agriculture, the datathat do exist suggest that such exposure is commonplace.  A 1990 study ofmigrant farmworker children in New York State found that more than 40 percenthad worked in fields still wet with pesticides, and 40 percent had been sprayedwith pesticides, either directly from crop duster airplanes or indirectly fromdrift.[42]Juvenile farmworkers, as is the case with all farmworkers,have very little power to protect themselves from the danger of pesticides orother health risks in the fields.  If they complain they are likely to be, atbest, ignored.  At worst, they will be fired.  "I encountered a lot ofpeople with blisters and [pesticide-related] health issues," an outreachworker told Human Rights Watch.  "When they confronted their farm laborcontractor or employer they were fired-gone the next day."[43]Children's cumulative exposure to pesticides from allsources, including food, water, dust, and air, is already a source of concernfor health professionals.[44]Additional exposure in the fields makes the risk more urgent still.Children who live on or near agricultural land, or whosefamilies work in the fields . . . are likely to be the most pesticide-exposedsubgroup in the United States... . . . Many of the children with the greatestpesticide exposures are from migrant farmworker families . . . [F]arm childrenface particularly significant health risks.[45]Under pressure from a variety of medical, scientific,farmworker, and children's advocacy organizations, the EPA is evaluatingcurrent protections for children and assessing their adequacy.  "We'reconcerned that children may be a special population in need," an EPAofficial acknowledged to Human Rights Watch.[46]To date, though, the EPA has not taken concrete steps to increase theprotection of juveniles working in agriculture or other children living on ornear farms.SanitationDrinking water, water for hand washing, and toiletfacilities are the minimum sanitation requirements imposed by OSHA on farms.Even these minimal requirements, however, are often ignored by growers and bythe farm labor contractors who bring in workers.  Furthermore, Congressprohibits enforcement of these regulations on farms with ten employees or less,essentially exempting small farms from having to protect their workers' mostbasic health and dignity requirements.[47]An estimated 95 percent of all United States farms fall under this exemption.[48]State occupational safety and health requirements may bemore or less stringent than federal, or more stringent in some respects butless protective in others.  In Arizona, for example, state occupational safetyand health requirements apply to all farms with five or more employees, therebycovering many more workers than does federal OSHA.[49]On the other hand, Arizona state regulations only require one toilet for everyforty workers, as opposed to the federal OSHA requirement of one toilet pertwenty workers.[50]Nearly all of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watchfor this report said that they had worked in fields or orchards where one ormore of these three basic requirements-drinking water, hand-washing facilities,and toilet facilities-was not met.  Similar findings were reported inCalifornia and North Carolina surveys by others.[51]Lack of ToiletFacilitiesIn Arizona, comments regarding toilet facilities included:Portapotties?  [Laughs.]  No.  Every place I'veever been, you just take tissue paper and find a hole.-JohnP., age eighteen[52]No, I never saw a portapotty.[53]I wouldn't expect a portapotty.-Ricky N., ageseventeen[54]They [portapotties] are too nasty to use.Sometimes they're near, sometimes they're far, but it doesn't matter because noone will use them anyway.  Even at the beginning of the season they'rehorrible.  You either have to find another spot or hold it.  I usually try tohold it.-Sylvia R., ageeighteen[55]A top official of the Occupational Safety and HealthDivision of the Industrial Commission of Arizona-often referred to as"state OSHA" or "Arizona OSHA"-told Human Rights Watch that a lack oftoilets was, together with a lack of drinking cups, the "biggest complaintin the fields."[56]Notwithstanding this, the same official also reported that his agency, which isresponsible for enforcing state sanitation regulations, does not do farminspections on its own initiative and does not do surprise inspections.[57]He was unable to provide Human Rights Watch with statistics regarding citationsfor sanitation-related violations in agriculture.Lack of usable toilet facilities is unsanitary andcontributes to the spread of parasitic infection among workers.  It can also beparticularly dangerous and humiliating for girls and women, in that it leavesthem with the unpleasant choice of either public urination-more obvious andawkward for females-or urinary retention.  Urinary retention is a cause ofurinary tract infections, which are suffered by farmworkers at a higher ratethan the general population.[58]A desire to avoid urination may also lead workers to limit their fluid intake,with potentially grave, even deadly, consequences.Lack of HandwashingFacilitiesBoth federal and state occupational safety and health lawsrequire agricultural employers to provide their workers with soap and water forhandwashing. Only about half of the teens interviewed for this report said thathandwashing facilities were available at their work sites.Being unable to wash their hands with soap and waterincreases farmworkers' risk of pesticide poisoning.  Pesticide residue on theplants transfers to workers' hands and arms, where it remains until they areable to wash it off.  If this is not possible while at work, their skin canremain contaminated for twelve hours or more-however long it takes them to gethome and wash-greatly prolonging their pesticide exposure.Unwashed hands also virtually guarantee that pesticides willbe ingested when workers eat their lunch.  Workers typically break for thirtyminutes for lunch, often sitting right in the fields to eat or moving to theedges of the fields when shade is available.There was no water for washing hands.  Women on thepacking tractor can wear gloves but when we picked we just used our hands.Then we would eat our lunch.  There was no way to wash our hands first.-Sylvia R.,eighteen, discussing her work picking cantaloupes the previous summer[59]When employers don't provide handwashing facilities, workersmay resort to washing in irrigation ditches, which are unclean and oftencontaminated with fertilizer and pesticide runoff.[60]Or the employers or field supervisors may themselves provide dirty andcontaminated water to the workers.  "Occasionally farm labor contractorswill get water from the ditches or drainage canals and put it in a container aswater for the employees to wash their hands with," reported a compliancesupervisor with Arizona's Occupational Safety and Health Division.[61]Such water exposes workers to dangerous chemicals and to organic wastes andparasites.Lack of Drinking WaterPhysical labor under hot conditions can rapidly overwhelmthe body.  Without adequate fluid intake and rest, workers risk devastatingdehydration and heat-induced illness, up to and including death.   (Heatillness is discussed in the following section.)The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration andthe Environmental Protection Agency recommend that workers laboring under hotweather conditions drink a minimum of eight ounces of water every half-hour.[62]Very high heat or humidity increases the amount of recommended water, so that,for example, a person working in 90 degree heat under a full sun should drinkeight ounces of water every fifteen minutes.[63]Federal and state occupational safety and health lawsrequire agricultural employers to supply sufficient amounts of cool water totheir workers.[64]OSHA estimates "Sufficient" at "two to three gallons per worker on a hotday."[65]Arizona requires a minimum of two gallons per employee per day of"suitably cool" water.[66]Only some growers and farm labor contractors comply with this requirement.Many provide inadequate amounts of water, water that is hot or warm, or nodrinking water at all.Still others provide contaminated water.  An Arizona farmwas cited in 1997, for example, for providing farmworkers with watercontaminated by E. coli, dangerous and potentially fatal bacteria.[67]An owner of the business, Texas Hill Farms, confirmed to state inspectors thatcanal water was being given to the farm laborers; office workers were providedwith different, uncontaminated water.[68]The same farm was also cited for failing to provide toilet and handwashingfacilities to its agricultural workers.  The Arizona Industrial CommissionDivision of Occupational Safety and Health assessed a total penalty against thebusiness of $2,250 ($1,250 for providing contaminated water and $1,000 for thelack of toilet facilities).Many teens reported that their foremen or farm laborcontractors would bring one five or ten-gallon jug to the work site; when itwas gone, no more water was brought in.We had to share water from one big jug.  It wasn'tenough.  You couldn't drink as much as you wanted.  Maybe twice a week we wouldrun out of water completely.An old man took us there [to the field] in themorning, set us up, then would come back in the afternoon to pick us up.  Ifyou ran out of water, if you passed out, tough.-Ricky N., ageseventeen[69]Other young workers told Human Rights Watch that they had tobring their own drinking water.[70]Still others bought beverages from co-workers or supervisors who, in lieu ofproviding water, sold sodas or beer for $1.00 to $1.50 each.The supervisors sold beer for one dollar each.  Lotsof supervisors did this.  People buy it because they are thirsty, not becausethey want to drink alcohol. They [supervisors] also sell it toteenagers-whoever.  They don't care about your age. . . . People might buyseveral beers in a shift.-Sylvia R., ageeighteen[71][Some] farm labor contractors take out an ice chestfilled with Coke, charge a dollar or a dollar-fifty for a Coke-this is economicexploitation.  [Selling beer] is a health and safety issue.-ArtMorelos, Compliance Supervisor, Arizona OSHA[72]Federal OSHA discourages consumption of soda by agriculturalworkers (the gases make it difficult to drink sufficiently large quantities offluids) and warns strongly against the consumption of alcohol:Alcohol affects the body's temperature-regulatingcapacities and increases the risk of heat-induced illness. . . . Workers shouldbe strongly urged not to drink any alcohol during hot weather before startingwork and until the end of the evening meal after work in order to give theirbody a chance for full replacement of all lost fluid.[73]In addition to the risk of dehydration and heat illness,on-the-job consumption of alcohol increases the risk of injury from heavyequipment, knives, hoes, ladders, and other farming implements.  A paralegaltold Human Rights Watch that a seventeen-year old boy was killed in earlysummer 1998 in the cantaloupe fields near Aguila, a remote town northwest ofPhoenix.  He and other workers on the crew reportedly were drinking beer asthey worked.  Drunk, the boy slipped in front of the melon conveyor tractor andwas killed.[74]Hazardous Conditions;Work-Related IllnessesHeat IllnessesHeat illnesses can lead todeath or brain-damage and are an ever-present danger for field workers.  TheEPA and OSHA estimate approximately 500 deaths annually from heat illnesses inthe United States.[75]Children are more susceptible to heat stress than adults.[76]The following coroner's report of a farmworker's deathillustrates the deadliness of heat illness and the difficulty in treating aworker once the illness has progressed to a critical stage.Received a call reporting that                     ,female adult, 18, had been pronounced dead in the Medical Intensive Care Unitby Dr. French at 13:59, May 30.The decedent had been taken to                Hospitalby her father at 14:30, May 28, after collapsing while working in a cottonfield.  The exact location could not be determined.  Upon arrival at thehospital, the decedent had a rectal temperature of 107.5 degrees Fahrenheit.She was given oxygen and packed in ice and by 15:10 her temperature had droppedto 103.5.  She was suffering from seizures and a constant flow of yellow,watery diarrhea.  She was unresponsive the entire time she was at the hospitaland her pupils were three to four millimeters wide.She was transferred to the Medical Intensive CareUnit, where efforts were made to regulate her body temperature and it wasreduced to 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit.  The seizures continued, however, and shebegan to have myocardial and renal (heart and kidney) failure and disseminatedintravascular coagulation (blood clots throughout her body).  She was ondialysis when she died.The decedent's family reported that she had beenworking in the fields for three days prior to her collapse.  She had taken atylenol for a headache around noon, May 28, but immediately threw it up.The United States Weather Bureau reported that thehigh temperatures for May 25 through May 28 were 93, 96, 102, and 107 degreesFahrenheit, respectively.[77]Many of the young workers interviewed by Human Rights Watchhad suffered from mild to moderate heat illness, with symptoms includingdizziness, headaches, nausea, and vomiting.  Two reported witnessing cases ofheat illness-one of a sister, another of a boyfriend-so severe that theafflicted person was unable to work for an entire week  "He had the heat insidehim," described one.  "He was very pale and throwing up."  "He was sickfrom the sun."[78]Musculoskeletal TraumaThe strenuous and often awkward labor of farmwork increasesthe risk of injuries, including chronic repetitive stress disorders andmusculoskeletal trauma.  Several teens told Human Rights Watch that theysuffered from chronic back and/or neck pain when they were working in thefields.Early adolescence is a time of rapid growth, which makesteenage workers more vulnerable than adults to musculoskeletal disorders.[79]Agricultural work in particular has been linked to musculoskeletal trauma, dueto the stresses on the body of constant bending, lifting, twisting, and otherawkward or punishing work.[80]Furthermore, because back pain is generally rare among adolescents as awhole-and a history of back pain is a risk factor for new back injuries-medicalexperts conclude that "the long-term consequences of back strains amongadolescent workers are of substantial concern."[81]Carbon MonoxidePoisoning Incident in Washington StateOn July 25, 1997, approximately one hundred workers werepoisoned by carbon monoxide at a packing plant in Washington state.  Seven ofthese workers were fifteen years old or younger and therefore underage forpacking plant employment under Washington law.[82]Another ten were sixteen or seventeen years old.[83]The youngest of the affected workers were fourteen years old.[84]The doors to the packing room where the poisoning occurredwere shut on the day of the poisoning.  Two of the doors were taped shut withduct tape; two other doors were covered with fine mesh nets.[85]The ventilation fan was broken, and there were multiple sources of carbonmonoxide in operation.[86]A report by doctors from the Occupational and EnvironmentalMedicine Clinic of Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington,estimated that workers' exposure levels to carbon monoxide on the day of thepoisoning ranged between 200 and 500 parts per million.[87]The permissible exposure limit for carbon monoxide is 35 parts per million.[88]Human Rights Watch interviewed Flor Trujillo (her realname), one of the affected workers.  Flor was fifteen years old at the time ofthe poisoning.I was working at the plant for two weeks before thepoisoning.  For the whole two weeks I was having headaches; by after lunch itwould be pretty bad.  I would ask my supervisor if she had anything for it andshe would give me a packet of Pain-Aid pills-but then she said she couldn'tgive them to me anymore.  I think because I was underage.The last day me and my friend went to the littlestore and got pills because we had bad headaches.  Everyone was like "metoo," so I gave some other people some of the pills.A couple of hours after lunch this girl who wasworking by us fainted. . . . A couple of hours later another girl fainted, ahigh school girl; she was probably sixteen. . . . After her then a bunch ofpeople were fainting.The manager told us to keep working, wouldn't let usleave.  Finally our supervisor told us to leave.  These kids [workers] werejumping on the doors to tear the tape off, open the doors so we could getoutside.  . . .  I was all shaky and cold and trembling.  I passed out.It took about two weeks for me to start feelingbetter.  I had bad headaches.  I wanted to sleep all day.  I was really weak.I got a letter in the mail saying I couldn't workthere anymore because I wasn't over sixteen years old.  When we got the jobthey didn't ask how old we were.I still get really bad headaches.  They seem like apart of life now.  They come every day. . . . I remember what happened and Ifeel really bad about what could have happened . . . That's the worst thingthat's ever happened to me.  It scared me a lot and still does.  I'm scared ofbeing in a place that's shut. . . .  Sometimes I start crying because I stillremember.[89]The Harborview Medical Center report states that,"[g]iven the estimated exposures . . . it is not surprising that someworkers have chronic complaints."[90]Approximately one hundred workers were seen at the localhospital's emergency room on the day of the incident, with symptoms includingdizziness, headaches, nausea, and loss of consciousness; ninety-three workersfiled claims for carbon monoxide poisoning.[91]As a result of this mass poisoning, Washington's Department of Labor andIndustries levied a fine against the company, Brewster Heights Packing, Inc.,in the amount of two thousand dollars.[92]Hazardous Equipment;Work-Related InjuriesIn a Florida orange grove in January 1999, twoyoung farmworkers fell off the tailgate of a moving pickup truck.  Severalcrates of oranges fell on top of them, killing one of the boys and wounding theother.  The boy who died, Miguel Angel Ramos, was either fourteen or fifteenyears old; the other boy was fifteen.  The accident occurred on a school day.[93]Agriculture is the most dangerous occupation open tojuveniles in the United States.[94]Farmworkers routinely use knives, hoes, and other cutting implements; operateor work near heavy machinery; work on ladders; and work with or near pesticidesand other dangerous chemicals.  Children working in agriculture in the U.S.make up only 8 percent of the population of working minors overall, yet accountfor 40 percent of work-related fatalities among minors.[95]An estimated 100,000 children suffer agriculture-related injuries annually inthe United States.[96]Minors working in agriculture have also been found to suffer a higher frequencyof severe and disabling injuries than those working in all other occupations.[97]Daniel F., sixteen, described to Human Rights Watch aninjury he suffered the previous year, when he was fifteen years old and workingat a large hydroponic tomato nursery in Willcox, Arizona.[98]We were putting plastic on the ground, rolling itdown off of big long rolls.  There was a big hole in the floor.  [As Daniel F.explained, this appears to have been the open end of a pipe, perpendicular toand flush with the floor.]  I couldn't see it; it was covered with plastic.  Istepped in it, fell in, whacked my knee.Daniel F. underwent treatment for several months, includingmultiple visits to an orthopedic specialist, magnetic resonance imaging, andanti-inflammatory injections and pills.  For two months he was on crutches; forthree months he was in a knee brace.The doctor said I will never be 100 percent cured.I can't play soccer anymore; before the accident I was in a league.  I can'treally play basketball.  My knee still bothers me.  For example, if I run itgives in . . . even if I walk sometimes it can do that.The nursery paid for Daniel F.'smedical expenses and he received workers' compensation.  But the company alsosent him a letter to sign-a liability release, by his description-from theirinsurer.Even at the age of fifteen, Daniel F.'s work at the nurseryin the summer was legal-under current Arizona and federal law, hydroponicnurseries are not classified as hazardous workplaces. Daniel F. told HumanRights Watch of other injuries that occurred at the hydroponic nurseries, asdid a legal aid attorney involved in several claims against Bonita.  "Theyare taking farmworkers and having them do work they are not accustomed to.  Itis more heavily industrialized than farmwork, [with] trolleys going around theceiling, big vats of water, people driving little carts. . . .  These are notinjuries a farmworker would look out for.  That industry ought to be declaredhazardous."[99]Tractors and other motorized farm equipment represent veryserious hazards, and the FLSA prohibits their operation by children agedfifteen and younger.  Abidance by this prohibition, and enforcement when it isviolated, is another matter.  Human Rights Watch interviewed a sixteen-year oldwho had worked full time for the three previous summers-when thirteen,fourteen, and fifteen years old-driving a tractor.Even those not operating farm equipment themselves may be indanger.  According to Art Morelos of the Industrial Commission of Arizona,"a common safety hazard in cantaloupe and lettuce fields, where thepacking is done in the field, is that the tractor will be set to move without adriver.  It goes very slowly, but is still dangerous."[100]In fact, it can be deadly, as illustrated by the incident noted earlier in thischapter, in which a drunken seventeen-year reportedly fell in front of acantaloupe packing tractor and was killed.For all workers, but especially for field workers, fatigueincreases the risk of injury.    Long hours, early morning hours, and work invery hot conditions all increase fatigue, as does the heavy physical laborentailed in most agricultural work.  The relative inexperience of young workersalso increases their risk of accidents and injury.Cuts from knives were the injury most commonly reported toHuman Rights Watch by young workers.   Several knew of other people who hadbeen injured badly, their fingers cut off by knives or their hands mangled inmachinery.A boy working in the Yuma area told Human Rights Watch of aknife injury he suffered when he was fifteen years old.[101]He cut his finger with a broccoli-harvesting knife.  "That knife was so sharp,"he said, showing his finger with a curved scar about three inches long runningthe length of it.The field supervisor did not have a first-aid kit-onlyBand-Aids.  According to the boy's older sister, the cut was bad and neededmedical attention.[102]However, because her brother was both underage (at fifteen, he was too young tobe working legally during school hours) and undocumented, he was not taken to alocal hospital or clinic.  Instead, he was taken across the border to hisparents' house in Mexico and from there to a Mexican hospital, where hereceived multiple stitches.  The delay from the time of the injury to the timeof treatment was between two and three hours.Advocates and workers report that it is typical for injuredworkers to go to Mexico for treatment, for a variety of reasons.  The employermay want to avoid workers' compensation claims in order to keep their rateslow.  The worker may be undocumented and afraid of discovery, or afraid theywill be denied treatment at a clinic or hospital in the United States.  Inaddition, health care services for farmworkers are often very far away anddifficult to access.Depression andSubstance AbuseFarmworkers in general have high rates of depression.[103]Extreme poverty and hardship, the stress of job uncertainty and frequent moves,and social stigmatization and isolation are contributing factors.  This is truefor children and youth as well.  Studies have also linked depression in teenageworkers to long hours of work in high-intensity, low-skilled jobs-precisely thekind of labor undertaken by farmworkers.[104]As a result of these pressures, farmworkers are vulnerableto substance abuse, which can alleviate pain and offer a temporary escape fromdifficult lives.  In addition, though, some substance abuse is directly relatedto work.  This includes not just the unsafe practice, encouraged by someavaricious employers, of drinking beer sold at the work site.  It also includesdrugs taken for the express purpose of getting more work done.Some farmworker youth use drugs "in order to fulfillthe demands of work," according to Emma Torres, a former farmworker whonow coordinates a border health and substance abuse prevention project in theYuma area.[105]This is particularly true for boys and young men working at the piece rate,where the pace at which one works directly determines earnings.  "They usespeed to make it through the day," says Torres.[106]The farmworker is like a machine:  the harder theywork the more they will earn.  So they push their body to the max.  That's whythey do drugs-not to feel high, but with the purpose of extracting more workfrom their body  . . .   But the body can only take so much, and after a fewyears they end up disabled, young, and on the street, begging.  They don'tqualify for Social Security, they have no insurance . . . but their hands orbacks don't work anymore.[107]Underage WorkersNo one ever cared how old I was.-RickyN., who began working in the fields at the age of fourteen.[108]"Underage worker" is a slippery concept inagriculture, as children are legally permitted to work at very young ages.Under certain not-too-rigorous circumstances, federal and most state lawspermit children as young as twelve to work for hire in agriculture, an age faryounger than that permitted in other occupations.  Under more limitedconditions, even children aged ten and eleven can work as hired farm laborers.Enforcement of these laws, weak as they are, is lax.Growers and farm labor contractors frequently hire underage workers, a categorythat includes children under the age of sixteen working during school hours,children aged thirteen or younger working without parental consent, andchildren under the age of sixteen who engage in hazardous agricultural tasks.State laws regarding the minimum age of employment as ahired farmworker vary widely.  According to a 1997 survey by the Child LaborCoalition, eighteen states have no minimum age requirement for children workingin agriculture.[109]In Oregon, the minimum age is nine; in Illinois it is ten.[110]Fourteen states require a minimum age of twelve; in nine states the minimum ageis fourteen.[111]Only one state, Nevada, has set sixteen as the minimum age for hiredfarmworkers.The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) sets the federal minimumage for child labor. (Whichever legal standard-state or federal-is moststringent is the one that applies.)  The Fair Labor Standards Act dates back to1938 and reflects a radically different era in the United States, a time when"agriculture" was synonymous with "family farm," and aquarter of all Americans still lived and worked on farms.  Initially, farmworkerswere excluded entirely from the law's protection, and restrictions on childlabor in agriculture were not added until 1974.The law is woefully inadequate to protect today's hiredfarmworkers, who are overwhelmingly employed as wage laborers in commercialenterprises, and not on the family farm, including the hundreds of thousands ofworkers aged seventeen and under.  The FLSA standards differ betweenagricultural and nonagricultural work.  Employment of children thirteen oryounger is forbidden in nonagricultural occupations.  Children aged fourteenand fifteen may work in nonagricultural settings for limited hours outside ofschool:  up to three hours on a school day; up to eighteen hours in a schoolweek; up to eight hours on a nonschool day; and up to forty hours in anonschool week.  They may not work before 7 a.m. or after 7 p.m. (9 p.m. in thesummer).  Youth sixteen and older may work in any nonhazardous nonagriculturaloccupation.[112]For children working in agriculture, the FLSA is much lessprotective.  Children younger than twelve may work unlimited hours outside ofschool, if this work takes place on a small farm with a parent's writtenconsent.[113]Children aged twelve and thirteen may work unlimited hours outside of school onany farm with written parental consent, or without written consent on a farmwhere a parent is employed.[114]Children aged fourteen and fifteen may work unlimited hours outside of schoolon any farm, without parental consent.[115]There are no hourly restrictions on the agricultural work of children who aresixteen or older.In addition to allowing agricultural employers to employchildren for longer hours and at younger ages, the FLSA also permits sixteenand seventeen-year olds to engage in hazardous agricultural work.[116]In other occupational settings, eighteen is the minimum age for hazardous work.Under federal law, then, it is legal for a twelve-year oldchild to harvest asparagus from 3 a.m. to 8 a.m. seven days a week, bendingover in the pre-dawn cold and wielding a knife, then stumbling on to school.The same child would be prohibited from working in any nonagricultural work(other than wreath-making or newspaper delivery).  A fifteen-year old may workfifty hours a week during the school year if she works in agriculture, but onlyeighteen hours a week if she works at Burger King.Many of the youth interviewed by Human Rights Watch haddropped out of school before the age of sixteen in order to work full time inthe fields. Employment of these children violated the law.  Although federallaw permits children to perform farmwork for unlimited hours outside of school,it does not permit the employment of children aged fifteen and under duringschool hours.In most cases, children told Human Rights Watch that theywere not asked their age prior to employment.  When they were asked their ages,and/or to show proof of age, the fact that they were under sixteen did notdeter the farm labor contractors or growers from hiring them anyway.  All ofthe juveniles believed their employers knew them to be underage.Jessica G., for example, left school two years ago at theage of fifteen to work in the melon fields near Yuma, where the season runsfrom November to April.[117]She worked from 4:00 a.m. until 3:00 or 4:00 p.m.-an eleven or twelve-hour day.She earned $36 a day; at about $3 an hour, well below minimum wage.  "It'svery difficult work," she said.  "You're outside all day, with just a couple ofshort breaks."  "I was very tired at the end of the day."  Both themanager of the farm and the farm labor contractor who hired Jessica G. werefriends of her family.  Four of the five children in Jessica G.'s family haveworked in the fields.  Their grandmother raised them, as their mother alwaysworked in the fields as well.Richard M. told Human Rights Watch about his firstagricultural job, when he was fourteen.As long as you're fifteen you can get a job.  Myuncle drives you to the field and tells the contractor he has a new worker.He'll put you on the payroll. . . . They do ask to see your social security andyour birth certificate.  When I was fourteen I showed them my social securityand my birth certificate. . . .  Yeah, I wasn't old enough to work out there.                                      -RichardM., seventeen years old[118]But Richard M. did work at thatfield, until he got sick two weeks later from pesticide poisoning.Blanca Rodriguez, now an attorney working with farmworkersin Washington state, recalls working in the asparagus fields with her parentsfrom the age of five or six on.  The asparagus harvest generally runs fromApril through June, coinciding with the last portion of the school year.We'd get up at 2:00 a.m., go to the fields, and thengo to school.  That's why parents do it, because they can still send their kidsto school.  And in high school we would stay a bit later with our parents, thengo to night school.  The high school still has a night school option forasparagus cutters during the season.[119]According to Rodriguez, children asyoung as ten and eleven still work in the asparagus fields.  Not all go toschool at the same time; some drop out for the season, or drop out for theasparagus season and stay out for the summer and early fall, until the appleharvest ends in October.[120]In two cases looked at by Human Rights Watch, underageworkers were badly injured on the job; in one of these, the worker wassubsequently denied compensation and fired for being underage.  The case ofFlor Trujillo (her real name) is described more fully in the chapter titled"Health and Safety Risks."  Trujillo was hired at the age of fifteento work in a fruit-packing plant in central Washington state.  Under Washingtonlaw, work in a packing plant is considered hazardous, and workers must be atleast sixteen years of age.  At the time she was hired, Trujillo was not asked herage.  A few weeks later, she and about one hundred of her co-workers werepoisoned by carbon-monoxide fumes inside the plant.  Seven of the poisonedworkers were fifteen or younger.   Within a month of the incident, Trujilloreceived a letter from the company, Brewster Heights Packing, Inc., telling herthat she could no longer work there because she was underage.  Trujillo did notreceive any compensation from the company for the danger in which it placedher, her resulting illness, or her lost income.[121]In Willcox, Arizona, a fifteen-year old boy suffered apermanently-disabling injury to his knee while working at Bonita Nurseries, aDutch-owned hydroponic tomato nursery.  This case is discussed further in thechapter "Health and Safety Risks."Frank M., a boy interviewed in central Arizona, beganworking in 1996, the summer he was thirteen.  His job was to drive a tractor upand down dirt roads, wetting the roads so the dust wouldn't fly in the face ofthe workers.  He said he drove at about 25 miles per hour.[122]Under the FLSA, driving a tractor or other farm vehicle isconsidered hazardous, and therefore prohibited for any juvenile under the ageof sixteen.  "It was under the table until last year, when the boss put me onthe payroll," said Frank M..  "He knew how old I was."[123]Not only was Frank M. working illegally, but his employerwas underpaying him too, giving him one hundred dollars a week for roughly aforty-hour work week; in other words, about $2.50 an hour-just over half of theminimum wage at that time.Other boys also told Human Rights Watch about their earlyyears of work:I worked the cotton fields starting when I wastwelve, weeding with a hoe between the plants.  I worked from 4:00 a.m. to 2:00p.m. [ten hours], with a thirty minute break for lunch.  You just go up anddown the rows.  There were lots of kids out there, twelve, thirteen years old.-Mark H., nineteen[124]Mark H.-working ten hours a day at the age of twelve in thecotton fields of central Arizona, where the temperature routinely rises above110 degrees-was working with his parents' knowledge.  His aunt, a friend of thegrower, had gotten him his job.  Because the work took place during the summer,and therefore outside of school hours, and because he worked on a small farm,the fact of his employment was, for the most part, perfectly legal (with theexception that his parents had not provided written consent regarding theirson's employment).  In violation of the FLSA, he was paid below minimum wage,earning only about $3.50 an hour.  He was paid under the table, without SocialSecurity deductions being made on his behalf, also an illegal practice.  Yet inthe four years that Mark H. worked summers in the field, to his knowledge not asingle state or federal authority ever checked on his employer's practices.I pitched watermelons.  Now that's some hard work.You throw it down the line, one to the other, standing about five feet apart.That's when I was fourteen.  I worked pitchingwatermelons from about 4:00 to 8:00 p.m.  Because in the morning I was doingother work.  I chopped cotton from four or five in the morning until noon.Then they make you go home and rest.  Then watermelon.So it was like, eight hours in the morning, thenfour hours at night.  Cotton and watermelon is hard work.  I'd get home abouteight, go to sleep around ten, then get up at four. . . .  It's hard.  You canfaint.  You have to drink lots of water.-Dean S., sixteenyears old[125]Dean S. worked twelve hours a day at the age of fourteen,sleeping only six hours a night.  He chopped cotton and pitched watermelons,both difficult and exhausting forms of work with a high risk of injury.  Thefact of his summer employment was entirely legal, however-as a fourteen yearold, employers could hire him for farmwork without any hourly restrictionswhatsoever, except that he not work during school hours.Wage and Hour ConcernsWage Fraud:  Earning Less than Minimum WageWith some exceptions, juvenile farmworkers are entitled bylaw to earn the prevailing minimum wage.[126]Since September 1, 1997, the federal minimum wage has been $5.15 per hour.  (Asof this writing in late 1999, members of Congress are discussing a rise in theminimum wage.)  From October 1, 1996 to August 31, 1997, the minimum hourlywage was $4.75; from April 1, 1991 to October 1, 1996, the federal minimum wagewas $4.25.  In those states with a higher minimum wage-Washington voters, forexample, approved a minimum wage of $5.75 in 1998-employers must pay thestate-mandated minimum wage.Agricultural employers may pay either an hourly rate or apiece-rate.  If they pay by a piece-rate, the earnings for all hours worked ina work week must be sufficient to bring the average hourly wage up to at leastminimum wage.[127]Depending on the speed, skill, and strength of theworker-and the worker's co-workers, if he or she is working as part of ateam-piece-rate wages can be either beneficial or problematic.  The strongest,fastest, and most experienced workers can earn in excess of minimum wage(although usually not above $7.00 or $7.50 per hour).  Slower or weakerworkers, or those just starting out in agriculture, may earn less than half ofminimum wage.  Adolescents can fall into either one of these two groups,although it is usually only older adolescents, often male, who excel atpiece-rate work.  Success at piece-rate work, however, can carry an additionalprice in terms of its toll on the body.[128]Approximately one-third of the juveniles interviewed byHuman Rights Watch reported earning significantly less than minimum wage.  Mostof these teens worked for small growers.  Not all were paid by an hourlyminimum wage or by piece-rate-several were paid instead a fixed lump sum perday or per week.These findings comport with those of a recent NationalAgricultural Workers Survey, which found that agricultural workers agedfourteen through seventeen earned just over $4 an hour, on average.[129]The Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division has also reported high ratesof wage fraud, with more than half of grape growers and farm labor contractorssurveyed found to be violating minimum wage requirements.[130]The following are some examples of the experiences ofadolescent farmworkers paid by both the piece-rate and lump-sum method:·In 1998, Sani H., then sixteen, picked chilies at the rate offifty cents per bag (about the size of a bushel).  He worked from 7:00 a.m.until 3:00 p.m. and earned about $20 a day, for an average hourly wage of$2.50.[131]·In 1996, John P., then fifteen, picked apples for piece-ratewages.  He worked ten hours a day-from 5:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m.-and earnedbetween twenty and thirty dollars a day ($2 to $3 an hour).  Two years later,in 1998, he picked cherries, again working ten-hour days.  For that work he waspaid $42 a day, or just over $4 an hour-one dollar less per hour than minimumwage.  This means that John P., who worked Monday through Friday and a half-dayon Saturday, was shortchanged $55 a week by his employer.[132]·Mark H. worked every summer from the age of twelve to sixteen inthe cotton fields south of Phoenix.  He usually worked from 4:00 a.m. until2:00 p.m. (ten hours), six days a week.  The last summer he worked this job, in1996, the farmer he worked for paid him a flat weekly rate of $200-about $3.50an hour, well below minimum wage at that time.[133]·In 1997, when he was fourteen years old, Dean S. worked twelvehours a day for a local farmer:  eight hours in the morning in the cottonfields and four hours in the evening pitching watermelon.  The most he everearned was $50 a day, or about $4 an hour.[134]·Ricky N., who also pitched watermelon in central Arizona, earnedbetween $2.75 and $3.00 an hour in 1996, when he was fifteen.  The federalminimum wage was then $4.25 an hour.[135]·When Jessica G. was fifteen, in 1996, she worked in the cantaloupefields of southwestern Arizona for eleven to twelve hours each day.  Each day,she was allowed one fifteen-minute break in the morning and one thirty-minutebreak for lunch.  She earned $36 a day-about $3 an hour, which wasapproximately 65 percent of the minimum wage at that time.[136]In violation of the FLSA, none of the employers in the abovecases provided additional compensation to bring their workers' wages up to thelegal hourly minimum.  None of these young workers knew they had been cheatedof their rightful wages.The above examples involved juvenile workers on relativelysmall farms or working for small-scale farm labor contractors.  Underpayment ofwages, however, is by no means limited to small growers or farm laborcontractors.  Human Rights Watch interviewed two young women who had previouslyworked for a major agribusiness.  Both of them reported that they-and theirco-workers-had been routinely cheated on their pay.They take hours away from your pay.  This is verycommon-they short all the workers.  Almost always, every check, they cut off alittle bit.  Like, let's say you work eighty hours-they'll pay you forseventy.  So you end up making less than minimum wage.[137]According to the girls, the amount cut out of the pay variedfrom check to check, but the practice was consistent.Another thing they do is, sometimes when you'resupposed to work eight hours, for example, they make you work more but stillpay only for eight.[138]Asked if they had ever complained about these practices, thegirls said no.  "Some of the workers complained but it did no good," theysaid.  They told Human Rights Watch that they believed they had no recourse.Practically speaking, they did not.  Their employer was one of a handful oflarge corporate growers operating on state-owned land in western Arizona.  Thenearest town to the fields the girls were working in is Wendon, with apopulation of 450, and the nearest enforcement agency offices-the Department ofLabor's Wage and Hour Division and the State of Arizona IndustrialCommission-are in Phoenix, two hours away.  Nor is there public bus service toWendon, Aguila, Salome, or any of the other tiny towns in that vast andisolated area west of Phoenix.The girls said they had once seen a government inspector-forwhich agency they did not know.  They had been prompted on more than oneoccasion by their supervisors, however, who told them what to say if approachedby a government official:  "If they ask how much I pay you, say$5.50," or "say $6.00," they told us.  "And so that's whatpeople would say . . . . There are a lot of unfair practices."[139]Excessive andInappropriate Hours of WorkIn contrast to nonagricultural occupations, the FLSA imposesneither a daily nor a weekly limit to the number of hours children may work inagriculture.  Human Rights Watch spoke with several adolescent farmworkers whoworked twelve hours a day for six or six and a half days a week, and a few whohad worked fourteen hours a day or more.We would work as much as was needed.  You could workup to fourteen or fifteen hours a day.  But you're not forced to work more thantwelve; beyond twelve is optional.-Frank M.,sixteen, describing the hours he worked the summer he was fifteen, in Avondale,Arizona[140]Under current law there is nothing illegal about employersextracting such long hours from children, unless the work occurs during schoolhours and the children are under sixteen.Damaris A., a legal permanent resident of the United States,worked in the fields near Yuma, Arizona from the age of thirteen until she wasseventeen.  Despite her and her family's right to reside in the United States,a severe housing shortage in the Yuma area prevented them from doing so.Instead, like thousands of others, Damaris A., her younger brother, and herfather crossed into the U.S. each day from the city of San Luís Río Colorado,Mexico, into the town of San Luis, Arizona.  From there, the workers are drivenby bus or truck to work sites near and far.In order to get to work by 7:00 a.m., Damaris A. would riseat 3:00 a.m., prepare for work, then wait about two hours to cross theinternational port of entry.  The wait was due to the long lines of peoplecrossing through, like Damaris A., to go to work in the fields on the U.S.side.  During the peak season, immigration officials estimate that more than6,000 farmworkers cross the border daily at the San Luis, Arizona port ofentry.[141]The majority of these workers are, like Damaris A., legal permanent residentsof the United States.[142]Once on the U.S. side, Damaris A. still had to travel to thework site, which could take up to two hours depending on the location of thefields where the farm labor contractor had her crew working.The peak season for lettuce and cantaloupe in the Yuma arearuns from April to November.  During the height of the season, Damaris A.worked from 7 a.m. until 9 p.m., six days a week.  Occasionally she worked ahalf-day on Sunday as well.  During her fourteen-hour workdays, she waspermitted two fifteen-minute breaks and a half-hour for lunch.  She earnedminimum wage.  Some weeks, she worked as many as ninety hours.At night, Damaris A. would reverse the travel process shehad undertaken in the morning:  travel to the border crossing, wait two hoursor so to complete the crossing, and finally arrive home by midnight.  On herbusiest days, then, Damaris A. had only three hours of sleep at home beforestarting all over again in the morning.This was illegal employment-for three years, Damaris A. wasunder sixteen and working during school hours.  She got her job through herfather, who worked for the same grower and was friendly with the foreman.Damaris A. lied about her age and was hired despite producing no documentationof her birth date.Another young worker, Gerardo L., worked in the melon fieldsnear El Centro, California, when he was seventeen.  His work was not illegal-hewas old enough to be working full time without restrictions-but it was long andgrueling.  He worked from 5:00 a.m. until anywhere between noon and 8:00 p.m.,depending on the needs of the grower.  For one month during the peak harvest,he worked from 5:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m., seven days a week-105 hours a week.He also had to travel one hour each way to and from work.  He was paid minimumwage.[143]The Effect of LongHours on Health and EducationWork in excess of twenty hours per week has a substantialand well-documented negative impact on teenagers' health, social development,and education.  These issues are discussed further in the chapters on health andeducation.The Effect of Farmworkon EducationAll of the juvenile farmworkers interviewed by Human RightsWatch had dropped out of school or been held back at least one time.Nationally, the dropout rate for farmworker youth is 45 percent.[144]Reflecting this legacy of under-education, a full 80 percent of adult migrantfarmworkers function at a 5th-grade literacy level or less.[145]Several factors contribute to this lack of educationalattainment among farmworker youth.  Mobility, poverty, and the strain of toomany hours of work-all three often the defining characteristics of farmwork-are particularly detrimental for children and adolescents in school.The necessary mobility of many farmworker families, as theyfollow the growing cycles of various crops in various locales, brings with itfrequent and repeated changes in school.  Not only does this interruptlearning, but it also makes it difficult for children to adapt socially to theschool environment, and for teachers to teach effectively.  According to theNational Center for Farmworker Health, changing schools takes an emotional tollon children, who are more likely to drop out if they change schools four ormore times.[146]The extreme poverty of their families means that manyfarmworker children and youth do not have the option of going to school-theirfamilies cannot afford for them to study, either because there is not enoughmoney for shoes and clothes or because the children are themselves required towork.  "A lot of kids don't even go to school anymore," an outreachworker told Human Rights Watch.  "They never get caught because they movearound.  Their families aren't emphasizing education.  They say, 'We need tolive day by day; you need to get out there and earn some money.'"[147]One of the most significant causes of low educationalachievement is the fact that juvenile farmworkers simply spend too much time onthe job.  Numerous studies have found that long hours of work-generally definedas twenty or more hours a week during the school year-interfere with scholasticperformance.[148]In addition to not having time to study, students who engage in so-called"high intensity work" (again, work of twenty or more hours a week)generally don't get enough sleep, sleeping only seven hours a night rather thanthe nine they need.[149]As a result, these worker-students are sleepy during school (and on the job,which leads to higher rates of injury), more likely to be tardy or absent, andmore likely to fall asleep in class.[150]Their excessive sleepiness interferes with learning; it may also contribute toemotional difficulties.[151]Finally, students working twenty or more hours a week are more likely to usestimulants-including caffeine-to compensate for their tiredness.[152]Statistics are not available regarding the number ofjuvenile farmworkers working twenty or more hours a week.  Anecdotal evidence,including Human Rights Watch findings, suggests that the majority of youngfarmworkers working during the school year are putting in work weeks of atleast twenty hours and often more.  A 1992 study found that, nationally,approximately 37 percent of adolescent farmworkers work full time.[153]The United States Department of Labor (DOL) has never hadstatutory authority to limit the number of hours that sixteen andseventeen-year olds may work during the school year.  Citing "theextensive research about the adverse effects of high-intensity work whileschool is in session," the National Research Council recommended in 1998that Congress provide DOL with the necessary authority to impose such limits.[154]In doing so, the council noted that:[T]he historical reasons that justified theexemption of those 16 and older from the hour limitation no longer apply.Furthermore, high-intensity work . . . has been associated with unhealthy andproblem behaviors, including substance use and minor deviance, insufficientsleep and exercise, and limited time spent with families, and it is associatedwith decreased eventual educational attainment.[155]In agriculture the situation is much worse, as there is nohourly restriction for any children working during the school year.Even children as young as twelve may legally work any number of hours duringthe week, regardless of the damage done to their health, their studies, andtheir overall well-being.[156]Special Risks to GirlsYoung female farmworkers face additional pressures andconcerns, including frequent subjection to sexual harassment, discussed below.Children of farmworkers, and especially girls, often are responsible forsignificant duties in the home¾caringfor younger siblings, grocery shopping and food preparation, laundry, andhousecleaning.  Even for those who do not work yet in the fields, theseresponsibilities take the place of necessary study and sleep time, increasingthe chances that they will drop out of school.  "Instead of doinghomework, they are caring for their baby brothers and sisters and taking careof the house.  That's where [the family's poverty] is hurting them,"according to Raúl Redondo, an outreach worker in Yuma, Arizona.[157]In addition, farmworker girls and young women have very high pregnancy rates.In Yuma County, where agriculture is the primary occupation, the teen pregnancyrate is 85.2 per 1,000;[158]the U.S. average, in contrast, is 54.4 per 1,000.[159]SexualHarassmentSexual harassment of female workers is a top concern offarmworker advocates.  Due to various factors, farmworker girls and women areexceptionally vulnerable to sexual harassment and assault.  They work inisolated areas in a male-dominated occupation-female crew leaders andsupervisors are unheard of-where education regarding sexual harassment is inits infancy.  Often, they do not speak English, do not know that sexualharassment is illegal, and in any case have no one to turn to for help.  Many ofthem are undocumented-that is, they have no legal status allowing them to be inthe United States-and therefore are even more hesitant to report theharassment.According to several advocates interviewed by Human RightsWatch, girls and women are subjected routinely to sexual advances by farm laborcontractors and field supervisors.  If they refuse, they-and members of theirfamily-face retaliation in the form of discharge, blacklisting, and evenphysical assault and rape.Two girls picking cantaloupes for a prominent agribusinesstold Human Rights Watch that they had been sexually harassed by theirrespective supervisors.  Co-workers also harassed one of the girls.  Both wereembarrassed in speaking about this and reluctant to provide details.  One ofthe girls, though, gave the following account of harassment she experienced theprevious summer, when she was seventeen.This supervisor, he was about forty-five years old,he was telling me sexual stuff.  He said it in a serious way; I feltthreatened.  One time he told me to go with him to get ice, in his pickup. . .. on the way he asked me to go out with him.  I told him no.  "Why not?"  heasked.  He kept asking me questions, trying to talk me into it.  For weeks hekept asking me.  There was no one to complain to.-Sylvia R., eighteenyears old[160]These girls, who worked in a remote area two hours west ofPhoenix, reported that sexual harassment of young farmworker women was common.Furthermore, both had heard reports of women being attacked, and both said theyknew a local woman who had been raped by her supervisor.  "He always insistedon giving her a ride home, and she ended up raped," said Sylvia R..  "Thathappens."  Human Rights Watch asked Sylvia R. if anything happened to the man."No," she replied.  "He's the boss."Human Rights Watch interviewed a woman in Yuma-not aminor-who said she was fired after resisting a sexual assault by hersupervisor.One day my supervisor saw me downtown and offered mea ride home.  How could I say no?  He's my supervisor!  I know his wife! . . .But when we got to my house he tried to come inside.  He said "Oh, María,I want you so much!" and grabbed my breasts.  I pushed him off me!  I wasshocked!The next morning when I got to work I was told to gohome-they said there was nothing for me.  I asked why.  They said thesupervisor didn't want me there anymore.  After three years!-María,mid-fifties[161]Although any woman working in the fields or the packingsheds is vulnerable to such abuse, young women are thought to be at an evenhigher risk for sexual assault and harassment.  "Young women areparticularly vulnerable," said Cindy O'Hara, a trial attorney with theEqual Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) in San Francisco.[162]"It's often the first job they've had, and they're not equipped to dealwith [the harassment].  They don't have a lot of experience.  A lot have justrecently immigrated and gotten jobs.  They feel they don't have a lot ofoptions.  Many of them are single parents."[163]Sexual harassment in agriculture is particularly difficultto combat.  As noted, the victims of the harassment often live and work ingeographically remote and isolated areas, may not speak English, and usually donot know that they have any legal recourse against the abuse.  Culturally, theymay be embarrassed to talk about it, according to O'Hara.  They also may faceanger from husbands or boyfriends who accuse them of encouraging or enjoyingthe harassing behavior.  "There is a lot of guilt and anxiety [amongharassment victims]," said O'Hara.  "They think, 'What did I do tobring this on?' and become afraid to work, afraid it will happen again."The most pressing deterrent to coming forward with acomplaint is the fear of losing their job.  As eighteen-year-old Sylvia R. toldus, "Everyone is scared to say anything because they threaten them.  If theysay something they will lose their job."[164]In February 1999, the San Francisco District office of theEEOC reached a $1,855,000 settlement with Tanimura & Antle, one of thelargest lettuce growers and distributors in the United States.  The EEOCalleged that a production manager for the company subjected employee BlancaAlfaro to quid pro quo sexual harassment, requiring "sexual favors"as a condition for employment.  Alfaro also allegedly was subjected to ahostile work environment in the form of "constant unwelcome sexualadvances by that production manager and another management employee."[165]Alfaro was fired shortly after she complained about the harassment.  Inaddition, the EEOC alleged that Tanimura & Antle unlawfully retaliatedagainst employee Elias Aragón after he protested the harassment andmistreatment of Blanca Alfaro.[166]Sharing in the settlement will be an as-yet unknown numberof current and former employees who were also subjected to sexual harassment inSalinas, California, Huron, California, and Yuma, Arizona.[167]The EEOC's San Francisco office also settled a sexualharassment case in early 1999 against farm labor contractor C & M Packing,doing business as "Fresh West."[168]That case settled on behalf of four female claimants for $90,000.  LikeTanimura & Antle, Fresh West has facilities in Yuma, Salinas, and Huron.These victories are attributable to EEOC outreach effortsand to the fact that, in the words of attorney O'Hara, "there are somebrave women out there."  Still, these two cases represent but a tinyfraction of the sexual harassment that is occurring in the fields and packingplants of the United States.  The EEOC and state attorneys general-who alsotypically have civil rights jurisdiction-must make it a priority to engage inpersistent outreach and education of workers, supervisors, farm laborcontractors, and employers, and mount vigorous enforcement actions againstharassers when complainants do come forward.IV.  U.S. LAWS AND THEIRENFORCEMENT:AN ONGOING FAILURE TOPROTECT CHILDRENWORKING IN AGRICULTUREEveryone violates the law one way or another.[169]This report details the ways in which juvenile farmworkersare endangered and exploited on a daily basis.  They work too many hours attoo-young ages, burdened with fatigue when they should be studying, playing, orat school.  They are not paid minimum wage.  Their safety is compromised andtheir health is at risk.  They are also, for the most part, unprotected by theU.S. government.The United States prides itself on respect for human rightsand frequently decries child labor practices in other countries.  The FairLabor Standards Act prohibits "oppressive child labor," defined aswork that may be detrimental to children's health or well-being.[170]Yet hundreds of thousands of juveniles working in agriculture do labor underoppressive conditions in the U.S.There are several reasons for this, high among them the factthat U.S. law is grossly and unjustifiably inadequate¾not only does it offer insufficient protection for farmworkerchildren and adolescents, but it offers them vastly less protection than itdoes for juveniles working in other occupations.  Further worsening thesituation, government enforcement of even these deficient laws is sporadic andweak.  In addition, Congress has eviscerated in recent years the ability ofpublicly-funded legal aid offices to assist farmworkers, by prohibitingclass-action lawsuits and prohibiting the representation of persons in the U.S.without proper documentation.[171]In sum, juvenile farmworkers are left with limited protection and few means ofrecourse when their rights are violated.The Fair LaborStandards Act and Enforcement by the Department of LaborThe Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) is the federal law thatsets minimum ages for work, maximum numbers of work-hours per day and per week,and the minimum hourly wage.  It originated in 1938 and has been modifiednumerous times since.  Farmworkers originally were not protected at all by thelaw, and still are not covered fully.  It was not until 1974 that restrictionson child labor in agriculture¾albeitminimal¾were incorporated.The most glaring deficiency of the FLSA is its disparatetreatment of farmworker and nonfarmworker children.  Children working innonagricultural occupations receive much greater protection against excessivehours of work, work at early ages, and work under hazardous conditions.  Inother words, as put by the General Accounting Office, "children canlegally work in agriculture under conditions that would be illegal in otherwork settings."[172]For example:·In agriculture, employers may hire children younger than twelveto work unlimited hours outside of school, provided the work takes placeon a small farm with written parental consent.  Outside of agriculture, theemployment of children younger than twelve is prohibited.[173]·In agriculture, employers may hire children aged twelve andthirteen to work unlimited hours outside of school, provided they havewritten parental consent or work on a farm where a parent is employed.  Outsideof agriculture, employment of children aged twelve and thirteen is forbidden.·In agriculture, employers may hire children aged fourteen andfifteen to work unlimited hours outside of school.  There is no parentalconsent requirement.  Outside of agriculture, children aged fourteen andfifteen may work limited hours:  up to forty hours in a nonschool week; up toeighteen hours in a school week; up to eight hours on a nonschool day; and upto three hours on a school day.  In addition, outside of agriculture, fourteenand fifteen-year olds may not work before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. (9 p.m.in the summer).  There are no similar restrictions protecting children working inagriculture.·In agriculture, employers may require or allow sixteen andseventeen-year olds to work in hazardous occupations.  In nonagriculturaloccupations, the minimum age for hazardous work is eighteen.  This disparatetreatment is particularly troublesome given agriculture's position as the mostdangerous occupation for working children in the United States.[174]Historically, agricultural employment practices in the U.S.have been regulated less than other occupations.  Partly this is due to the UnitedStates inception as an agrarian society, and a lingering idealization of theagrarian life.[175]Partly it is due to the unique nature of farm work and the cycles of harvest,whose rapidly changing and sometimes unpredictable needs rarely coincide with aforty-hour per week, year-round work schedule.For juvenile farmworkers, the differential treatment stillpresent at the beginning of the 21st century stems from the vastly differentcircumstances found in the United States one hundred or even fifty years ago.In 1900, less than 10 percent of eighteen-year-olds finished high school,[176]and approximately 42 percent of the United States population lived on familyfarms.[177]Children of farm families were expected to work and learn all aspects offarming, which would continue to be their occupation into adulthood.In 1938, when the FLSA was enacted, nearly a quarter of theUnited States population still lived on farms,[178]and only 50 percent of teenagers were finishing high school.[179]At that time, the FLSA included restrictions on nonagricultural work forchildren, but no restrictions whatsoever on farm work for children.Today, only about 1.5 percent of United States residentslive on farms.[180]Farms have changed form dramatically in the past decades; mechanization, specialization,fertilizers, and other technical innovations have led to the phenomenal growthof large-scale agriculture and the simultaneous decline of the small familyfarm.  As a result, where once most children in agriculture were working ontheir own family farms, now most are working as hired hands for commercialenterprises.Concurrent with this change in farming has been a change ineducation practices, including a heightened emphasis on secondary-schooleducation for all.  By 1997, the high school completion rate had risen tonearly 90 percent.[181]There exists now a widespread recognition that children not only have a rightto a full education, but that they have a need for that education, and,without it, are likely to end up relegated to a minimum subsistence-level job(of which farm work is one example).With all of these changes, the rationale for protectingchild workers in agriculture less than all other child workers has evaporated.Children working on farms have the same need for sleep, health, education, andrecreation as their nonfarmworking peers.  Poverty does not change that, nordoes it eliminate these children's right to enjoy full government protection.If excessive child labor is bad for some, then it is bad for all.Occasionally, efforts to protect child workers from thedeleterious effects of long hours in difficult and demanding jobs are met withskepticism and disapproval, on the grounds that limiting children's work hourswill have a negative economic impact on them and their family.  This is ashort-sighted objection.  Limiting the extreme aspects of child labor mayreduce children's-and therefore families'-incomes in the short term.  In thelong-term, however, favoring education over menial labor vastly increases theprobability that the cycle of poverty will be broken.  One farmworker advocatein New York state observed that, "At a family level, parents usually want theirkids to be able to work.  Because the families are so caught up in their dailyeconomic needs, it's difficult for them to look at the long-term effects ontheir kids of this dangerous, hazardous work."[182]The disparate legal treatment outlined above is unfair anddiscriminatory.  Furthermore, its impact is felt predominantly by juveniles ofracial minorities.  This is due to the close correlation between race andoccupation in farmwork.  Nationally, approximately 85 percent of farmworkers,including juvenile farmworkers, are members of racial minorities; most of themare Latino.[183]In some regions, including Arizona and California, 99 percent of farmworkersare Latino.  This means that the FLSA's two-tiered scheme of protection¾one for farmworker children, one for allother working children¾correspondsclosely to race and ethnicity.  By explicitly discriminating against farmworkerchildren, most of whom are Latino, the law also engages in de factodiscrimination along racial lines.  This may violate international law, as willbe discussed in the following chapter.Proposed Amendments tothe FLSA Regarding Child Labor in AgricultureIn the House of Representatives, Representative Tom Lantos(Democrat from California) has for the past twelve years introduced the"Young American Workers' Bill of Rights."[184]The bill is widely supported by children's advocates.  It would enhanceprotection for many working children, including children working inagriculture. Among other provisions, the bill would amend the FLSA to:·Specify that "oppressive child labor," forbidden underthe Act, expressly applies to the employment of migrant farmworkers agedthirteen and under.·For all working youth, restrict after-school work to fifteen totwenty hours per week, depending on age, and eliminate entirely before-schoolwork.·Broaden the FLSA's coverage to include all employers engaged in interstatecommerce, regardless of their annual volume of sales.[185](Currently, the FLSA only applies to enterprises with $500,000 in annual salesor business.)·Establish tougher criminal and civil penalties for child laborviolations.·Provide for closer coordination among federal and state childlabor enforcement agencies.In the 106th session of Congress, the proposed YoungAmerican Workers' Bill of Rights had fifty-eight cosponsors but enjoyed onlylimited bipartisan support.[186]It is not expected to pass.  "Kids don't have high-priced lobbyists,"Lantos aide Chris Walker told Human Rights Watch.  "[The employers] havestrong lobbyists."[187]In past sessions, Senator Tom Harkin (Democrat from Iowa)has introduced Senate legislation titled "The Children's Act forResponsible Employment," or CARE.  CARE, which was not introduced in the106th session but will likely be introduced again in the future, seeks to amendthe FLSA to: raise the age at which youth may engage in hazardous agriculturallabor from sixteen to eighteen; apply the same age and hour restrictions toagricultural employment as to other forms of employment; and increase civil andcriminal penalties for child labor violations.Enforcement of the FLSAIt is estimated that there are at least one million childlabor violations in the United States each year in agriculture and 100,000minors working illegally-that is, in violation of child labor laws--on farms.[188]Only a tiny fraction of these violations are uncovered by the Wage and HourDivision (WHD) of the Department of Labor (DOL), which bears responsibility forthe FLSA enforcement.  In 1998, for example, WHD found 104 minors illegallyemployed in agriculture[189]¾one for every 1,000 estimated to be workingillegally in the fields.Inadequate ResourcesPart of the problem is insufficient resources.  The Wage andHour Division does not have enough staff and funding to uncover and investigatethe FLSA violations affecting minors in agriculture.  As of late 1999, WHD hadabout 940 investigators to cover the entire country, inspecting and citing forviolations against adult and child workers alike in all occupations, not justagriculture.[190]This is slightly fewer investigators than the agency had in 1987.[191]It works out to roughly one investigator for every 150,000 civilian workers.[192]Investigators are responsible for enforcing several dozens of laws.None of these investigators, also called enforcementofficers, are dedicated exclusively to child labor; only twenty-three aredesignated as farm labor specialists.[193]Inadequate funding means that even this relatively smallstaff is underutilized.  Child labor in agriculture currently is a "targetedinitiative" for WHD, which means that the agency proactively enforces the lawrather than waiting for complaints to arise before initiating investigations."We have a very intense and vigorous enforcement program relating toagriculture," WHD's Child Labor Coordinator told Human Rights Watch.[194]The money to carry out this program, however, appearslacking, forcing some investigators to cut short their efforts.  In Arizona, aWHD investigator had to call off a series of field investigations in theWillcox area after only two weeks, several weeks earlier than planned.[195]She was told there was a sudden budget crisis and that there were no more fundsfor travel.  Given that Arizona's major agricultural areas are two to fourhours from Phoenix, being grounded to headquarters drastically reducesenforcement possibilities.  "There's not even enough money to go to Yuma," shelamented.[196]The Yuma area has about 75 percent of Arizona's farmworkers.There is no doubt that widespread violations are out thereand that WHD is capable of finding them when staff and resources aresufficiently allocated.  In a 1998 investigation of grape growers, WHD foundthat, in California, more than 50 percent of farm labor contractors wereviolating the FLSA's minimum wage requirement.[197]In Arizona, 50 percent of grape growers and 60 percent of farm laborcontractors were found in violation of the FLSA, and 53 percent of all grapefield workers were owed back wages.[198](The reports did not distinguish between juvenile and adult workers.)  Theproblem is not an inability to find labor violations, but getting enoughinvestigators out into the fields.Child Labor inAgriculture Not a PriorityUntil fiscal year 1998, WHD enforcement in agriculture wasminimal.  In fiscal year 1997, for example, the agency reported only fourteenchild labor violations in agriculture.[199]"Until the Salad Bowl initiative, the Department of Labor's history was not tofocus on agriculture at all," according to Darlene Adkins of the NationalConsumers League Child Labor Coalition.  "Their levels of enforcement inagriculture were very low; basically they had no presence in agriculture."[200]The low priority of child labor in agriculture changedsomewhat in fiscal year 1998 (October 1997 through September 1998), when theDepartment of Labor launched a "salad bowl" initiative.  The "salad bowl"program targeted five crops¾lettuce,tomatoes, cucumbers, onions, and garlic¾forincreased compliance within a five-year period.  Labor law violations arecommon in all of these labor-intensive, hand-harvested crops.  Differentregional offices tailored their salad bowls to reflect area crops:  in Arizona,chili peppers and green peppers were added; in New Jersey, blueberries; inMaryland, melons; in Louisiana, strawberries.  The number of violations foundincreased considerably¾from fourteen in1997 to 104 in 1998¾but still remainedextraordinarily low.[201]Ineffective SanctionsEven when violations are found, sanctions generally are weakand ineffective.  The Wage and Hour Division can assess civil money penaltiesin the case of child labor violations (for example, underage workers) and forrepeated and willful wage violations (WHD does not have statutory authority toassess penalties for first-time wage violations).  The amount of civil moneypenalties ordered for child labor violations in 1990 averaged only $212 perviolation.[202]Wage and Hour Division officials told Human Rights Watch they did not know whatthe average penalty per child labor violation was in fiscal year 1998, but thatthe average penalty for all Wage and Hour violations was $971.[203]Since 1991, the maximum civil money penalty available for a nonwillful childlabor violation has been $10,000.  In practice, fines at that level areassessed only in cases of death or serious injury.[204]For most growers, fines are relatively insignificant and itis easier and cheaper for them to violate the law and risk a fine than tocomply with the law¾especially sincelow rates of enforcement mean detection is rare.  An Arizona investigator toldHuman Rights Watch that "the fines are not strong enough.  I had a grower sayto me, "The fine is only $1,000; I'll just pay it and keep doing things as Iam."[205]The same investigator noted that the Phoenix districtoffice, in a search for something more effective than civil money penalties,has increasingly turned to civil court injunctions, memoranda of understanding,and the FLSA's "hot goods" provision.[206]This trend, true of WHD's efforts nationwide, is a laudable and promisingtactic.The "hot goods" provision did not come into use by WHD until1998, although it has been part of the FLSA since its origination in 1938.  Theprovision prohibits the shipment in interstate commerce of any goods producedin violation of minimum wage, overtime, or child labor requirements.[207]It can be extremely effective, particularly in agriculture, in that it allowsthe WHD to seek temporary restraining orders preventing the movement of taintedgoods.  This creates great incentives for companies, growers, and otheraffected businesses to cooperate with WHD.  Such cooperation has includedfuture compliance agreements and arrangements for ongoing monitoring.Use of the "hot goods" provision is still an exceptionrather than the rule.  According to Department of Labor officials, statisticson its use are unavailable.[208]Growers' Avoidance ofLiabilityIn addition to weak sanctions, another common obstacle tothe FLSA enforcement in agriculture is growers' distancing of themselves fromtheir workers through the use of farm labor contractors.  The maneuver, largelysuccessful so far, seeks to avoid grower liability for labor violations by maintainingthat the workers are not employees of the grower, but of the farm laborcontractor exclusively.  Of course, this is a total fiction.  The growers ownor lease the land and determine planting, cultivation, and harvesting methodsand schedules.  They also pay, via the contractors, for all of the work that isdone.When growers avoid liability in this manner, there are tworesults.  First, the growers escape accountability and are free to continue theviolating practices; and second, workers' back pay, fines, and other penaltiesare unlikely to be collected, as many farm labor contractors are itinerant andwithout assets.   In other words, nobody pays.The Wage and Hour Division can beat this unjust maneuveringby finding joint employment¾andtherefore joint liability¾between thegrower and the farm labor contractor.  WHD¾whichonly recently began to seek joint liability in the farmworker context¾determines joint employment by looking at avariety of factors, including: whether the grower has the authority to control,either directly or indirectly, the workers or the work they perform; whetherthe grower has control over employment conditions or wage payment; and whetherthe work performed is an integral part of the grower's business.[209]Other labor experts contend that joint employment under theFLSA (as well as under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker ProtectionAct (MSPA), also enforced by WHD[210])is much broader, and includes all instances where growers "suffer or permit"the workers to work.[211]This approach more accurately reflects the language and intent of the FLSA,which defines "employ" as "to suffer or permit to work."[212]Failure to Coordinatewith StatesNot all states regulate child labor in agriculture.  Ofthose that do, not all enforce their laws.  In a 1999 survey by the Child LaborCoalition, only ten states reported targeting child labor compliance inagriculture the previous year.[213]Of these ten states, only four¾California,Florida, New Jersey, and New York¾reporteda significant number of investigations.[214]Inexplicably, the Wage and Hour Division does not coordinateits efforts with those of the individual states.  A state's level of childlabor law enforcement is not taken into account in determining federalenforcement efforts.[215]Indeed, WHD does not even collect state enforcement statistics, meaning theydo not know which states, and to what extent, are participating at all incombating child labor in agriculture.[216]The Wage and Hour Division's failure to coordinate with thestates¾or at least take into accountstate practices when formulating their own goals and strategies¾means that resources may not be used totheir best advantage.  Efforts may be duplicated in some states; in others, aneed for a heightened WHD presence may go unnoticed.  In all cases, informationsharing between state and federal labor departments would be appropriate,useful, and likely to increase positive enforcement results.The Worker ProtectionStandard and other Environmental Protection Agency Regulations and theirEnforcementIn 1992, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)promulgated a Worker Protection Standard intended to "reduce the risks ofillness or injury resulting from . . . occupational exposures to pesticides . .."[217]This regulation was a significant step forward in protecting the health offarmworkers.  The Worker Protection Standard forbids employers from requiringor allowing workers, other than trained pesticide handlers, to enter or remainin areas being treated with pesticides.  It requires employers to notifyworkers when areas have been treated by pesticides, either orally, by means ofprominently-posted "Danger" signs, or both, depending on thepesticide's labeling statement.  The Standard further requires that workers betrained regarding pesticide safety, pesticide-related illnesses, and emergencyresponses to pesticide exposure.Restricted-entry intervals (REIs) are also set by the EPAbut do not form part of the Worker Protection Standard itself.[218]Restricted-entry intervals refer to the period of time after a pesticide'sapplication during which workers should not be in the treated areas.  Generallyspeaking, the shortest REI is twelve hours and the longest is seventy-twohours.[219]Dry conditions¾as in the Arizona desert¾may necessitate a longer REI, particularlyamong toxicity category I pesticides, which are the most toxic.[220]The problem with the Worker Protection Standard and the REIregulations is that they are formulated with adults¾and only adults¾inmind.  Restricted-entry intervals are determined using the model of a 154-poundadult male.  There is no prohibition on children mixing, handling, or applyingpesticides.  Despite the greater vulnerability of juveniles to pesticides,there is no special consideration for them in the EPA regulations at all.The Worker Protection Standard, although a federalregulation, is enforced by the individual states, usually by their departmentsof agriculture.[221]In an interview with Human Rights Watch, a top EPA official said that theagency "has concern for the lack of consistency state to state regardingenforcement. . . .  We're talking about enforcement of a national standard, andwe'd like to think there was [consistency in enforcement], but we're not thatnaive."[222]A national assessment by EPA of how the states are implementing and enforcingthe regulations is underway as of the end of 1999.[223]In response to outside concern and inquiries¾notably by the General Accounting Office[224]and a coalition of prominent nongovernmental organizations[225]¾the EPA also began in the late 1990s to lookat children as a special population in need of protection.  As of this writingin late 1999, however, no new protections for farmworker juveniles had beenproposed by the EPA.Arizona Enforcement ofEPA RegulationsIn Arizona, pesticide enforcement is carried out by theEnvironmental Services Division of the Arizona Department of Agriculture.  Inaddition to pesticide compliance and enforcement, the division is responsiblefor registering and licensing feed, fertilizers, and pesticides.There are two immediate areas of concern regarding Arizona'senforcement of federal pesticide regulations.  The first, probably true for allstate agriculture departments, is that the department itself and most of itsinspectors have traditionally served the needs of growers, not workers.  Thisis reflected in the Department of Agriculture's Mission Statement:  "Toregulate and support Arizona agriculture in a manner that encourages farming,ranching, and agribusiness while protecting consumers and natural resources."[226]It contains not a word about protecting agricultural workers.This attitude was revealed also in an informal andunsolicited comment made to Human Rights Watch by an inspector in Yuma, whosaid that when growers violated worker safety standards he preferred not tocite them.  "I prefer to work with the grower," he said.  "I prefer toget voluntary compliance."[227]A federal EPA official also acknowledged that state agriculture inspectors maybe biased toward growers.[228]A second problem is that only two of Arizona's elevenEnvironmental Services inspectors are bilingual in English and Spanish.  Giventhat approximately 99 percent of Arizona's farmworkers are Spanish-speaking,[229]the lack of bilingual inspectors raises serious doubts regarding the ability ofArizona to adequately ensure pesticide-use compliance and the commitment of thestate to this mandate.Field SanitationStandards:  Federal OSHA and OSHA-Approved State Plans and their EnforcementIn 1987, the federal Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration (OSHA) issued a Field Sanitation Standard.  The Standardrequires agricultural employers to provide workers with:(1)  Cool and potable drinking water in sufficientamounts, dispensed by single-use drinking cups or by fountains and readilyaccessible to all; and(2)  One toilet and a handwashing facility for eachtwenty employees, located within a quarter-mile walk.OSHA predicted that implementation of this standard wouldreduce by hundreds of thousands the annual incidence of farmworker illnesses,injuries, and deaths, including heat-related deaths and injuries, parasiticintestinal illnesses, pesticide-related illnesses, and urinary tractinfections.[230]Aside from enforcement problems, the primary weakness of theField Sanitation Standard is that Congress annually limits its application toagricultural establishments that employ eleven or more people as hand laborers.[231]Farms employing fewer than eleven hand laborers are exempt.  As a result,hundreds of thousands of farmworkers, including juveniles, may not have accessto basic sanitation and health requirements.  Even worse, the limit of OSHAjurisdiction to farms with eleven or more workers is absolute, extending farbeyond field sanitation¾it applies evento cases where workers face unsafe working conditions or where a catastrophe orfatality has occurred.  Whatever happens on a farm with ten or fewer employees,OSHA may not investigate.Individual states may develop and operate their ownoccupational safety and health programs.  These programs, called State Plans,must be approved and monitored by federal OSHA.  Once in place, they supplant(with limited exceptions) direct federal OSHA enforcement in that state.As of December 1999, twenty-one states had approved StatePlans.[232]Of these, only four¾Alaska, Arizona,Oregon, and Washington¾required farmswith ten or fewer workers to comply with field sanitation standards.[233]Arizona's state-plan jurisdiction extends to all farms with five or moreworkers.  Some employers attempt to dodge the sanitation regulations bysplitting up their workers into crews of four, each in a different field(thereby giving the appearance of no more than four workers), or by hiringtheir labor via farm labor contractors.[234]Even when the standards do apply, violations are rampant.According to the General Accounting Office, violations were found in 69 percentof all federal field inspections conducted in 1990.[235]Despite this high rate of violations, enforcement is minimal.  The GAO reportedin 1998 that "OSHA has devoted less than 3 percent of its inspections over thepast 5 years to agriculture, even though agriculture is often considered to beone of the most hazardous industries."[236]States with their own OSHA plans generally fare no better,and may have even lower rates of compliance, depending on their standards andthe vigor with which inspections take place and violations are cited andfined.  A 1990 study in North Carolina found that "only 4 percent of thehired farmworkers surveyed had access to drinking water, . . . handwashing andtoilet facilities."[237]Arizona OSHAIn Arizona, the state most closely examined by Human RightsWatch, there is very little enforcement of field sanitation standards or otherhealth and safety regulations.  The Industrial Commission's Division ofOccupational Safety and Health (hereinafter Arizona OSHA) has jurisdiction overall farm health and safety issues, not just field sanitation.  The agency,however, does not make any farm inspections on its own initiative."We don't do farm inspections unless we receive a complaint from anemployee or a referral from another government agency," said Art Morelos,Compliance Supervisor for the Tucson office.[238]Morelos noted that "I'm sure a lot [of farmworkers] get hurt that we neverhear about."[239]The Tucson office is responsible for seven southern Arizonacounties, including Yuma County, where about 75 percent of Arizona farmworktakes place.  The office averages only thirty to fifty farm inspections a year,almost all of them the result of referrals from farmworker advocates in otheragencies, including legal aid workers.There is general agreement that farmworkers rarely initiatecomplaints themselves.  The primary reason, discussed earlier in this report,is fear of retribution.  Farmworkers are simply too vulnerable; to complain isto risk their job.  In addition to fear, farmworkers are unlikely to know thatthey have a right to clean and plentiful drinking water, toilet facilities, anda place to wash their hands.  Morelos acknowledged both of these concerns."They're afraid of losing their jobs; afraid to speak up because ofretaliation.  They don't know what their rights are."Nor are they likely to learn what their rights are, asArizona's state OSHA does not engage in farmworker education regarding minimumsanitation standards.  Even if workers did know that their rights were beingviolated and wanted to complain, however, they would have yet another hurdle tocross¾filing the complaint.  Both stateregulations and state-OSHA policy requires all complaints, including complaintsfrom workers, to be submitted in writing.[240]Nor is there a toll-free number that workers can call, whether to make acomplaint, find out how to make a complaint, or ask for information.  The vastmajority of farmworkers, of course, live in rural areas, are very poor, andhave minimal educational backgrounds.  Many do not speak English.  Given theseconditions and circumstances, it is not surprising that worker complaints arerare.[241]Several farmworker advocates reported that, when they domake referrals to state OSHA, the response is slow and ineffective.  They alsocomplained of a rigid insistence on receiving written information regardingviolations, a requirement that the regulations themselves do not extend toreferring agencies.  One advocate said, "I call with a complaint, they tell meto fax it in.  Fax it!  I'm in the middle of nowhere!  Do they thinkfarmworkers are going to be able to fax in their complaints?"[242]Arizona OSHA has shown little interest in establishing apresence outside of the two major metropolitan areas of Tucson and Phoenix.There is no office in Yuma, not even a seasonal office during the peak growingseason.  OSHA trips to remote areas¾wheremuch agricultural work takes place, and where, because of a lack of oversightand government intervention, abuses are most plentiful¾are reportedly very rare.Part of the problem appears to be due to understaffing.  TheTucson office of Arizona OSHA, responsible for an area with approximately onemillion residents, has five inspectors.  They have jurisdiction over allworkplaces except mines and on federal installations and reservations.  Theyare so understaffed that they do not investigate farm accidents unless there isa fatality or a catastrophe (three or more people hospitalized due to a singleaccident).[243]When occupational violations are found and agriculturalemployers cited, it is usually the farm labor contractor alone who facesliability.  "The growers got wise," said Art Morelos.  "Becausewhoever pays the workers has to also pay the workers comp insurance,transportation insurance, deal with sanitation, worry about OSHA, etc."[244]He also noted that farm labor contractors generally have fewer resources andare more difficult to collect fines from than are growers.  Unlike the U.S.Department of Labor, Arizona OSHA is not yet pursuing the growers themselvesvia a theory of joint liability.V.  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH INTERNATIONAL LAWThe United States violates multiple provisions ofinternational treaties in its treatment of farmworker children.  The failure toprotect farmworker children equally with nonfarmworker children violates theright to equal protection of the law, found not only in the United StatesConstitution but also in the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  The United States alsois in violation of provisions requiring the protection of children fromeconomic exploitation and from dangerous or otherwise harmful workingconditions.Additional international standards are violated by thefailure of the U.S. to enforce its laws that do purport to protectchildren working in agriculture.  These various infractions of internationallaw are discussed below.Violation of InternationalNon-Discrimination LawsUnited States law-which sets a lower standard of protectionfor child farmworkers than for children working in other occupations-violatesvarious international treaties forbidding discriminatory laws and practices.Article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)states that "[a]ll persons are equal before the law and are entitled withoutany discrimination to the equal protection of the law. . . ."  The UnitedStates has been a State Party to the ICCPR since 1992.  Article 2 of theConvention on the Rights of the Child requires States Parties (which the U.S.is not, having signed but not ratified the Convention) to respect and ensureall rights enumerated in the convention-which include several applicable tochild farmworkers (see below)-without discrimination of any kind.  Among thosebases of discrimination explicitly forbidden are race, color, language, andnational, ethnic or social origin.ILO ConventionConcerning the Prohibition and Immediate Elimination of the Worst Forms ofChild Labour (Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention)In 1999, the International Labour Organization adopted aconvention calling for all ratifying Member States "to secure theprohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour as a matter ofurgency."[245]The United States ratified this convention on December 2, 1999.  Prior toadoption of the convention, the United States government spoke strongly in itsfavor, urging ILO Members to "join together and to say there are somethings we cannot and will not tolerate."[246]Unfortunately, the United States itself witnesses andtolerates extreme forms of child labor that undoubtedly fall within theintended purview of the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention.Under the convention, "the worst forms of childlabour" include, among others, "work which, by its nature or thecircumstances in which it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safetyor morals of children."[247]Exactly what constitutes such types of work is left to be determined by MemberStates, in consultation with employer and worker organizations and inconsideration of international standards, particularly the ILO Worst Forms ofChild Labour Recommendation.[248]This Recommendation, adopted in 1999 in conjunction with the convention of thesame name, states that:In determining the types of work referred to underArticle 3(d) of the Convention [the "worst forms of child labour"definition], and in identifying where they exist, consideration should begiven, as a minimum, to:(a) work which exposes children to physical,emotional or sexual abuse;(b) work underground, under water, at dangerousheights or in confined spaces;(c) work with dangerous machinery, equipment andtools, or which involves the manual handling or transport of heavy loads;(d) work in an unhealthy environment which may, forexample, expose children to hazardous substances, agents or processes, or totemperatures, noise levels, or vibrations damaging to their health;(e) work under particularly difficult conditionssuch as work for long hours or during the night or work which does not allowfor the possibility of returning home each day.[249]As seen in this report, children working in agriculture inthe United States-who number in the hundreds of thousands-face the risksoutlined in subparagraphs (c) through (e):  work with dangerous machinery,equipment, and tools; work in an unhealthy environment, including exposure tohazardous substances, notably pesticides; and work for long hours, during thenight, or without the possibility of returning home each day.  In addition,female farmworkers may face the danger of subparagraph (a) (exposure to sexualabuse).It is apparent, then, that farm work in the U.S. sometimesruns a high risk of harming the health and safety of children, and does in manycases meet the definitional requirements of the "worst forms of childlabor."  Consequently, as a ratifying member state of the Worst Forms ofChild Labour Convention, the United States is under an affirmative obligationto take immediate and effective steps to ascertain what forms and conditions ofchild labor in agriculture violate the convention and then eliminate them.The convention further calls on member states to:  preventchildren from engaging in the worst forms of child labor; provide directassistance for the removal of children already engaged in the worst forms ofchild labor; identify and reach out to children at risk; and take account ofthe special situation of girls.[250]Far from acknowledging the danger of farm work to childrenand taking these appropriate steps, the United States by law permitschildren to engage in agricultural labor with fewer restrictions than childrenworking in other areas.  This includes permitting children to engage inhazardous agricultural work.Even worse, the United States government mistakenly contendsthat the United States is already in full compliance with the Worst Forms ofChild Labour Convention.  While eager to point out abusive child laborpractices in Guatemala, Brazil, Pakistan, and other developing countries,[251]the United States is myopic when it comes to domestic abuses.  In announcingU.S. ratification of the Convention, the White House declared that ratification"would require no changes in U.S. law and practice.  U.S. law alreadyprohibits the worst forms of child labor, and law enforcement and socialservice programs are in place to implement the requirements of theConvention."[252]This conclusion was the work of "a Presidentialadvisory group of labor, business, and government experts."[253]This "advisory group" appears to fall substantially short of thebroad-spectrum consultative process called for in article 4 of the Conventionand mentioned above.  The "advisory group" utilized is a standingadvisory panel, the Tripartite Advisory Panel on International Labor Standards.[254]It consists of attorneys representing the following:·the United States Secretary of Labor;·the United States Secretary of State;·the United States Secretary of Commerce;·the President of the AFL-CIO (American Federation of Labor andCongress of Industrial Organizations);·the President of the U.S. Council for International Business.[255]Legal counsel for the PresidentialAdvisors on National Security and Economics also participate.[256]In other words, the U.S. "advisory group,"consisted of five people appointed from government, one from business, and onefrom labor-a lopsided arrangement at best.In its report, this advisory panel concluded that therewould be no need for the U.S. government to formally consult with worker andemployer organizations to identify where the worst forms of child labor exist(as required by Article 4(2)) because "[e]mployer and worker organizations,along with the general public, have regular access to the Department of Laborand other government agencies . . ."[257]The Convention on theRights of the ChildThe United States has signed but not ratified the Conventionon the Rights of the Child (CRC).  (The only other country that has notratified the convention is Somalia, which has no functioning government.)Notwithstanding the failure of the U.S. to ratify it, the convention providesstrong guidance as to the minimum protections to which children-definedas all those under the age of eighteen-are entitled.  Several provisions of theconvention apply to farmworker children.The United States' violation of article 32 is the mostglaring of its violations and is implicated directly by the findings of thisreport.  This article addresses exploitation in employment.  It states thatchildren have a right "to be protected from economic exploitation and fromperforming any work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with thechild's education, or to be harmful to the child's health or physical, mental,spiritual, moral or social development."  The article calls on governmentsto take appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educationalmeasures in this regard, and especially to provide for a minimum age ofemployment, appropriate regulation of work hours and conditions of employment,and appropriate sanctions to ensure enforcement of the article.Article 24 recognizes the right of all children to a highstandard of health and to healthcare facilities, and calls on governments "toensure the provision of necessary medical assistance and health care to allchildren."  Compliance with this standard is compromised in the U.S. bythe spotty availability of health care and medical clinics for farmworkingchildren (as well as all children-farmworkers and otherwise-of agriculturallaborers).  Farmworkers don't usually earn enough to pay for health careout-of-pocket, and rarely can afford health insurance.  According to aspokesperson for the National Center for Farmworker Health, almost allfarmworker children are eligible for Medicaid,[258]but difficulties in enrollment and the lack of state-to-state portability,however, mean that relatively few are able to utilize it.[259]Less than 15 percent of farmworkers have access to federally-subsidized healthclinics.[260]Article 28 of the convention recognizes the right of allchildren to education.  It instructs governments to make education"available and accessible to all," and to "[t]ake measures toencourage regular attendance at schools and the reduction of drop-outrates."  In the United States, the school drop-out rate among farmworkerchildren is 45 percent.Finally, article 3 of the Convention on the Rights of theChild states that "In all actions concerning children . . . the best interests ofthe child shall be a primary consideration."ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis report was researched and written by Lee Tucker,consultant to the Children's Rights Division of Human Rights Watch.  It wasedited by Lois Whitman, Executive Director of the Children's Rights Division,and Michael McClintock, Deputy Program Director of Human Rights Watch.  OtherHuman Rights Watch staff who assisted substantially in the review orpreparation of this report were:  Dinah PoKempner, Deputy General Counsel ofHuman Rights Watch; Jo Becker, Children's Rights Division Advocacy Director;Shalu Rozario, Children's Rights Division Associate; and Lance Compa, ProgramResearcher.We are grateful to the many people and organizations whooffered their assistance and expertise in connection with this report, not allof whom can be named.  In particular, we thank: Diane Mull of the Associationof Farmworker Opportunity Programs; Darlene Adkins of the National ConsumersLeague Child Labor Coalition; Emma Torres, Coordinator of Bridges inFriendship:  A Project of the Border Health Foundation; Gary Restaino, formerstaff attorney of Community Legal Services in Phoenix; RupertSandoval, Coordinator of the Arizona Interagency Farmworkers Coalition; DavidDick and Maria Elena Badilla of Pinal-Gila Legal Aid Society; Janice Porter andSister Emily Gezich of Aguila, Arizona; BlancaRodriguez, United Farm Workers attorney in Sunnyside, Washington; GinaLombardi of the National Center for Farmworker Health; Michelle Gonzalez Arroyoof the Labor Occupational Health Program at the University of California inBerkeley; and Dr. Marion Moses of the Pesticide Information Center.  Dr. John Arnold of Project PPEP in Tucson offered greatassistance by putting us in touch with several other Project PPEP staff members¾teachers KarenLowe, Jimmy Pruitt, and Doug Davidson, and regional directors Augie Zaragozaand Raoul Salazar¾all of whomwere extremely helpful and to whom we give our heartfelt thanks.Many government officials gave graciously of their time,sharing information and responding to our queries.  Our thanks to: CorlisSellers, Libby Hendrix, and Esther LaPlante of the U.S. Department of Labor;Marcos Cordoba of the Arizona Department of Economic Security; Art Morelos ofthe Industrial Commission of Arizona; Frank Zamudio of the Arizona Departmentof Agriculture; Kevin Keaney of the Environmental Protection Agency; and CindyO'Hara of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.The Natural Resources Defense Council's excellent report,"Trouble on the Farm:  Growing up with Pesticides in Agricultural Communities,"was invaluable to our report and is cited numerous times.  We gratefullyacknowledge the NRDC and author Dr. Gina Solomon for this outstandingcontribution, as well as their ongoing work aimed at protecting children frompesticides.  We also acknowledge the National Research Council and theInstitute of Medicine for their comprehensive 1998 book, Protecting Youth atWork, cited frequently in our reportAbove all, Human Rights Watch would like to thank all of thechildren and youth who shared their experiences with us, making this reportpossible.  In order to protect their privacy, all of their names have beenchanged except where otherwise noted.APPENDIX A: Selected Provisions of the Fair LaborStandards Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 201 - 219Sec. 206.  Minimum wage(a)  Employees engaged in commerce; . . . agriculturalemployeesEvery employer shall pay to each of his employees who in anyworkweek is engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce, oris employed in an enterprise engaged in commerce or in the production of goodsfor commerce, wages at the following rates:(1)exceptas otherwise provided in this section, not less than $4.25 an hour during theperiod ending on September 30, 1996, not less than $4.75 an hour during theyear beginning on October 1, 1996, and not less than $5.15 an hour beginningSeptember 1,  1997 . . .Sec. 207.  Maximum hours(a) Employees engaged in interstate commerce; additionalapplicability to employees pursuant to subsequent amendatory provisions(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, noemployer shall employ any of his employees who in any workweek is engaged incommerce or in the production of goods for commerce, or is employed in anenterprise engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce, fora workweek longer than forty hours unless such employee receives compensation forhis employment in excess of the hours above specified at a rate not less thanone and one-half times the regular rate at which he is employed.(2) No employer shall employ any of his employees who in anyworkweek is engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce, oris employed in an enterprise engaged in commerce or in the production of goodsfor commerce, and who in such workweek is brought within the purview of thissubsection by the amendments made to this chapter by the Fair Labor StandardsAmendments of 1966 –(A) for a workweek longer than forty-four hours during thefirst year from the effective date of the Fair Labor Standards Amendments of1966,(B) for a workweek longer than forty-two hours during thesecond year from such date, or(C) for a workweek longer than forty hours after theexpiration of the second year from such date, unless such employee receivescompensation for his employment in excess of the hours above specified at arate not less than one and one-half times the regular rate at which he isemployed.Sec. 212. Child labor provisionsRestrictions on shipment of goods; prosecution; convictionNo producer, manufacturer, or dealer shall ship or deliverfor shipment in commerce any goods produced in an establishment situated in theUnited States in or about which within thirty days prior to the removal of suchgoods therefrom any oppressive child labor has been employed: Provided, Thatany such shipment or delivery for shipment of such goods by a purchaser whoacquired them in good faith in reliance on written assurance from the producer,manufacturer, or dealer that the goods were produced in compliance with therequirements of this section, and who acquired such goods for value withoutnotice of any such violation, shall not be deemed prohibited by thissubsection: And provided further, That a prosecution and conviction of adefendant for the shipment or delivery for shipment of any goods under theconditions herein prohibited shall be a bar to any further prosecution againstthe same defendant for shipments or deliveries for shipment of any such goodsbefore the beginning of said prosecution.(b)  Investigations and inspectionsThe Secretary of Labor or any of his authorizedrepresentatives, shall make all investigations and inspections under section211(a) of this title with respect to the employment of minors, and, subject tothe direction and control of the Attorney General, shall bring all actionsunder section 217 of this title to enjoin any act or practice which is unlawfulby reason of the existence of oppressive child labor, and shall administer allother provisions of this chapter relating to oppressive child labor.(c)  Oppressive child laborNo employer shall employ any oppressive child labor incommerce or in the production of goods for commerce or in any enterpriseengaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce.(d)  Proof of ageIn order to carry out the objectives of this section, theSecretary may by regulation require employers to obtain from any employee proofof age.Sec. 213. Exemptions(a) Minimum wage and maximum hour requirementsThe provisions of sections 206 [minimum wage] (exceptsubsection (d) in the case of paragraph (1) of this subsection) and section 207[maximum hours and overtime] of this title shall not apply with respectto –(6) any employee employed in agriculture (A) if suchemployee is employed by an employer who did not, during any calendar quarterduring the preceding calendar year, use more than five hundred man-days ofagricultural labor, (B) if such employee is the parent, spouse, child, or othermember of his employer's immediate family, (C) if such employee (i) is employedas a hand harvest laborer and is paid on a piece rate basis in an operation whichhas been, and is customarily and generally recognized as having been, paid on apiece rate basis in the region of employment, (ii) commutes daily from hispermanent residence to the farm on which he is so employed, and (iii) has beenemployed in agriculture less than thirteen weeks during the preceding calendaryear, (D) if such employee (other than an employee described in clause (C) ofthis subsection) (i) is sixteen years of age or under and is employed as a handharvest laborer, is paid on a piece rate basis in an operation which has been,and is customarily and generally recognized as having been, paid on a piecerate basis in the region of employment, (ii) is employed on the same farm ashis parent or person standing in the place of  his parent, and (iii) is paid atthe same piece rate as employees over age sixteen are paid on the same farm, or(E) if such employee is principally engaged in the range production oflivestock; or(b) Maximum hour requirementsThe provisions of section 207 of this title shall not applywith respect to –(12) any employee employed in agriculture or in connectionwith the operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs, or waterways,not owned or operated for profit, or operated on a sharecrop basis, and which areused exclusively for supply and storing of water, at least 90 percent of whichwas ultimately delivered for agricultural purposes during the precedingcalendar year; or(c) Child labor requirements(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) or (4), the provisionsof section 212 of this title relating to child labor shall not apply to anyemployee employed in agriculture outside of school hours for the schooldistrict where such employee is living while he is so employed, if suchemployee -(A) is less than twelve years of age and (i) isemployed by his parent, or by a person standing in the place of his parent, ona farm owned or operated by such parent or person, or (ii) is employed, withthe consent of his parent or person standing in the place of his parent, on afarm, none of the employees of which are (because of subsection (a)(6)(A) ofthis section) required to be paid at the wage rate prescribed by section206(a)(5) of this title,(B) is twelve years or thirteen years of age and (i)such employment is with the consent of his parent or person standing in theplace of his parent, or (ii) his parent or such person is employed on the samefarm as such employee, or(C) is fourteen years of age or older.(2) The provisions of section 212 of this title relating tochild labor shall apply to an employee below the age of sixteen employed inagriculture in an occupation that the Secretary of Labor finds and declares tobe particularly hazardous for the employment of children below the age ofsixteen, except where such employee is employed by his parent or by a personstanding in the place of his parent on a farm owned or operated by such parentor person.(3) The provisions of section 212 of this title relating tochild labor shall not apply to any child employed as an actor or performer inmotion pictures or theatrical productions, or in radio or televisionproductions.(4)(A) An employer or group of employers may apply tothe Secretary for a waiver of the application of section 212 of this title tothe employment for not more than eight weeks in any calendar year ofindividuals who are less than twelve years of age, but not less than ten yearsof age, as hand harvest laborers in an agricultural operation which has been,and is customarily and generally recognized as being, paid on a piece ratebasis in the region in which such individuals would be employed. The Secretarymay not grant such a waiver unless he finds, based on objective data submittedby the applicant, that -(i) the crop to beharvested is one with a particularly short harvesting season and theapplication of section 212 of this title would cause severe economic disruptionin the industry of the employer or group of employers applying for the waiver;(ii) the employment of theindividuals to whom the waiver would apply would not be deleterious to theirhealth or well-being;(iii) the level and type ofpesticides and other chemicals used would not have an adverse effect on thehealth or well-being of the individuals to whom the waiver would apply;(iv) individuals age twelveand above are not available for such employment; and(v) the industry of suchemployer or group of employers has traditionally and substantially employedindividuals under twelve years of age without displacing substantial jobopportunities for individuals over sixteen years of age.(B) Any waiver granted by the Secretary undersubparagraph (A) shall require that -(i) the individualsemployed under such waiver be employed outside of school hours for the schooldistrict where they are living while so employed;(ii) such individuals whileso employed commute daily from their permanent residence to the farm on whichthey are so employed; and(iii) such individuals beemployed under such waiver (I) for not more than eight weeks between June 1 andOctober 15 of any calendar year, and (II) in accordance with such other termsand conditions as the Secretary shall prescribe for such individuals'protection.(5)(A) In the administration and enforcement of thechild labor provisions of this chapter, employees who are 16 and 17 years ofage shall be permitted to load materials into, but not operate or unloadmaterials from, scrap paper balers and paper box compactors -(i) that are safe for 16-and 17-year-old employees loading the scrap paper balers or paper boxcompactors; and(ii) that cannot beoperated while being loaded.(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), scrap paperbalers and paper box compactors shall be considered safe for 16- or 17-year-oldemployees to load only if -(i)(I) the scrap paper balers and paper box compactorsmeet the American National Standards Institute's Standard ANSI Z245.5 1990 forscrap paper balers and Standard ANSI Z245.2-1992 for paper box compactors; or(II) the scrap paper balers and paper box compactorsmeet an applicable standard that is adopted by the American National StandardsInstitute after August 6, 1996, and that is certified by the Secretary to be atleast as protective of the safety of minors as the standard described in subclause(I);(ii) the scrap paper balers and paper box compactors includean on-off switch incorporating a key-lock or other system and the control ofthe system is maintained in the custody of employees who are 18 years of age orolder;(iii) the on-off switch of the scrap paper balers and paperbox compactors is maintained in an off position when the scrap paper balers andpaper box compactors are not in operation; and(iv) the employer of 16- and 17-year-old employees providesnotice, and posts a notice, on the scrap paper balers and paper box compactorsstating that -(I) the scrap paper balers and paper box compactorsmeet the applicable standard described in clause (i);(II) 16- and 17-year-old employees may only load thescrap paper balers and paper box compactors; and(III) any employee under the age of 18 may notoperate or unload the scrap paper balers and paper box compactors. TheSecretary shall publish in the Federal Register a standard that is adopted bythe American National Standards Institute for scrap paper balers or paper boxcompactors and certified by the Secretary to be protective of the safety ofminors under clause (i)(II).(C)(i) Employers shall prepare and submit to the Secretaryreports -(I) on any injury to an employee under the age of 18that requires medical treatment (other than first aid) resulting from theemployee's contact with a scrap paper baler or paper box compactor during theloading, operation, or unloading of the baler or compactor; and(II) on any fatality of an employee under the age of18 resulting from the employee's contact with a scrap paper baler or paper boxcompactor during the loading, operation, or unloading of the baler orcompactor.(ii) The reports described in clause (i) shall be used bythe Secretary to determine whether or not the implementation of subparagraph(A) has had any effect on the safety of children.(iii) The reports described in clause (i) shall provide -(I) the name, telephone number, and address of theemployer and the address of the place of employment where the incidentoccurred;(II) the name, telephone number, and address of theemployee who suffered an injury or death as a result of the incident;(III) the date of the incident;(IV) a description of the injury and a narrativedescribing how the incident occurred; and(V) the name of the manufacturer and the modelnumber of the scrap paper baler or paper box compactor involved in theincident.(iv) The reports described in clause (i) shall be submittedto the Secretary promptly, but not later than 10 days after the date on whichan incident relating to an injury or death occurred.(v) The Secretary may not rely solely on the reportsdescribed in clause (i) as the basis for making a determination that any of theemployers described in clause (i) has violated a provision of section 212 ofthis title relating to oppressive child labor or a regulation or order issuedpursuant to section 212 of this title. The Secretary shall, prior to makingsuch a determination, conduct an investigation and inspection in accordancewith section 212(b) of this title.(vi) The reporting requirements of this subparagraph shallexpire 2 years after August 6, 1996.(6) In the administration and enforcement of the child laborprovisions of this chapter, employees who are under 17 years of age may notdrive automobiles or trucks on public roadways. Employees who are 17 years ofage may drive automobiles or trucks on public roadways only if -(A) such driving is restricted to daylight hours;(B) the employee holds a State license valid for thetype of driving involved in the job performed and has no records of any movingviolation at the time of hire;(C) the employee has successfully completed a Stateapproved driver education course;(D) the automobile or truck is equipped with a seatbelt for the driver and any passengers and the employee's employer hasinstructed the employee that the seat belts must be used when driving theautomobile or truck;(E) the automobile or truck does not exceed 6,000 poundsof gross vehicle weight;(F) such driving does not involve -(i) the towing of vehicles;(ii) route deliveries or route sales;(iii) the transportation for hire of property, goods, orpassengers; (iv) urgent, time-sensitive deliveries;(v) more than two trips away from the primary place ofemployment in any single day for the purpose of delivering goods of theemployee's employer to a customer (other than urgent, time-sensitivedeliveries);(vi) more than two trips away from the primary place ofemployment in any single day for the purpose of transporting passengers (otherthan employees of the employer);(vii) transporting more than three passengers (includingemployees of the employer); or(viii) driving beyond a 30 mile radius from the employee'splace of employment; and(G) such driving is only occasional and incidentalto the employee's employment. For purposes of subparagraph (G), the term''occasional and incidental'' is no more than one-third of an employee'sworktime in any workday and no more than 20 percent of an employee's worktimein any workweek.(d)  Delivery of newspapers and wreathmakingThe provisions of sections 206, 207, and 212 of this titleshall not apply with respect to any employee engaged in the delivery ofnewspapers to the consumer or to any homeworker engaged in the making ofwreaths composed principally of natural holly, pine, cedar, or other evergreens(including the harvesting of the evergreens or other forest products used inmaking such wreaths).(e)  Maximum hour requirements and minimum wage employeesThe provisions of section 207 of this title shall not applywith respect to employees for whom the Secretary of Labor is authorized toestablish minimum wage rates as provided in section 206(a)(3) of this title,except with respect to employees for whom such rates are in effect; and withrespect to such employees the Secretary may make rules and regulationsproviding reasonable limitations and allowing reasonable variations,tolerances, and exemptions to and from any or all of the provisions of section207 of this title if he shall find, after a public hearing on the matter, andtaking into account the factors set forth in section 206(a)(3) of this title,that economic conditions warrant such action.APPENDIX B:International Labor Organization Convention 182 and RecommendationsILO Convention No. 182Conventionconcerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for theElimination of theWorst Forms of Child LabourC. 182 Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999The General Conference of the International LabourOrganization,Having been convened at Geneva bythe Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its87th Session on 1 June 1999, andConsidering the need to adopt newinstruments for the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of childlabour, as the main priority for national and international action, includinginternational cooperation and assistance, to complement the Convention and theRecommendation concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment, 1973, whichremain fundamental instruments on child labour, andConsidering that the effectiveelimination of the worst forms of child labour requires immediate andcomprehensive action, taking into account the importance of free basiceducation and the need to remove the children concerned from all such work andto provide for their rehabilitation and social integration while addressing theneeds of their families, andRecalling the resolution concerningthe elimination of child labour adopted by the International Labour Conferenceat its 83rd Session in 1996, andRecognizing that child labour is toa great extent caused by poverty and that the long-term solution lies insustained economic growth leading to social progress, in particular povertyalleviation and universal education, andRecalling the Convention on theRights of the Child adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 20November 1989, andRecalling the ILO Declaration onFundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up, adopted by theInternational Labour Conference at its 86th Session in 1998, andRecalling that some of the worstforms of child labour are covered by other international instruments, inparticular the Forced Labour Convention, 1930, and the United NationsSupplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, andInstitutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, 1956, andHaving decided upon the adoption ofcertain proposals with regard to child labour, which is the fourth item on theagenda of the session, andHaving determined that theseproposals shall take the form of an international Convention;adopts this seventeenth day of Juneof the year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine the following Convention,which may be cited as the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999.Article 1Each Member which ratifies thisConvention shall take immediate and effective measures to secure theprohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour as a matter ofurgency.Article 2For the purposes of this Convention,the term "child" shall apply to all persons under the age of 18.Article 3For the purposes of this Convention,the term "the worst forms of child labour" comprises:(a) all forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery,such as the sale and trafficking of children, debt bondage and serfdom andforced or compulsory labour, including forced or compulsory recruitment ofchildren for use in armed conflict;(b) the use, procuring or offeringof a child for prostitution, for the production of pornography or forpornographic performances;(c) the use, procuring or offeringof a child for illicit activities, in particular for the production andtrafficking of drugs as defined in the relevant international treaties;(d) work which, by its nature or thecircumstances in which it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safetyor morals of children.Article 41. The types of work referred tounder Article 3(d) shall be determined by national laws or regulations or bythe competent authority, after consultation with the organizations of employersand workers concerned, taking into consideration relevant internationalstandards, in particular Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Worst Forms of Child LabourRecommendation, 1999.2. The competent authority, afterconsultation with the organizations of employers and workers concerned, shallidentify where the types of work so determined exist.3. The list of the types of workdetermined under paragraph 1 of this Article shall be periodically examined andrevised as necessary, in consultation with the organizations of employers andworkers concerned.Article 5Each Member shall, afterconsultation with employers' and workers' organizations, establish or designateappropriate mechanisms to monitor the implementation of the provisions givingeffect to this Convention.Article 61. Each Member shall design andimplement programmes of action to eliminate as a priority the worst forms ofchild labour.2. Such programmes of action shallbe designed and implemented in consultation with relevant governmentinstitutions and employers' and workers' organizations, taking intoconsideration the views of other concerned groups as appropriate.Article 71. Each Member shall take allnecessary measures to ensure the effective implementation and enforcement ofthe provisions giving effect to this Convention including the provision andapplication of penal sanctions or, as appropriate, other sanctions.2. Each Member shall, taking intoaccount the importance of education in eliminating child labour, take effectiveand time-bound measures to:(a) prevent the engagement ofchildren in the worst forms of child labour;(b) provide the necessary andappropriate direct assistance for the removal of children from the worst formsof child labour and for their rehabilitation and social integration;(c) ensure access to free basiceducation, and, wherever possible and appropriate, vocational training, for allchildren removed from the worst forms of child labour;(d) identify and reach out tochildren at special risk; and(e) take account of the specialsituation of girls.3. Each Member shall designate thecompetent authority responsible for the implementation of the provisions givingeffect to this Convention.Article 8Members shall take appropriate stepsto assist one another in giving effect to the provisions of this Conventionthrough enhanced international cooperation and/or assistance including supportfor social and economic development, poverty eradication programmes anduniversal education.Article 9The formal ratifications of thisConvention shall be communicated to the Director-General of the InternationalLabour Office for registration.Article 101. This Convention shall be bindingonly upon those Members of the International Labour Organization whoseratifications have been registered with the Director-General of theInternational Labour Office.2. It shall come into force 12months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have beenregistered with the Director General.3. Thereafter, this Convention shallcome into force for any Member 12 months after the date on which itsratification has been registered.Article 111. A Member which has ratified thisConvention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date onwhich the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to theDirector-General of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciationshall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered.2. Each Member which has ratifiedthis Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration ofthe period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise theright of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for anotherperiod of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at theexpiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in thisArticle.Article 121. The Director-General of theInternational Labour Office shall notify all Members of the InternationalLabour Organization of the registration of all ratifications and acts ofdenunciation communicated by the Members of the Organization.2. When notifying the Members of theOrganization of the registration of the second ratification, theDirector-General shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organization tothe date upon which the Convention shall come into force.Article 13The Director-General of theInternational Labour Office shall communicate to the Secretary-General of theUnited Nations, for registration in accordance with article 102 of the Charterof the United Nations, full particulars of all ratifications and acts of denunciationregistered by the Director-General in accordance with the provisions of thepreceding Articles.Article 14At such times as it may considernecessary, the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall presentto the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shallexamine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference thequestion of its revision in whole or in part.Article 151. Should the Conference adopt a newConvention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the newConvention otherwise provides --(a) the ratification by a Member ofthe new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciationof this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 11 above, if andwhen the new revising Convention shall have come into force;(b) as from the date when the newrevising Convention comes into force, this Convention shall cease to be open toratification by the Members.2. This Convention shall in any caseremain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which haveratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention.Article16The English and French versions ofthe text of this Convention are equally authoritative.The foregoing is the authentic textof the Convention unanimously adopted by the General Conference of theInternational Labour Organization during its Eighty-seventh Session which washeld at Geneva and declared closed on 17 June 1999.IN FAITH WHEREOF we have appendedour signatures this day of June 1999.The President of the Conference,The Director-General of theInternational Labour OfficeRECOMMENDATION 190International Labour Conference,87th Session, Geneva, June 1999RECOMMENDATIONCONCERNING THE PROHIBITIONANDIMMEDIATE ACTION FOR THE ELIMINATION OF THE WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOURADOPTEDBY THE CONFERENCE AT ITS EIGHTY-SEVENTH SESSION,  GENEVA, 17 JUNE 1999The General Conference of theInternational Labour Organization,Having been convened at Geneva by theGoverning Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its 87thSession on 1 June 1999, andHaving adopted the Worst Forms ofChild Labour Convention, 1999, andHaving decided upon the adoption ofcertain proposals with regard to child labour, which is the fourth item on theagenda of the session, andHaving determined that theseproposals shall take the form of a Recommendation supplementing the Worst Formsof Child Labour Convention, 1999; adopts this seventeenth day of June of the yearone thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine the following Recommendation, whichmay be cited as the Worst Forms of Child Labour Recommendation, 1999.1. The provisions of thisRecommendation supplement those of the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention,1999 (hereafter referred to as "the Convention"), and should beapplied in conjunction with them.I. Programmes ofaction2. The programmes of action referredto in Article 6 of the Convention should be designed and implemented as amatter of urgency, in consultation with relevant government institutions andemployers' and workers' organizations, taking into consideration the views ofthe children directly affected by the worst forms of child labour, theirfamilies and, as appropriate, other concerned groups committed to the aims ofthe Convention and this Recommendation. Such programmes should aim at, interalia:(a) identifying and denouncing theworst forms of child labour;(b) preventing the engagement ofchildren in or removing them from the worst forms of child labour, protectingthem from reprisals and providing for their rehabilitation and socialintegration through measures which address their educational, physical andpsychological needs;(c) giving special attention to:(i) younger children;(ii) the girl child;(iii) the problem of hidden work situations, in which girlsare at special risk;(iv) other groups of children with special vulnerabilitiesor needs;(d) identifying, reaching out to andworking with communities where children are at special risk;(e) informing, sensitizing and mobilizing public opinionand concerned groups, including children and their families.II. Hazardous work3. In determining the types of work referred to underArticle 3(d) of the Convention, and in identifying where they exist,consideration should be given, inter alia, to:(a) work which exposes children tophysical, psychological or sexual abuse;(b) work underground, under water,at dangerous heights or in confined spaces;(c) work with dangerous machinery,equipment and tools, or which involves the manual handling or transport ofheavy loads;(d) work in an unhealthy environmentwhich may, for example, expose children to hazardous substances, agents orprocesses, or to temperatures, noise levels, or vibrations damaging to theirhealth;(e) work under particularlydifficult conditions such as work for long hours or during the night or workwhere the child is unreasonably confined to the premises of the employer.4. For the types of work referred tounder Article 3(d) of the Convention and Paragraph 3 above, national laws orregulations or the competent authority could, after consultation with theworkers' and employers' organizations concerned, authorize employment or workas from the age of 16 on condition that the health, safety and morals of thechildren concerned are fully protected, and that the children have receivedadequate specific instruction or vocational training in the relevant branch ofactivity.III. Implementation5. (1) Detailed information andstatistical data on the nature and extent of child labour should be compiledand kept up to date to serve as a basis for determining priorities for nationalaction for the abolition of child labour, in particular for the prohibition andelimination of its worst forms as a matter of urgency.(2) As far as possible, suchinformation and statistical data should include data disaggregated by sex, agegroup, occupation, branch of economic activity, status in employment, schoolattendance and geographical location. The importance of an effective system ofbirth registration, including the issuing of birth certificates, should betaken into account.(3) Relevant data concerningviolations of national provisions for the prohibition and elimination of theworst forms of child labour should be compiled and kept up to date.6. The compilation and processing ofthe information and data referred to in Paragraph 5 above should be carried outwith due regard for the right to privacy.7. The information compiled underParagraph 5 above should be communicated to the International Labour Office ona regular basis.8. Members should establish ordesignate appropriate national mechanisms to monitor the implementation ofnational provisions for the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms ofchild labour, after consultation with employers' and workers' organizations.9. Members should ensure that thecompetent authorities which have responsibilities for implementing nationalprovisions for the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of childlabour cooperate with each other and coordinate their activities.10. National laws or regulations orthe competent authority should determine the persons to be held responsible inthe event of non-compliance with national provisions for the prohibition andelimination of the worst forms of child labour.11. Members should, in so far as itis compatible with national law, cooperate with international efforts aimed atthe prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour as a matterof urgency by:(a) gathering and exchanginginformation concerning criminal offences, including those involvinginternational networks;(b) detecting and prosecuting thoseinvolved in the sale and trafficking of children, or in the use, procuring oroffering of children for illicit activities, for prostitution, for theproduction of pornography or for pornographic performances;(c) registering perpetrators of suchoffences.12. Members should provide that thefollowing worst forms of child labour are criminal offences:(a) all forms of slavery orpractices similar to slavery, such as the sale and trafficking of children,debt bondage and serfdom and forced or compulsory labour, including forced orcompulsory recruitment of children for use in armed conflict;(b) the use, procuring or offeringof a child for prostitution, for the production of pornography or forpornographic performances; and(c) the use, procuring or offeringof a child for illicit activities, in particular for the production andtrafficking of drugs as defined in the relevant international treaties, or foractivities which involve the unlawful carrying or use of firearms or otherweapons.13. Members should ensure thatpenalties including, where appropriate, criminal penalties are applied forviolations of the national provisions for the prohibition and elimination ofany type of work referred to in Article 3(d) of the Convention.14. Members should also provide as amatter of urgency for other criminal, civil or administrative remedies, whereappropriate, to ensure the effective enforcement of national provisions for theprohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, such as specialsupervision of enterprises which have used the worst forms of child labour,and, in cases of persistent violation, consideration of temporary or permanentrevoking of permits to operate.15. Other measures aimed at theprohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour might includethe following:(a) informing, sensitizing andmobilizing the general public, including national and local political leaders,parliamentarians and the judiciary;(b) involving and trainingemployers' and workers' organizations and civic organizations;(c) providing appropriate trainingfor the government officials concerned, especially inspectors and lawenforcement officials, and for other relevant professionals;(d) providing for the prosecution intheir own country of the Member's nationals who commit offences under itsnational provisions for the prohibition and immediate elimination of the worstforms of child labour even when these offences are committed in anothercountry;(e) simplifying legal andadministrative procedures and ensuring that they are appropriate and prompt;(f) encouraging the development ofpolicies by undertakings to promote the aims of the Convention;(g) monitoring and giving publicityto best practices on the elimination of child labour;(h) giving publicity to legal orother provisions on child labour in the different languages or dialects;(i) establishing special complaintsprocedures and making provisions to protect from discrimination and reprisalsthose who legitimately expose violations of the provisions of the Convention,as well as establishing helplines or points of contact and ombudspersons;(j) adopting appropriate measures toimprove the educational infrastructure and the training of teachers to meet theneeds of boys and girls;(k) as far as possible, taking intoaccount in national programmes of action:(i) the need for job creation and vocational training forthe parents and adults in the families of children working in the conditionscovered by the Convention; and(ii) the need for sensitizing parents to the problem of childrenworking in such conditions.16. Enhanced internationalcooperation and/or assistance among Members for the prohibition and effectiveelimination of the worst forms of child labour should complement nationalefforts and may, as appropriate, be developed and implemented in consultationwith employers' and workers' organizations. Such international cooperationand/or assistance should include:(a) mobilizing resources fornational or international programmes;(b) mutual legal assistance;(c) technical assistance includingthe exchange of information;(d) support for social and economicdevelopment, poverty eradication programmes and universal education.The foregoing is the authentic textof the Recommendation unanimously adopted by the General Conference of theInternational Labour Organization during its Eighty-seventh Session which washeld at Geneva and declared closed on 17 June 1999.IN FAITH WHEREOF we have appendedour signatures this day of June 1999.The President of the Conference,The Director-General of theInternational Labour OfficeAPPENDIX C:  Excerptsfrom the Convention on the Rights of the ChildUN Convention on the Rights of theChild, G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc.A/44/49 (1989).PREAMBLEThe States Parties to the present Convention,Considering that, in accordance with the principlesproclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherentdignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the humanfamily is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,Bearing in mind that the peoples of the United Nations have,in the Charter, reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights and in thedignity and worth of the human person, and have determined to promote socialprogress and better standards of life in larger freedom,Recognizing that the United Nations has, in the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights and in the International Covenants on Human Rights,proclaimed and agreed that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedomsset forth therein, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex,language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin,property, birth or other status,Recalling that, in the Universal Declaration of HumanRights, the United Nations has proclaimed that childhood is entitled to specialcare and assistance,Convinced that the family, as the fundamental group ofsociety and the natural environment for the growth and well‑being of allits members and particularly children, should be afforded the necessaryprotection and assistance so that it can fully assume its responsibilitieswithin the community,Recognizing that the child, for the full and harmoniousdevelopment of his or her personality, should grow up in a family environment,in an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding,Considering that the child should be fully prepared to livean individual life in society, and brought up in the spirit of the idealsproclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations, and in particular in thespirit of peace, dignity, tolerance, freedom, equality and solidarity,Bearing in mind that the need to extend particular care tothe child has been stated in the Geneva Declaration of the Rights of the Childof 1924 and in the Declaration of the Rights of the Child adopted by theGeneral Assembly on 20 November 1959 and recognized in the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights, in the International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (in particular in articles 23 and 24), in the InternationalCovenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (in particular in article 10)and in the statutes and relevant instruments of specialized agencies andinternational organizations concerned with the welfare of children, 'Bearing in mind that, as indicated in the Declaration of theRights of the Child, "the child, by reason of his physical and mentalimmaturity, needs special safeguards and care, including appropriate legalprotection, before as well as after birth",Recalling the provisions of the Declaration on Social andLegal Principles relating to the Protection and Welfare of Children, withSpecial Reference to Foster Placement and Adoption Nationally andInternationally; the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for theAdministration of Juvenile Justice (The Beijing Rules) ; and the Declaration onthe Protection of Women and Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict,Recognizing that, in all countries in the world, there arechildren living in exceptionally difficult conditions, and that such childrenneed special consideration,Taking due account of the importance of the traditions andcultural values of each people for the protection and harmonious development ofthe child,Recognizing the importance of international co‑operationfor improving the living conditions of children in every country, in particularin the developing countries,Have agreed as follows:PART I*        *        *Article 21. States Parties shall respect and ensure the rights setforth in the present Convention to each child within their jurisdiction withoutdiscrimination of any kind, irrespective of the child's or his or her parent'sor legal guardian's race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or otheropinion, national, ethnic or social origin, property, disability, birth orother status.2. States Parties shall take all appropriate measures toensure that the child is protected against all forms of discrimination orpunishment on the basis of the status, activities, expressed opinions, orbeliefs of the child's parents, legal guardians, or family members.Article 31. In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken bypublic or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrativeauthorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be aprimary consideration.2. States Parties undertake to ensure the child suchprotection and care as is necessary for his or her well‑being, takinginto account the rights and duties of his or her parents, legal guardians, orother individuals legally responsible for him or her, and, to this end, shalltake all appropriate legislative and administrative measures.3. States Parties shall ensure that the institutions,services and facilities responsible for the care or protection of childrenshall conform with the standards established by competent authorities,particularly in the areas of safety, health, in the number and suitability oftheir staff, as well as competent supervision.*       *       *Article 241. States Parties recognize the right of the child to theenjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health and to facilities forthe treatment of illness and rehabilitation of health. States Parties shallstrive to ensure that no child is deprived of his or her right of access tosuch health care services.2. States Parties shall pursue full implementation of thisright and, in particular, shall take appropriate measures:(a) To diminish infant and child mortality;(b) To ensure the provision of necessary medical assistanceand health care to all children with emphasis on the development of primaryhealth care;(c) To combat disease and malnutrition, including within theframework of primary health care, through, inter alia, the application of readilyavailable technology and through the provision of adequate nutritious foods andclean drinking‑water, taking into consideration the dangers and risks ofenvironmental pollution;(d) To ensure appropriate pre‑natal and post‑natalhealth care for mothers;(e) To ensure that all segments of society, in particularparents and children, are informed, have access to education and are supportedin the use of basic knowledge of child health and nutrition, the advantages ofbreastfeeding, hygiene and environmental sanitation and the prevention ofaccidents;(f) To develop preventive health care, guidance for parentsand family planning education and services.3. States Parties shall take all effective and appropriatemeasures with a view to abolishing traditional practices prejudicial to thehealth of children.4. States Parties undertake to promote and encourageinternational co‑operation with a view to achieving progressively thefull realization of the right recognized in the present article. In this regard,particular account shall be taken of the needs of developing countries*       *       *Article 281. States Parties recognize the right of the child toeducation, and with a view to achieving this right progressively and on thebasis of equal opportunity, they shall, in particular:(a) Make primary education compulsory and available free toall;(b) Encourage the development of different forms ofsecondary education, including general and vocational education, make themavailable and accessible to every child, and take appropriate measures such asthe introduction of free education and offering financial assistance in case ofneed;(c) Make higher education accessible to all on the basis ofcapacity by every appropriate means;(d) Make educational and vocational information and guidanceavailable and accessible to all children;(e) Take measures to encourage regular attendance at schoolsand the reduction of drop‑out rates.2. States Parties shall take all appropriate measures toensure that school discipline is administered in a manner consistent with thechild's human dignity and in conformity with the present Convention.3. States Parties shall promote and encourage internationalcooperation in matters relating to education, in particular with a view tocontributing to the elimination of ignorance and illiteracy throughout theworld and facilitating access to scientific and technical knowledge and modernteaching methods. In this regard, particular account shall be taken of theneeds of developing countries.*       *       *Article 321. States Parties recognize the right of the child to beprotected from economic exploitation and from performing any work that islikely to be hazardous or to interfere with the child's education, or to beharmful to the child's health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or socialdevelopment.2. States Parties shall take legislative, administrative,social and educational measures to ensure the implementation of the presentarticle. To this end, and having regard to the relevant provisions of otherinternational instruments, States Parties shall in particular:(a) Provide for a minimum age or minimum ages for admissionto employment;(b) Provide for appropriate regulation of the hours andconditions of employment;(c) Provide for appropriate penalties or other sanctions toensure the effective enforcement of the present article.[1]This and all other children's names have been changed, except where otherwisenoted.[2]Darlene Adkins, Coordinator, Child Labor Coalition.  Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview, January 25, 1999.  The Child Labor Coalition, comprised of fiftymember organizations, is part of the National Consumers League.[3]Mining, the most dangerous occupation in the country, is not open to thoseunder the age of eighteen.  Agriculture is the second-most dangerous occupationoverall.[4]In the United States, "Latino" refers to people of Latin American ancestry.[5]U.S. General Accounting Office, "ChildLabor in Agriculture:  Characteristics and Legality of Work," Washington,D.C.:  U.S. General Accounting Office, 1998; GAO/HEHS-98-112R, p. 2.[6]Article 1 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child states that "a childmeans every human being below the age of eighteen years unless under the lawapplicable to the child, majority is attained earlier."[7]The U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices has estimated that there are 1.5 million migrant farmworkers and 2.5million seasonal farmworkers.  United States Department of Health and HumanServices, Bureau of Primary Health Care homepage(http://www.bphc.hrsa.dhhs.gov/mhc/mhc1.htm; accessed August 24, 1999), p. 2.[8]In Arizona, a July 1998 investigation by the U.S. Department of Labor turned uptwelve underage children working in onion fields, including a four-year old.Graciela Sevilla, "Littlest Workers:  Arizona Targeted in Child Labor Sweep," ArizonaRepublic, July 24, 1998. Oregonian in August 1998 reported findingdozens of farmworker children younger than twelve.  Alex Pulaski, "Rulesprotecting children lost in fields of Northwest," Oregonian, August30, 1998.[9]Arroyo and Kurre, "Young Agricultural Workers in California," LaborOccupational Health Program, Center for Occupational and Environmental Health,School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, November 1997, pp.18-20.[10] Human Rights Watch telephone interview withDr. Marion Moses, President, Pesticide Education Center, San Francisco,California, February 23, 1999.[11]National Center for Farmworker Health, "Who are America'sFarmworkers?" (http://www.ncfh.org/aboutfws/aboutfws.htm, accessed March22, 1999), p. 2.   In Arizona, average farmworker earnings are $6,200 a year.Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Janine Duron, Department ofEconomic Security, Yuma, Arizona, September 18, 1998.[12]Federal Register, vol. 64, no. 52, March 18, 1999, pp. 13428-13430.[13]Agricultural workers are explicitly excluded from coverage under the NationalLabor Relations Act, and therefore have no federally-guaranteed right ofunionization and collective bargaining.[14]Human Rights Watch interview with Emma Torres, Project Coordinator, Bridges inFriendship (a project of the Border Health Foundation), Somerton, Arizona,September 30, 1998.[15]See , accessed May 14,2000.[16]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Amelia Lopez, former ArizonaDepartment of Economic Security outreach worker, March 18, 1999.[17]Human Rights Watch interview with Frank Zamudio, Arizona Department ofAgriculture Pesticide Worker Safety Investigator, Yuma, Arizona, October 1,1998.[18]United States General Accounting Office, "Pesticides:  Improvements Needed toEnsure the Safety of Farmworkers and their Children," Washington, D.C.:  U.S.General Accounting Office, March 2000, GAO/RCED-00-40, p. 19.[19]See National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, Protecting Youth atWork:  Health, Safety, and Development of Working Children and Adolescents inthe United States (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1998), pp.173-174.  Furthermore, almost all OSHA standards do not apply to agriculturalworkplaces.  Ibid., p. 174.[20]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, October 27, 1998.  Wheezingis a symptom of pesticide poisoning.  Natural Resources Defense Council, Troubleon the Farm, p. 5.[21]Association of Farmworker Opportunity Programs, "Did Pesticides Kill JosJ Antonio Casillas?" WashingtonNewsline, http://www.afop.org/newsletter/july98/pesticide.html.[22]United States General Accounting Office, "Hired Farmworkers:  Health andWell-Being at Risk," Washington, D.C.:  U.S. General Accounting Office,1992; GAO/HRD-092-46, p. 3.[23]Natural Resources Defense Council, Trouble on the Farm: Growing Up withPesticides in Agricultural Communities (New York:  Natural ResourcesDefense Council, October 1998), p. 6.[24]According to a draft report by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality,both the federal General Accounting Office and the Arizona Department of Healthand Safety found, in separate studies, "a serious problem" ofunderreporting of pesticide-related illnesses.  Arizona Department ofEnvironmental Quality, "Occupational Exposure to Toxic Materials andPesticides," p. 2, http://earthvision.asu.edu/acerp/section3/Chp_12HH.html.The primary author of this report was Tim Flood, M.D., Medical Director,Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Arizona Department of Health.[25]Matt Crenson, "Pesticides May Jeopardize Child Farmworkers' Health," Childrenfor Hire, an Associated Press series, December 9, 1997.[26]Youth Advocate Program International, "U.S. Farmworker Children LackNeeded Workplace Protection," Youth Advocate Program InternationalReport, vol. 3, no. 1, Spring 1998, http://www.yapi.org/rpt.htm, p. 3.[27]Learning Disabilities Association of America et al., "Request thatPesticides be Tested for their Toxicity to the Developing Nervous System,"letter to Carol Browner of the Environmental Protection Agency, May 12, 1999,p. 2.  The letter was signed also by Consumers Union, Natural Resources DefenseCouncil, Science and Environmental Health Network, Physicians for SocialResponsibility, and the U.S. Public Interest Research Group.[28]Natural Resources Defense Council, Trouble on the Farm, p. 8, citing Dr.Lynn Goldman of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.[29]See Ibid., pp. 7-9.[30]Natural Resources Defense Council, Trouble on the Farm, p. 12.[31]Ibid., p. viii.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with Frank Zamudio, Arizona Department ofAgriculture Pesticide Worker Safety Investigator, Yuma, Arizona, October 1,1998.[33]Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, "Occupational Exposure toToxic Materials and Pesticides," p. 11,http://earthvision.asu.edu/acerp/section3/Chp_12HH.html.[34]Natural Resources Defense Council, Trouble on the Farm, pp. 6, 23.[35]Natural Resources Defense Council, "Farm Children Face Hazards fromAgricultural Chemicals," press release, October 22, 1998, p. 1.[36]Human Rights Watch interview, Somerton, Arizona, October 1, 1998.  Damaris A.had been a field worker since the age of thirteen, primarily in the Yuma areaand in western Arizona.[37]Human Rights Watch interview, Aguila, Arizona, April 29, 1999.[38]Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 170.  Agricultural workers must betrained by their employer-unless they show proof of previous training withinfive years-regarding the hazards of pesticides, where and in what formpesticides may be encountered, routes through which pesticides can enter thebody, signs and symptoms of pesticide poisoning, emergency first aid forpesticide poisoning and how to obtain emergency medical care, decontaminationtechniques, hazards from drift, hazards from pesticide residues on clothing,and an explanation of other protective Worker Protection Standard requirements,including application and entry restrictions and the required posting ofwarning signs.  United States Environmental Protection Agency, The WorkerProtection Standard for Agricultural Pesticides-How to Comply (U.S.Government Printing Office:  Washington, 1993).[39]Human Rights Watch interview, Willcox, Arizona, March 16, 1999.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany B., age fifteen, Casa Grande,Arizona, November 3, 1998.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with Thomas K., Willcox, Arizona, March 16, 1999.[42]Natural Resources Defense Council, Trouble on the Farm, p. 18 (citingPollack, S. et al, "Pesticide exposure and working conditions amongmigrant farmworker children in western New York State," American PublicHealth Association Annual Meeting, 1990.)[43]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Amelia Lopez, former ArizonaDepartment of Economic Security outreach worker in western Arizona, March 18,1999.[44]See generally Natural Resources Defense Council, Trouble on the Farm,chapter five ("Surrounded by Pesticides").[45]Natural Resources Defense Council, Trouble on the Farm, p. vii.[46]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Kevin Keaney, EPA Branch Chief forCertification and Worker Protection, October 19, 1999.[47]Congress exempts small farms from enforcement of all OSHA standards byattaching riders to annual appropriations bills.  See National Research Counciland Institute of Medicine, Protecting Youth at Work, p. 174.[48]National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, Protecting Youth atWork, p. 159.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Art Morelos, Compliance Supervisor for theIndustrial Commission of Arizona, Division of Occupational Safety and Health,Tucson, Arizona, October 15, 1998.[50]Industrial Commission of Arizona, Division of Occupational Safety and Health,Field Sanitation Regulation R4-13-670; U.S. Department of Labor, OccupationalSafety and Health Administration, Fact Sheet No. OSHA 92-25, "OSHA's FieldSanitation Standard."[51]In North Carolina, a survey found that only 4 percent of farmworkers had accessto drinking water, handwashing facilities, and toilets.  National Center forFarmworker Health, "Who Are America's Farmworkers?,"http://www.ncfh.org/aboutfws/aboutfws.htm, p. 5.  In California, a survey ofseveral hundred adolescents working in agriculture found that they"repeatedly mentioned" lack of clean bathrooms and accessibledrinking water as key concerns.  Arroyo and Kurre, "Young AgriculturalWorkers in California," p. 37.[52]Human Rights Watch interview, Willcox, Arizona, March 16, 1999.[53]A "portapotty" is a portable toilet.[54]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, October 27, 1998.[55]Human Rights Watch interview, Aguila, Arizona, April 29, 1999.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Art Morelos, Compliance Supervisor, IndustrialCommission of Arizona, Division of Occupational Safety and Health, October 15,1998, Tucson, Arizona.[57]Ibid.[58]National Center for Farmworker Health, "Who Are America'sFarmworkers?" pp. 5-6.[59]Human Rights Watch interview, Aguila, Arizona, April 29, 1999.[60]See Ibid., p. 4.  Farmworkers' use of irrigation canals to bathe and wash wasreported to Human Rights Watch by several farmworkers and farmworker advocates,including Augie Zaragoza, Director of Project PPEP's Casa Grande office (HumanRights Watch interview August 10, 1998, Casa Grande, Arizona), David Dick andMaria Elena Badilla, Director and Paralegal respectively of Pinal-Gila LegalAid in Coolidge, Arizona (Human Rights Watch telephone interview, September 1,1998), and Amelia Lopez, former Arizona Department of Economic Securityoutreach worker (Human Rights Watch telephone interview, March 18, 1999).[61]Human Rights Watch interview with Art Morelos, Compliance Supervisor,Industrial Commission of Arizona, Division of Occupational Safety and Health,October 15, 1998, Tucson, Arizona.[62]United States Environmental Protection Agency, "A Guide to Heat Stress inAgriculture," EPA-750-b-92-001, May 1993, pp. 17-19.[63]Ibid.[64]See, for example, 29 C.F.R. 1928.110 (the federal Occupational Safety andHealth Administration's Field Sanitation Standard) and Arizona IndustrialCommission Regulation R4-13-670 (Field Sanitation).[65]Ibid., p. 24.[66]Arizona Industrial Commission Regulation R4-13-670.[67]Industrial Commission of Arizona, Division of Occupational Safety and Health,Inspection Report, Case Number 126996610, September 19, 1997 (reviewed by HumanRights Watch).[68]Ibid[69]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, October 27, 1998.[70]A California survey found that 75 percent of adolescent farmworkers broughttheir own water to work.  Arroyo and Kurre, "Young Agricultural Workers inCalifornia," p. 31.[71]Human Rights Watch interview, Aguila, Arizona, April 29, 1999.[72]Human Rights Watch interview, Tucson, Arizona, October 15, 1998.[73]United States Environmental Protection Agency, "A Guide to Heat Stress inAgriculture," EPA-750-b-92-001, May 1993, pp.24-25.[74]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Maria Elena Badilla, paralegal withPinal-Gila Legal Aid, Coolidge, Arizona, September 1, 1998.  According toBadilla, the boy's body was returned to Mexico and no worker's compensation orother claim was filed.[75]United States Environmental Protection Agency, "A Guide to Heat Stress inAgriculture," EPA-750-b-92-001, May 1993, p. 1.[76]Ibid.[77]Ibid., p. 2.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Jane T., October 27, 1998, CasaGrande, Arizona.[79]National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, Protecting Youth atWork:  Health, Safety, and Development of Working Children and Adolescents in theUnited States (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1998), p. 93.[80]See Ibid., p. 156.[81]Ibid., p. 94.[82]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with attorney involved in the case, whoprefers to remain unnamed, March 9, 1999.  Washington state has determined thatpacking shed employment  is "particularly hazardous," and forbidsemployment of children under sixteen in packing sheds.  This is more protectivethan federal law.[83]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Flor Trujillo, underage victim ofthe mass poisoning, March 24, 1999.[84]Center of Excellence for Chemically Related Illness, Harborview Occupationaland Environmental Medicine Clinic, Harborview Medical Center, University ofWashington, "Review of Claims Related to the Carbon Monoxide Incident atBrewster Heights Packing Inc.," February 12, 1998, University ofWashington, Seattle, Washington, p. 7.[85]Ibid., p. 6.[86]Ibid.[87]Ibid., p. 13.[88]Ibid.[89]Human Rights Watch telephone interview, March 24, 1999.[90]Harborview Medical Center, "Review of Claims," p. 5.[91]Ibid., p. 2.[92]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with attorney involved in the case, whoprefers to remain unnamed, March 9, 1999.[93]Association of Farmworker Opportunity Programs, "Child Dies in Orange GroveAccident," Washington Newsline,http://www.afop.org/newsletter/jan_feb99/kiddies.html.[94]According to the National Safety Council, agriculture is second only to miningin occupational fatalities.  Arroyo and Kurre, "Young Agricultural Workersin California," Labor Occupational Health Program, Center for Occupationaland Environmental Health, School of Public Health, University of California,Berkeley, November 1997, pp. 23-24, citing National Safety Council,"Accident Facts," 1996.  The Department of Labor prohibits employmentof youth under the age of eighteen in mining.[95]National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, Protecting Youth atWork, p. 153.[96]Ibid.[97]Arroyo and Kurre, "Young Agricultural Workers in California," p. 28,citing a study in Washington state.[98]Human Rights Watch interview, Willcox, Arizona, March 16, 1999.[99]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Gary Restaino, then-staff attorneyfor Community Legal Services Farmworker Program,  Phoenix, Arizona, April 26,1999.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Compliance Supervisor Art Morelos, Tucson,Arizona, October 15, 1998.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Benjamin C., Somerton, Arizona, October 1,1998.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Damaris A., Somerton, Arizona, October 1,1998.[103]National Center for Farmworker Health, "Who are America'sFarmworkers?" p. 6.[104]National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, Protecting Youth atWork, p. 131.[105]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Emma Torres, Project Coordinator,Bridges in Friendship (a project of the Border Health Foundation), Somerton,Arizona, October 19, 1998.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Emma Torres, Somerton, Arizona, September 30,1998.[107]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Emma Torres, October 19, 1998.[108]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, October 27, 1998.[109]These states are Alabama, Arizona, Delaware, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,Massachusetts, Michigan, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Carolina, North Dakota,Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming.  Child LaborCoalition, "1997 Child Labor State Survey," National ConsumersLeague, Washington, DC, 1997, p. 12.  The Child Labor Coalition conducts astate child labor survey every two years.[110]Ibid.[111]States with a twelve-year minimum age requirement are Arkansas, Georgia, Idaho,Indiana, Kansas, Maryland, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, South Carolina,Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.  Those with a fourteen-year minimum agerequirement are Alaska, California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Missouri, Montana, NewMexico, Rhode Island, and West Virginia.  Ibid.[112]29 U.S.C. section 213.[113]29 U.S.C. section 213(c)(1)(A).  A "small farm" is one which did notemploy more than 500 man-days of agricultural labor during any calendar quarterof the preceding year. 29 U.S.C. section 213(a).  Five hundred man-days wouldtypically be reached by seven employees working six days a week during acalendar quarter.  Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Gary Restaino,then-staff attorney with Community Legal Services Farmworker Program, April 26,1999.[114]29 U.S.C. section 213(c)(1)(B).[115]29 U.S.C. section 213(c)(1)(C).[116]29 U.S.C. section 213(c)(2).[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Jessica G., Somerton, Arizona, September 30,1998.[118]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, October 27, 1998.[119]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Blanca Rodriguez, attorney with theUnited Farm Workers, Sunnyside, WA, March 10, 1999.[120]Ibid.[121]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Flor Trujillo, March 24, 1999.[122]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, October 27, 1998.[123]Ibid.[124]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, November 3, 1998.[125]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, November 3, 1998.[126]The minimum wage requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act do not apply to:(1) farmworkers, including minors, whose employers used less than 500 man-daysof farm labor during every calendar quarter of the previous year; (2)non-migrant hand-harvest laborers who are paid on a piece-rate basis and whoworked in agriculture less than thirteen weeks the previous year; and (3)workers sixteen years of age and younger who are employed at the same farm astheir parent and who are hand-harvest laborers paid at a piece rate.  29 C.F.R.780.300.[127]Unless the worker falls under one of the exempt categories; see precedingfootnote.[128]See the chapter "Health and Safety Risks" regarding cumulativeinjuries and substance abuse.[129]Cited in U.S. General Accounting Office, "Child Labor in Agriculture:Characteristics and Legality of Work," Washington, D.C.:  U.S. GeneralAccounting Office, 1998; GAO/HEHS-98-112R, p. 7.[130]U.S. Department of Labor, "Compliance Highlights: 1998 Agricultural ActivityReport, Wage and Hour Division," March 1999, p. 2 (regarding Californiafindings); U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division, Phoenix DistrictMemorandum, "Phoenix District Grape Survey," November 10, 1998 (regardingArizona findings).  The Department of Labor surveys did not distinguish betweenjuvenile and adult workers.[131]Human Rights Watch interview, Willcox, Arizona, March 16, 1999.[132]Human Rights Watch interview, Willcox, Arizona, March 16, 1999.[133]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, November 3, 1998.[134]Ibid.[135]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, October 27, 1998.[136]Human Rights Watch interview, Somerton, Arizona, October 1, 1998.[137]Human Rights Watch interviews with Sylvia R. and Dina V., Aguila, Arizona,April 9, 1999.[138]Ibid.[139]Ibid.[140]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, October 27, 1998.[141]Carol Mell, "Keepers of the Green:  Workers from Mexico fuel Yuma County'sagriculture industry," The Yuma Daily Sun, http://www.yumasun.com/news/index.shtml.[142]Ibid., quoting Mike Valadez, Immigration and Naturalization Service AssistantPort Director for San Luis, Arizona.[143]Human Rights Watch interview, Casa Grande, Arizona, November 3, 1998.[144]United States General Accounting Office, "Hired Farmworkers:  Health andWell-Being at Risk," Washington, D.C.:  U.S. General Accounting Office,1992; GAO/HRD-092-46, p. 37.  Among non-farmworkers, the dropout rate is only29 percent.  Ibid.[145]Diane Mull, "U.S. Farmworker Children Lack Needed WorkplaceProtection," Youth Advocate Program International Report, vol. 3,no. 1, Spring 1998, p. 3, (citing U.S. Department of Education, "TheEducation of Adult Migrant Farmworkers," vol. 2, 1991).[146]National Center for Farmworker Health, "Who are America'sFarmworkers?" http://www.ncfh.org/aboutfws/aboutfws.htm, p. 7.[147]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Amelia Lopez, former ArizonaDepartment of Economic Security outreach worker, March 18, 1999.[148]See generally National Research Council, Protecting Youth at Work,chapter five, "Work's Effect on Children and Adolescents," and inparticular pp. 115-120.[149]National Research Council, Protecting Youth at Work, p. 96.[150]Ibid., p. 97.[151]Ibid.[152]Ibid.[153]Arroyo and Kurre, "Young Agricultural Workers in California," LaborOccupational Health Program, Center for Occupational and Environmental Health,School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, November 1997, p.31, citing a 1992 United States Department of Agriculture study.[154]National Research Council, Protecting Youth at Work, p. 11.[155]Ibid.[156]As previously noted, the National Research Council has addressed thisdisparity, recommending that the distinction between agricultural andnonagricultural occupations be eliminated, and that the more stringentnonagricultural restrictions apply to all working children.  It should also benoted that, technically, children aged ten and eleven may also work as hiredfarmworkers under a special waiver system administered by the U.S. Departmentof Labor.  As a practical matter, however, the issuance of such waivers hasstopped or occurs on a very rare basis.[157]Human Rights Watch interview, Yuma, Arizona, September 30, 1998.[158]L. Anne Newell, "State, Pima show better rates of teen pregnancy," ArizonaDaily Star, April 6, 1999.  The rates are for girls 15 to 19-years old.[159]Patricia Donovan, "Falling Teen Pregnancy, Birthrates:  What's Behind theDeclines?" The Guttmacher Report on Public Policy, vol. I, no. 5,October 1998 (http://206.215.210.5/pubs/journals/gr010506.html).[160]Human Rights Watch interview, Aguila, Arizona, April 29, 1999.[161]Human Rights Watch interview, Yuma, Arizona, September 30, 1998.[162]The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is a federal agency charged withenforcing federal civil rights laws as they relate to employment.[163]Human Rights Watch telephone interview, May 5, 1999.[164]Human Rights Watch interview, Yuma, Arizona, September 30, 1998.[165]EEOC News (press release), "EEOC and Tanimura & Antle settle sexualharassment case in the agricultural industry," February 23, 1999, p. 1.[166]Ibid.  The retaliation against Mr. Aragón allegedly included verbal abuse,suspension without cause, and discharge.[167]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with EEOC attorney Cindy O'Hara, May 5,1999, and April 25, 2000.[168]Ibid.[169]Frank Zamudio, Arizona Department of Agriculture Industrial Hygienist, during aHuman Rights Watch interview, October 1, 1998, in reference to agriculturalemployers.[170]29 U.S.C. section 203(l).[171]These prohibitions apply to all legal aid offices receiving federal Legal ServicesCorporation funding.  There is no private right of action for child laborviolations.  Prior to these restrictions (1996 for the ban on class-actions),however, legal aid offices could mount class action lawsuits regarding wage andhour violations.[172]U.S. General Accounting Office, "Child Labor in Agriculture:Characteristics and Legality of Work," Washington, DC:  U.S. GeneralAccounting Office, 1998; GAO/HEHS-98-112R, p. 2.[173]The FLSA allows for very limited exceptions to this, including work deliveringnewspapers, acting, and making evergreen wreaths.[174]Agriculture is the second most dangerous occupation after mining.  Mineworkers, however, must be at least eighteen years old.[175]National Research Council, Protecting Youth at Work, pp. 146-148.[176]Ibid., p. 21.[177]Ibid., p. 142.[178]Ibid., p. 147.[179]Ibid., p. 21.[180]Ibid., p. 147, citing United States Bureau of the Census.[181]Digest of Education Statistics, 1998 (http://nces.ed.gov/pubs99/digest98/chapter2.html).[182]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Dan Werner, Farmworker LegalServices of New York staff attorney, March 17, 2000.[183]National Center for Farmworker Health, "Who are America'sFarmworkers?" http://www.ncfh.org/aboutfws/aboutfws.htm, accessed March22, 1999, p. 2.  The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics  reported in 1998 that44.9 percent of farm laborers are Latino.http://stats.bls.gov/pdf/cpsaatll.pdf.  Based on our extensive research andconsultation with national experts, Human Rights Watch considers this a grossunderestimation.[184]H.R.2119.  As of November 1999, the bill is still in the House Committee onEducation and the Workforce, Subcommittee on Workforce Protections.[185]The federal government's authority to regulate commerce is rooted in Article I,Section 8 of the United States Constitution, which reads in its relevant partthat "The Congress shall have Power . . . [t]o regulate Commerce . . . amongthe several States."  Accordingly, this authority is restricted to interstatecommerce.[186]Of the bill's fifty-eight cosponsors, only two¾TomCampbell (Republican from California) and John Porter (Republican from-Illinois)¾are Republicans.[187]Human Rights Watch telephone interview, March 2, 1999.[188]United States General Accounting Office, "Hired Farmworkers:  Health andWell-Being at Risk," Washington, D.C.:  U.S. General Accounting Office,1992; GAO/HRD-092-46, p. 22, citing an estimate by the National Child LaborCommittee.[189]U.S. Department of Labor, "Compliance Highlights:  1998 Agricultural ActivityReport, Wage and Hour Division," March 1999, p. 2.[190]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Corlis Sellers, WHD National ChildLabor Coordinator, September 22, 1999.[191]According to the GAO, there were 950 WHD enforcement officers in 1987.  U.S.General Accounting Office, "Child Labor in Agriculture:  Characteristicsand Legality of Work," Washington, D.C.:  U.S. General Accounting Office,1998; GAO/HEHS-98-112R, p. 15.[192]According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, as of October 1999 there were139,662,000 workers in the United States civilian labor force.  Bureau of LaborStatistics, http://stats.bls.gov:80/eag.table.html.[193]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Corlis Sellers, WHD National ChildLabor Coordinator, September 22, 1999.[194]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Corlis Sellers, WHD National ChildLabor Coordinator, September 22, 1999.[195]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Esther La Plante, WHD Farm LaborSpecialist based in Phoenix, AZ, November 12, 1998.[196]Ibid.[197]U.S. Department of Labor, "Compliance Highlights:  1998 Agricultural ActivityReport, Wage and Hour Division," March 1999, p. 2.[198]U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division, Phoenix District Memorandum:"Phoenix District Grape Survey," November 10, 1998.[199]U.S. General Accounting Office, "Child Labor in Agriculture:Characteristics and Legality of Work," Washington, D.C.:  U.S. GeneralAccounting Office, 1998; GAO/HEHS-98-112R, p. 12.[200]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Darlene Adkins, Coordinator,National Consumers League Child Labor Coalition, January 25, 1999.[201]By way of comparison, consider the Department of Labor statistical summariesfor child labor violations uncovered in fiscal years 1989 through 1992:  1989:24,074 in nonagricultural work; 299 in agriculture; 1990: 43,785 innonagricultural work, 795 in agriculture; 1991: 28,390 in nonagricultural work,334 in agriculture; 1992: 21,224 in nonagricultural work, 163 in agriculture.[202]United States General Accounting Office, "Hired Farmworkers:  Health andWell-Being at Risk," Washington, D.C.:  U.S. General Accounting Office,1992; GAO/HRD-092-46, p. 22.[203]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Corlis Sellers, WHD National ChildLabor Coordinator, September 22, 1999.[204]Ibid.[205]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Esther La Plante, WHD Farm LaborSpecialist, November 17, 1999.[206]Ibid.[207]The provision as it pertains to child labor reads in part:  "No producer,manufacturer, or dealer shall ship or deliver for shipment in commerce anygoods produced in an establishment situated in the United States in or aboutwhich within thirty days prior to the removal of such goods therefrom anyoppressive child labor has been employed." 29 U.S.C. section 212(a).[208]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Corlis Sellers, WHD National ChildLabor Coordinator, September 22, 1999.[209]U.S. Department of Labor Program Highlights, "Joint Employment and IndependentContractors Under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act,"Fact Sheet ESA no. 97-31, pp. 2-3.[210]The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA) requiresagricultural employers to inform workers in writing of the terms of theiremployment, post information about worker rights, pay all wages owed when dueand provide an itemized statement, and make and keep payroll records.  29U.S.C. section 1801-1872.[211]See, for example, Goldstein, Linder, Norton, and Ruckelshaus, "Enforcing FairLabor Standards in the Modern American Sweatshop: Rediscovering the StatutoryDefinition of Employment," UCLA Law Review 46 (1999): 983.[212]29 U.S.C. section 203(g).[213]Child Labor Coalition, "1999 Child Labor State Survey," NationalConsumers League, Washington, D.C., 1999, pp. 6-7.[214]Ibid.[215]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Corlis Sellers, WHD National ChildLabor Coordinator, September 22, 1999.[216]Ibid.[217]40 C.F.R. (Code of Federal Regulations) section 170.1.  See 40 C.F.R. section170 and following sections for the entire Worker Protection Standard.[218]See "Restricted-entry statements," 40 C.F.R. section 156.208.[219]40 C.F.R. section 156.208(c)(2)(i)-(iii).[220]Ibid., section 156.208(c)(2)(i).[221]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Kevin Keaney, EPA Branch Chief forCertification and Worker Protection, October 19, 1999.  According to Keaney, ina few states it is the state public health or environmental agency thatenforces the EPA regulations, rather than the department of agriculture.  It isup to the individual state to decide its enforcement strategy.[222]Ibid.[223]Ibid.[224]Representative Henry Waxman commissioned a study by the GAO of the protectionof children in agriculture.  Preliminary results of the inquiry are found in:U.S. General Accounting Office, "Child Labor in Agriculture:Characteristics and Legality of Work," Washington, DC:  U.S. GeneralAccounting Office, 1998; GAO/HEHS-98-112R.  The GAO's final report is due inearly 2000.[225]In May 1999, the following organizations sent a public letter to the EPA urgingthat pesticides be tested for their toxicity to children's developing nervoussystems, and expressing their concern over an EPA decision to remove aCongressionally-mandated "10X" (meaning requiring a margin of safety for childrenten times that required for adults) safety standard designed to protectchildren:  Natural Resources Defense Council, Learning Disabilities Associationof America, Consumers Union, Physicians for Social Responsibility, Science andEnvironmental Health Network, and the U.S. Public Interest Research Group.[226]Arizona Department of Agriculture homepage, , updated November 22, 1999.[227]Human Rights Watch was not interviewing this inspector and his name is notavailable.  The comment was made on October 1, 1998.[228]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Kevin Keaney, EPA Branch Chief forCertification and Worker Protection, October 19, 1999.[229]Estimate provided by Gary Restaino, former staff attorney with Community LegalServices Farmworker Program, in a telephone interview with Human Rights Watch,April 26, 1999.[230]U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,"OSHA's Field Sanitation Standard," Fact Sheet No. OSHA 92-25, p. 2.[231]As noted, Congress exempts small farms from enforcement of OSHA standards byattaching riders to annual appropriation bills; see, e.g., U.S. Departments ofLabor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related AgenciesAppropriations Act, 1998, HR 2264, 105th Congress.  NationalResearch Council, Protecting Youth at Work, p. 141.[232]The states are Alaska, Arizona, California, Hawai'i, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky,Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oregon,South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and Wyoming.Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands also have approved plans, and Connecticutand New York have plans that cover public sector employment only.  U.S.Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, "StateOccupational Safety and Health Plans," http://www.osha~slc.gov/.[233]United States General Accounting Office, "Hired Farmworkers:  Health andWell-Being at Risk," Washington, DC:  U.S. General Accounting Office,1992; GAO/HRD-092-46, p. 20.[234]Human Rights Watch interview with Art Morelos, Arizona Industrial CommissionCompliance Supervisor, Tucson, Arizona, October 15, 1998.[235]United States General Accounting Office, "Hired Farmworkers:  Health andWell-Being at Risk," Washington, DC:  U.S. General Accounting Office,1992; GAO/HRD-092-46, p. 20.[236]United States General Accounting Office, "Child Labor in Agriculture:Characteristics and Legality of Work," Washington, D.C.:  U.S. GeneralAccounting Office, 1998; GAO/HEHS-98-112R, p. 15.[237]General Accounting Office, "Hired Farmworkers:  Health and Well-Being atRisk," p. 20.., citing Maureen Sweeney and Stephen Ciesieski, WhereWork is Hazardous to Your Health (Raleigh, North Carolina: Farmworkers LegalServices of North Carolina, Apr. 1990).[238]Human Rights Watch interview, October 15, 1998.[239]Ibid.[240]"An employee . . . who believes that a violation of a safety or healthstandard or regulation exists that threatens physical harm or that an imminent dangerexists may request an investigation by giving notice to the director or hisauthorized representative of such violation or danger.  Any such notice shallbe reduced to writing . . ."  23 Arizona Revised Statutes section 408(F)[241]Compliance Supervisor Art Morelos estimated that 95 to 99 percent of allagriculture-related complaints are referrals from other agencies rather thandirect complaints from workers.  Human Rights Watch interview, September 20,1999.[242]Human Rights Watch interview, September 30, 1998.  The advocate interviewedpreferred to remain unnamed.[243]Human Rights Watch interview with Art Morelos, Arizona Industrial CommissionCompliance Supervisor, Tucson, Arizona, October 15, 1998.[244]Human Rights Watch interview with Art Morelos, September 20, 1999.[245]International Labour Organization Convention Concerning the Prohibition andImmediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (WorstForms of Child Labor Convention), Article 1.[246]Office of the Press Secretary, The White House, "Remarks by the Presidentto the International Labor Organization Conference," June 16, 1999.[247]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, Article 3(d).[248]Ibid., Article 4.[249]International Labour Organization Recommendation Concerning the Prohibition andImmediate Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, paragraph 3.[250]Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, Article 7.[251]See, for example, Office of the Press Secretary, the White House, "Remarksby the President at Signing of ILO Convention 182," December 2, 1999.[252]Office of the Press Secretary, the White House, "President ClintonRatifies the New ILO Convention on the Worst Forms of Child Labor:  PromotingCore Labor Standards Around the World," December 2, 1999.[253]Ibid.[254]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Charlie Spring, Director for theOffice of the International Labor Organization, Washington, D.C., February 1,2000.[255]Report of the Tripartite Advisory Panel on International Labor Standards to thePresident's Committee on the International Labor Organization RegardingConvention No. 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor, T.Doc. 106-005-S1P-99-3,p. 2.[256]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Charlie Spring, Director for theOffice of the International Labor Organization, Washington, D.C., February 1,2000.[257]Report of the Tripartite Advisory Panel on International Labor Standards, p.20.  Article 4(2) of the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention states that "Thecompetent authority, after consultation with the organizations of employers andworkers concerned, shall identify where the types of work so determined exist."[258]Medicaid is a federally-subsidized health insurance program for low-incomepeople.[259]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Gina Rose Lombardi, Public InformationCoordinator, National Center for Farmworker Health, March 22, 1999.  States maytake up to forty-five days to process Medicaid applications; a worker'seligibility must be re-validated every one to six months; and only some statesreciprocate on Medicaid eligibility.  National Advisory Council on MigrantHealth, Losing Ground:  The Condition of Farmworkers in America(Bethesda, MD:  Department of Health and Human Services, 1995), pp. 8-9.[260]National Advisory Council on Migrant Health, Losing Ground:  The Conditionof Farmworkers in America (Bethesda, MD:  Department of Health and HumanServices, 1995), p. 10.Region / CountryUnited States US Poverty and Economic Inequality Racial DiscriminationProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch