"Where Do You Want Us to Go?": Abuses against Street Children in Uganda | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureJuly 17, 2014"Where Do You Want Us to Go?"Abuses against Street Children in UgandaStreet children in Mbale town in Uganda, 140 miles east of the capital, Kampala, surround an open fire to stay warm at night.© Edward Echwalu 2014“Where Do You Want Us to Go?”Abuses against Street Children in UgandaMapSummaryKeyRecommendationsMethodologyI. ContextMoreChildren on the StreetsMoving tothe StreetsGetting Offthe Streets?II. Violenceagainst Street ChildrenAbuse by thePolice and Other AuthoritiesBeatingsArbitraryArrests and Mass RoundupsExtortionTreatmentand Conditions in Police DetentionForced LaborMob ViolenceImpunity forMob Attacks of Street ChildrenSexual AbuseSexual Abuseof Street GirlsSexual Abuseof Street BoysCommercialSexual ExploitationViolence byHomeless AdultsForced DrugUseChild LaborIII. Lawsand Policies for the Protection of ChildrenInternationalLegal StandardsRight toProtection from AbuseRight toProtection from Arbitrary Arrest and DetentionFreedom fromChild LaborRight toEducationThe UgandanChild Protection FrameworkChildren inPolice CustodyChildren andEmploymentEnforcementof Child Rights in UgandaIV.RecommendationsTo theGovernment of UgandaTo theMinistry of Gender, Labour and Social DevelopmentTo theMinistry of Education and SportsTo theMinistry of Local GovernmentTo theKampala Capital City AuthorityTo theParliament of UgandaTo theUganda Bureau of StatisticsTo theUganda Police ForceToUganda’s International PartnersAcknowledgmentsAnnex I:Human Rights Watch Letter to the Uganda Police ForceAnnex II:Response from the Uganda Police Force to Human Rights WatchAnnex III:Human Rights Watch Letter  to the Ministry of Gender, Labour andSocial DevelopmentAnnex IV:Human Rights Watch Letter  to the Ministry of Local GovernmentAnnex V:Human Rights Watch Letter to the Kampala Capital City AuthorityMapClick to expand ImageSummaryThese police have to give us our rights. They should makeus a home where we can be taken, but let it not be a police station, let it nothave policemen so that it is not a prison. This is our country too. Let us notbe strangers in our own country.—Zachary L., 16-year-old from Bugembe town, Jinjadistrict, seven years living on the street, February 2014Government structures should not just be there in name.They should function. In Kampala, apart from beating them up, the government isdoing nothing [for street children]. If all systems were working, you would notsee these children suffering.—Manager of a nongovernmental organization’s centerfor street children outside Kampala, February 2014When 13-year-old Stephen B.’s father died, his olderbrother did not want to care for him and sent him to look for his mother. Buthe got lost on a trip looking for her and decided to approach the police in Masakatown for help. They offered no assistance. Without money or contacts, Stephen turnedto the streets, and one year after, he remained homeless. Stephen said that he fearedhis encounters with the police more than anything else during this period. “Oneday, I was sleeping and four policemen came and started beating me. They beatme so badly on the ankles, knees, and elbows that I couldn’t move. They alsobeat my friends who were sleeping. Then one policeman said ‘Who has moneyso that we leave you alone?’ [My friend] Moses had 500 shillings (US$0.20).The policeman took it. This happens always in the night.”Uganda has one of the largest populations of young people inthe world with over 56 percent of its 37 million people under the age of 18,and more than 52 percent under age 15. Children are also the single largest demographicgroup living in poverty in Uganda. According to civil society groups who assiststreet children, local government officials, and police officers of the Childand Family Protection Unit who are tasked to focus on children, the number of Ugandanchildren living on the streets is increasing. But the total number of street childrenis unknown.Children living on the streets in the capital, Kampala, andthroughout Uganda’s urban centers face violence and discrimination by police,local government officials, their peers, and the communities in which they workand live. Some left home because of domestic abuse, neglect, and poverty, onlyto suffer brutality and exploitation by older children and homeless adults onthe streets. They often lack access to clean water, food, medical attention,shelter, and education.This report is based on interviews in seven towns acrossUganda with more than 130 current or former children who live or work on thestreets, known generally as street children. Some spend their days and nights onthe streets. Others work on the streets during the day and occasionally returnto their homes or other locations at night. Street children risk a range ofabuses when working on the streets and moving about without protection.Police and communities often treat street children as a partof the larger crime problem, arbitrarily arresting, detaining and beating them,and forcing them to clean detention facilities. There is widespread beliefwithin both the community at large and the police that street children are all criminals.Street children are often the first suspects when a crime, such as theft, iscommitted. Many street children expressed fear of the authorities and a totallack of protection on the streets. Police and officials from the KampalaCapital City Authority (KCCA) threaten them at night, and beat them withbatons, whips, or wires while demanding money or as a form of discipline forvagrancy. Children often hand over to the police and others whatever small sumsthey have to avoid further abuse or detention.Key government institutions are failing to adequatelyprotect these children. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development,charged with child protection, and local government 0fficials periodicallyorder general roundups of street children throughout the country. Theseroundups usually occur ahead of special events, official visits, internationalconferences, or are a way for the ministry to be seen to be tackling the perceived“problem” of street children. At various times, police around thecountry have detained large groups of up to 100 children without charge inpolice stations with adults. According to knowledgeable sources, these roundupsoften occur at the behest of the ministry of gender and other officials. Many childrenare released back to the streets after several days, or in some cases weeks,often only after paying a bribe or being forced to work for the police while incustody, including cleaning.Even when there are no pending criminal charges somechildren are transferred, without any clear justification, to one of thecountry’s four national remand homes or to the Kampiringisa NationalRehabilitation Center, a juvenile detention center outside Kampala. Thoughcivil society activists say instances of physical abuse in remand homes hasdecreased, the homes continue to suffer from inadequate staffing and resources.Children and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) report that both conditionsand treatment at Kampiringisa continue to be deplorable.In some instances in the locations where Human Rights Watchconducted research, community members harass, threaten, beat, and exploitstreet children. Whena suspected or actual theft occurs,communities have converged on street children, occasionally carrying out mob violence; as a result, there are reports that somechildren have been killed. For example, in the northern town of Lira, local journalistsdocumented three killings of street children by mobs between July and September2013. Organizations working with street children acknowledge that police do notoften investigate crimes committed against street children.Older children or adults have viciously beaten and sexuallyabused children who are new to the streets as a form of initiation. These olderchildren or street adults force younger or new street children to pay“rent” for staying with them or in a certain location on thestreets. Older children and adults force some children into drug use, as wellas occasionally coerce them to participate in theft or other crimes.Children reported working as vendors, porters, domestichelp, or laborers in homes, small restaurants, and other businesses, in orderto get money for food. They were paid little for long hours and physicallydemanding work. Some children were victims of commercial sexual exploitation,using sex work to survive, and according to both Human Rights Watch researchand the work of local organizations, both boys and girls faced rape and sexualassault by men and older street boys. Street children told Human Rights Watchthat they rarely reported crimes committed by their peers or adults to thepolice, fearing reprisals from the others on the street, or punishment by thepolice.The Ugandan government has adopted strong domestic childprotection legislation including the Children Act and laws prohibiting childlabor. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has created multipleprograms and policies intended to realize the rights of at-risk children likethe National Strategic Programme Plan of Interventions for Orphans and OtherVulnerable Children, which includes street children. And yet the government ofUganda has failed to meet its obligations to protect children on the streetsfrom abuse at the hands of the police, local authorities, and others, becauseof the shortcomings in the government’s implementation of its childprotection framework.The Uganda Human Rights Commission noted that the government’sapproach of “resettling and rehabilitating street children withoutaddressing the factors that send children to the streets is an unsustainablesolution in the long run” and argued that “there is an urgent needto address the causes and not just the symptoms.”Local NGOs are at the forefront of providing protection andservices to street children throughout many small towns in Uganda. Some end up“facilitating” the costs for police and district officials to carryout their child protection duties, providing fuel, vehicles, and occasionallycash for services. District ordinances, in Lira and Kasese, have criminalized providingsupport to street children. These provisions, designed to protect children,should not be implemented in a way that curtails the work of local NGOs providingassistance such as food, education, and rehabilitation programs for streetchildren given the multiple gaps in available government services.The government should ensure that street children areafforded the same rights and protections under domestic Ugandan law andregional and international provisions as all other Ugandan children. HumanRights Watch calls on the government of Uganda to meaningfully implement itschild protection system and ensure that authorities in child protection at thedistrict level have the means, support, and training to adequately performtheir duties. The ministry of gender and local government officials shouldcease ordering roundups of children and arbitrary arrests. They should instead focuson ending the stigma associated with street children by providing education andpositive campaigns on the rights of all children throughout the country. Uganda’sUniversal Primary Education (UPE) system should be used to ensure that thebasic educational needs of all Ugandan children are met. The government shouldwork to eliminate the extra costs of what is supposed to be free primaryeducation under the UPE system and prevent future generations of children fromending up on the streets. NGOs seeking to support street children should beregulated but not face threat of criminal sanction for offering assistance.Uganda has faced a number of corruption scandals andallegations of financial mismanagement in the last few years and some donorshave cut or restructured their assistance in response. Donors considering howto provide development assistance in Uganda should support civil societyorganizations working in child protection and activities directly targetingstreet children throughout the country. Any funds should be carefully monitoredto ensure they reach intended beneficiaries. Uganda’s internationalpartners should also actively voice their concerns regarding child protectionand the treatment of street children at the hands of police and otherauthorities, and encourage the Ugandan government to uphold its international, regional,and domestic obligations to child rights.Key RecommendationsTo the Government of UgandaTo the Ministry of Gender,Labour and Social DevelopmentEnd the ministry’s involvement in orpromotion of roundups of street children in Kampala and elsewhere in Uganda.Empower the National Council for Children toact as a focal point to promote the protection of street children and monitorlaw enforcement practices related to street children.Ensure that sufficient budgets are allocatedto ministry-led interventions that target street children specifically, workingwith nongovernmental organizations assisting street children to address gaps inprogramming.Take measures to fight stigma anddiscrimination against street children, for example through awareness-raisingcampaigns about the rights of all children, and creating a campaign and improvingmechanisms to report child abuse to police. Such mechanisms should be availableand accessible to both children and adults, like a free hotline and desksdedicated to receive reports in the offices of district-level probation and socialwelfare officers.Incorporate information on how to respectthe rights of children into existing trainings of police officers, justiceofficials, health workers, district probation and social welfare officers, andothers who interact with vulnerable children.Allocate sufficient funds to construct andmaintain alternative facilities for children not in conflict with the law ineach district as an alternative to remand homes and the national rehabilitationcenter.Carry out regular monitoring visits of theKampiringisa National Rehabilitation Center and the four remand homes in Naguru(Kampala), Mbale, Gulu, and Fort Portal, to ensure the health and well-being ofchildren in the centers.To the Ministry of Educationand SportsFormulate and implement a national strategyto progressively reduce and eliminate costs related to education that often preventchildren from going to or staying in school, such as the cost of meals, books,writing instruments, and uniforms.To the Ministry of LocalGovernmentEnsure that all probation and social welfareofficers are trained in child rights.Allocate sufficient budgets to probation andsocial welfare officers to carry out their work on child protection, andimplement programs for officers to conduct regular surveys of the number ofchildren in their district to improve interventions and assistance.Allow, in the absence of governmentservices, NGOs to operate assistance programs for street children and ensurethat district ordinances do not impede the work of NGOs.To the Kampala Capital CityAuthorityEnd the roundups of children and thepractice of taking them to Kampiringisa or forcefully returning them to theirhomes.Ensure that all KCCA officers are trained inchild rights and enforce the prohibition of abuse of children by KCCA officers.Initiateinvestigations into complaints concerning the abuse of street children, anddisciplinary measures and criminal sanctions should occur where appropriate.Tothe Uganda Bureau of StatisticsInclude questions relating to childrenliving, working, and sleeping on the streets in the next August 2014 census, inaddition to existing questions relating to orphans.To the Uganda Police ForceEnd arbitrary arrests, detention, androundups of street children.Investigate all allegations of beatings andviolence of street children by police and consider bringing charges underUganda’s 2012 Anti-Torture Act.Enforce the prohibition against policebrutality of street children.Improve its investigative and forensiccapacity to combat child abuse.Increase the number of Child and FamilyProtection Unit (CFPU) officers to ensure that they are located in every police station.Provide adequate support, includingresources for transportation and communication, to the CPFU to carry out itswork on child protection.Improve safeguards for children in policecustody.To Uganda’sInternational PartnersUrge the government of Uganda to investigateabuses of street children committed by the Uganda Police Force (UPF) and KCCA.Condemn roundups of street children regularlywhen they occur and consistently raise concerns with Ugandan governmentofficials, especially the inspector general of police, the minister of gender,labour and social development, and the executive director of the KCCA.If considering support to the government,provide technical and financial assistance specifically to improve theprotection of children’s rights.Promote the role and work of nongovernmentalorganizations in Uganda working with street children and help coordinate amongNGOs and the government on child protection issues.MethodologyThis report focuses on abuses of street children in Uganda,in Kampala and in urban centers throughout the country. Unlike small childrenengaged in forced begging who often feature prominently in Ugandan mediareporting, the children featured in this report are older, unaccompanied, liveamong peers, and are less likely to be targeted for assistance and socialprograms by both independent organizations and the government of Uganda. Thisreport touches on issues related to juvenile justice, but it is not anexamination of Uganda’s juvenile justice system.This report is based on research carried out by Human RightsWatch from December 2013 to February 2014. Human Rights Watch conductedinterviews in town centers in the eastern towns of Mbale and Soroti; in thenorth in Lira and Gulu towns; in the west in Kasese town; and in Masaka town andthe capital, Kampala, in central Uganda. These towns were selected for researchto cover the geographic breadth of Uganda, because of reports of abuses againststreet children in those towns, and because of the importance of those towns ascommercial and transportation hubs which draw street children from the region.Human Rights Watch staff interviewed 132 current and formerstreet children (109 men and boys and 23 women and girls). Of those interviewed,97 were children who currently live or work on the street, between the ages of8 and 18; and 37 were former street children—either children or adultscurrently in rehabilitation or vocational training programs, or now homelessadults. Human Rights Watch staff interviewed the children in markets, busparks, and in other public places during the day and in the evening. Assistedby nongovernmental and faith-based organizations, we also interviewed streetchildren who spend some of their time in NGO centers for meals and classes, aswell as former street children on site at their rehabilitation or vocationaltraining centers.An additional 49 interviews were conducted in person, by telephone,or by email correspondence with members of civil society organizationsproviding assistance to street children, health service providers,international humanitarian and children’s organizations, police, andlocal government officials. Human Rights Watch wrote letters to the Ministry ofGender, Labour and Social Development, the Ministry of Local Government, theKampala Capital City Authority, and the Uganda Police Force requestinginformation related to this report. The letters, and the only receivedresponse, are attached as annexes. Human Rights Watch did not seek to visitKampiringisa National Rehabilitation Center outside Kampala where some streetchildren said they had been detained because the problems at Kampiringisa arerelatively well-known and efforts to improve conditions there are an ongoingpart of local Ugandan NGO advocacy.Interviews with children were conducted individually, withthe presence in some cases of Ugandan civil society activists who knew andintroduced the children to Human Rights Watch. Most interviews were conductedin English, Kiswahili, or Luganda, or with an interpreter providing Kiswahili,Langi, Luo, Luganda, or Lugisu translation. Human Rights Watch staff discussedwith all interviewees the purpose of the interview, its voluntary nature, theways the information would be used, and that no compensation would be providedfor participating. Interviews typically lasted between 30 and 90 minutes.The majority of interviews were conducted with male streetchildren as girls were overall more difficult to locate and access. HumanRights Watch observed that female street children were either fewer in numberin some locations, or were off the streets during the day. This was furtherconfirmed by local organizations working with street children. Some girls areengaged in domestic labor, and thus not on the streets most of their time, andothers are involved in sex work. The latter tend to pay for lodging during theday, then work on the streets at night. NGOs said they are quick to provideassistance and accommodation for female children who they see as morevulnerable than boys.The research required asking about sensitive subjects, includingsexual abuse, drug use, or involvement in crimes, which children may notaddress honestly due to a variety of fears and their mistrust of adults. HumanRights Watch staff informed the children about the confidential nature of theinterviews as a way to establish trust, and corroborated information gatheredfrom the children with information from other sources. Care was taken withvictims to minimize the risk that recounting their experiences could furthertraumatize them or put them at physical risk.Throughout the report, where necessary, names andidentifying information of the interviewees have been withheld to protect theirprivacy. Pseudonyms have been used in place of the names of all children quotedor described in this report.I. ContextI didn’t come to the street because I wanted to. Ijust found myself here because of the mistreatment by my step-mother. Sometimesyou walk along the street and people shout at you…. They call you a thiefwhen you have not stolen anyone’s property…. You just become hardand accept these difficult conditions you live in.—Gabriel A., 15-year-old, one year living on thestreets of Mbale, December 2013[1]Street children are referred to by different names acrossUganda. In the eastern town of Mbale they are birds, mawungu, because“street children are like hawks; they snatch and go.”[2]In Soroti town the community calls them scavengers, chokora, while in northernGulu town people simply call them otino korido, children of the street. “Evenif you tell people your name, they just call you ‘street kid, street kid,’and it pains us,” said Andrew F., a 17-year-old boy who has been livingon the streets of Soroti for over five years.[3] Moreoften than not, they are referred to as bayaaye or muyaaye—vagabonds,idlers, deviants.[4] To manypeople street children are all thieves, ababandi.More Children on the StreetsUganda has one of the youngest populations in the world withover 56 percent of its 37 million people under the age of 18, and more than 52percent under age 15.[5] Childrenare the single largest group of Uganda’s poor, constituting 59 percent ofthose living under the poverty level.[6] Streetchildren are some of the most visible of the country’s poor—living,sleeping, and working in public—and as such they are exposed to extremerisk of violence and abuse.Street children are frequently on the move and it isdifficult to gauge their exact numbers. The number of children in a town canswell with the seasons, particularly around national holidays and in the rainyseason, and children move depending on their ability to find food and safety. A2013 study by the African Network for the Prevention and Protection against ChildAbuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN) estimated that there are 10,000 street children inUganda, a 70 percent increase in the number of children on the streets since1993, with 16 new children coming to the Kampala streets every day.[7]To date, the government has not undertaken any comprehensive survey of thenumber of street children in the country. A clear picture of the number ofchildren on the streets would allow for probation and social welfare officersat district level to carry out targeted programs and planning for assistancedelivery and support. Human Rights Watch is not aware of any official plans totake street children into account in the upcoming August 2014 national census.[8]NGOs assisting street children in towns such as Mbale in theeast, Lira in the north, Masaka in the west, and Kampala city routinely conductednight surveys to try to register new children on the streets. Not only did theyreport seeing new faces each night, but staff told Human Rights Watch they havecounted larger numbers coming to their centers, seeking food, a place to bathe,medical attention, and, for the very few organizations that provided it,shelter for the night.[9]Moving to the StreetsThe children will always come backto the streets. You have to treat resettlement and the situation at home.— Lillian Mugeni, publicrelations officer for the NGO Dwelling Places inKampala, February 2014[10]Numerous interrelated socio-economic factors have pushedchildren from their homes to the streets. Conflict, poverty, the HIV/AIDSepidemic, and government failure to deliver basic services over the years haveaffected the standard of living of Ugandans, especially children. The long conflictin northern Uganda from 1987 to 2006 was devastating for children who becameorphaned, homeless, or were born and raised in camps for the internallydisplaced.[11] Otherchildren were abducted and forced to fight with the rebel group the Lord’sResistance Army.[12] The forceddisarmament operations in the remote northern Karamoja region and itsconsequences of death and loss of livelihoods for the local populations also continueto fuel an influx of street children into Kampala.[13]Rapid urbanization, the breakdown of traditional supportstructures of extended families, and growing single-parent households also havebrought children to the streets.[14] NGOsassisting street children and the children themselves listed violence andmistreatment by their parents and neglect as the main factors driving children tothe streets.[15] Onesocial worker pointed out that children who lose one parent (but not both) arealso very likely to come to the streets. Step-parents sometimes single out step-children—notallowing them to go to school, forcing them to do more work in the home, anddenying them food.[16]Orphaned children described, in some instances, how theirnew guardians pushed them out of the home, particularly if the child was livingwith HIV or came from a family where a parent was suspected to have died of HIV.[17]There are 2.7 million orphans in Uganda, and over 1 million are estimated to beorphans from HIV/AIDS.[18]Additionally, the prohibitive cost of education cancontribute to forcing children out of school and on to the streets. In 1997 thegovernment introduced Universal Primary Education (UPE), which was meant toensure free education for all.[19] But thereare limited numbers of government-run schools and additional educational costs arise—fromschool uniforms to books and other supplies. As a result, poor families canchoose to keep some children out of school and make them work at home. Somechildren reject being kept from school and decide to come to the streets, orthey work on the streets to gather money to pay their own school costs.Finally, poverty is an underlining and crosscutting obstacle.“There is total poverty, nothing for a child, so they are forced to thestreets,” one street children’s resettlement officer in Mbale toldHuman Rights Watch.[20] Someparents or guardians, unable to care for their children at home, send them totown during the day to sell or beg, while others permanently force children outto fend for themselves.Getting Off the Streets?In Lira, thereis no remand home. Government involvement [with street children] stops atroundups. Any fully engaged rehabilitation of street children is not here.—Vincent Alele, program managerwith the NGO Child Restoration Outreach in Lira, December 2013[21]Uganda lacks any system of rehabilitation centers which couldprovide adequate healthcare and education for children found living on thestreets. While NGOs have tried to provide some facilities for children to sleepin safety off the streets, the only government-run centers available areintended for children in conflict with the law. Conditions, treatment, andservices are often seriously lacking.Uganda’s ministry of gender runs only four remandhomes throughout the country—Naguru, outside Kampala, Mbale, Gulu, andFort Portal—for children who are charged with or convicted of crimes andthere are plans for two others ongoing.[22] A localactivist indicated that generally conditions at the remand homes are improving,though the 2013 Auditor General’s report deemed several centers“unsuitable” for juveniles, citing understaffing and poorinfrastructure.[23] The KampiringisaNational Rehabilitation Center, a juvenile detention center outside Kampala,has long been criticized by local children rights’ activists for its poorconditions and treatment of children.[24] Whileit was intended to hold children convicted of crimes, it has often been used bylocal officials to detain children found on the streets when they have not beencharged with any crime.[25] Thirteenstreet children who spoke to Human Rights Watch had been through Kampiringisa,some multiple times, after being rounded up from the Kampala streets and takenthere without being charged with any criminal offence.Staff working at NGOs focused on the rights of children toldHuman Rights Watch about the harsh conditions children face at Kampiringisa,including staff abuse, forced labor in nearby communities, and dilapidatedfacilities. Some of the children themselves described recent experiences at thecenter such as beatings, being detained for a period of one week to two months,being forced to stay indoors all day, and being detained in a room with toomany people to lay down to sleep.[26]Following an October 2013 visit to Kampiringisa, MaryOkurut, the minister of gender, labour and social development, admitted that“the situation at the center needs urgent attention,” and said thatthe ministry would work to improve the living conditions of those held there.[27]The center’s principal, Michael Alule said the increasing number ofstreet children in the center has overwhelmed an already limited operation,particularly when children are rounded up and “dumped” inKampiringisa without warning.[28]Members of parliament have also raised concerns about thereliance on Kampiringisa. In February 2014 parliament’s Public AccountsCommittee (PAC) held a hearing examining evidence from the 2011/2012 AuditorGeneral’s report. The PAC accused the ministry of gender of notadequately responding to the issue of street children.[29]The national budget allocates the ministry billions of Ugandan shillings to “addressthe plight of street children.”[30] The PACcommittee noted that it was deeply disturbed by the practice of placing streetchildren in Kampiringisa, and that the ministry had received funds for remandhomes but little actual work had been done to update the facilities.[31]In fiscal year 2013, the ministry had an estimated budget of 6 billion Ugandanshillings ($2.3 million) for youth and children affairs. Just two millionshillings ($770) were allocated for renovations and maintenance of remand homesand Kampiringisa.[32]District governments in Lira and Kasese have enacted ordinancesto criminalize “providing support” to street children with the aim ofreducing any financial incentives for children to stay on the streets.[33]Clearly, providing cash to street children or paying bribes on their behalf canmake them more vulnerable to victimization and beatings by those seeking tosteal their money. Some NGO officials spoke of the animosity they face from notonly community members, but also police and local government officials for thework they do helping street children. Local organizations have stepped in tofill gaps in assistance to street children by providing basic services,psychosocial support, rehabilitation, reintegration, and family tracing andchild protection. In some cases NGOs have “facilitated,” or funded,the costs for police and district officials to carry out their child protectionduties, providing fuel, vehicles, and occasionally cash. Though theseordinances might be a useful measure to provide an additional level ofprotection to street children, they should not be interpreted in a manner thatcurtails, obstructs, or threatens the work of local NGOs at the forefront ofstreet child protection.RelevantGovernment Actors in Child ProtectionThe Ministry of Gender, Labour and SocialDevelopmentThe ministryof gender is the lead agency mandated to promote the protection of children inUganda.[34]The ministry has developed anational plan for orphans and other vulnerable children in which the ministryrecognizes street children as a group in high need of support.[35]The Youth and Children AffairsDepartment within the ministry designs and reviews programs, policies, andlaws related to children; coordinates with stakeholders on child-relatedissues; promotes the participation of children in national developmentprograms; supports the training of service providers; and ensures that allinitiatives, programs, and laws address the concerns of children.[36]The semi-autonomous NationalCouncil for Children within the ministry manages coordination, monitoring,and evaluation of all policies and programs for the protection of children,though it is not an implementing agency.[37]The ministry is also responsiblefor remand and rehabilitation homes—detention locations for children inconflict with the law—across Uganda, including Kampiringisa NationalRehabilitation Center, the juvenile detention center just outside Kampala.Local GovernmentEachdistrict, through executive committees, is meant to have secretaries charged withchildren’s health and welfare.[38] District councils are responsiblefor services for street children and they are the first line of response onchild protection issues.[39] These local councils are designedto provide assistance for children in need, and are in place to conductfamily tracing, or should refer cases to district probation and socialwelfare officers.[40] These officers are alsoresponsible for following up cases of child abuse and decide how to interveneto promote the child’s welfare.[41]The Uganda Police Force’s Child and FamilyProtection UnitThe police’sChild and Family Protection Unit (CFPU), established in May 1998, deals with casesof child abuse and neglect, among other issues.[42] There are about 450 CFPU officersacross the country,[43] and members of the unit are meantto be in every police station with trained officers to address issues of violenceagainst children.[44] Street children in conflict withthe law or those who need to access police officers to report abuse shouldhave access to an officer in the unit.[45] The CFPU has no specific budget tocarry out activities related to street children.[46]Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)The KCCAis the governing body for the capital under the direct supervision of thecentral government.[47] Among other activities, theauthority is mandated to provide, control, and manage services for thewelfare of children in the city.[48] KCCA probation officers are taskedwith assisting children, particularly when they are in conflict with the lawor “when their rights are infringed upon.”[49] The officers should investigatesuch cases and seek court judgments. Regarding street children, KCCA managesa transit center in Kampala where children are meant to be rehabilitatedbefore resettlement in their home districts, though the KCCA does notdescribe the extent of its rehabilitation activities.[50]II. Violence against Street ChildrenAbuse by the Police and Other AuthoritiesGovernment should look for a better solution for streetchildren instead of beating and arresting us. The more you beat us the more we gethardened with life and it does not solve the problem. They want us to go backhome but some of us do not even have homes. Others do not know where our parentsare. So when they beat us to go home, where do you want us to go?—Sam L., 15-year-old, lived four years on the streetsin Masaka, December 2013[51]In its November 2005 concluding observations on the rightsof children in Uganda, the Committee on the Rights of the Child noted“the increasing number of street children, especially in Kampala andother major urban centers, who are victims of, inter alia, drug abuse, sexualexploitation, harassment and victimization by members of the policeforce.”[52]The committee was “gravely concerned at the fact that society considerssuch children as dangerous people and a burden for the society.”[53]Street children are uniquely vulnerable to abuse andviolence, particularly by authorities charged with public order who often seestreet children as a public nuisance. Children told Human Rights Watch that membersof the Ugandan police, the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), and localgovernment officials have frequently harassed, threatened, beaten, arrested anddetained, or robbed them during the day and at night when they were sleeping.BeatingsThere is a tradition—kwercho—that thepolice use as a way of punishment in threes: the first beating is to open youreyes; the second is to show you the way home; the third is to send you home.They say this to you [as they beat you]…. They kept us in rooms where we werecaned … from the back to the buttocks. On the third day they opened thegate and we were caned as we left.— Daniel P., 15-year-old, living 10 years on thestreets of Lira, December 2013[54]Street children spoke about the abusive nature of policeand KCCA patrols. Officers have beaten and mistreated children who resistedarrest or extortion attempts. Many children sleep outside in alleyways or onexposed verandas in front of businesses and shops and police find them easily atnight when they are sleeping. Eleven-year-old Richard N. told Human Rights Watchthat “The police try to chase us away…. They find us where we aresleeping. If they catch us, they beat us.”[55]Seventy-four former and current street children told HumanRights Watch that they had been beaten during police sweeps at night. Fourpeople working with NGOs assisting street children also spoke of routine policebeatings of children. When asked if they knew why they were being targeted andbeaten, most children said that the police rarely accused them of a specificcrime. Fifteen-year-old Gabriel A. showed Human Rights Watch a cut he sustainedon his knee two days earlier during a police beating. He explained:On Tuesday [December 3, 2013] about 20 policemen came tothe place where we sleep. They surrounded us and started beating every childaround. They were not saying anything but just beating. One boy was beaten onthe jaw and sustained a cut. Another was hit on the mouth with a baton. He isstill in pain. I was whipped with a wire on my knee.... The police did notarrest anyone, they just beat and went.[56]Fifteen-year-old Christopher P. told Human Rights Watch that“The police come get us, ask us where we come from, where we are going,and we run away. I was once stopped, hit with a baton on the knees andshoulders…. Some days they beat us and leave us, some days they take us.This happened about eight times, and I was taken to a police post or thecentral police station three times.”[57]Other children said that at night police regularly sprayedtear gas at them at close range. For example, in Gulu, police beat 13-year-oldEdward B. with the butt of a gun, causing him injuries that needed medicaltreatment. He said that “Sometimes when [the police] come, they spraytear gas and they can also beat us. Sometimes they use the butt of the gun andthey threaten us that they will use the bayonet. They say ‘We will cutyou.’”[58] Inanother incident, police chased 14-year-old Ryan N. from Wandegeya market inKampala one night in October 2013. Police surrounded the market place where hewas sleeping and sprayed the children they found outside with tear gas.I woke up and couldn’t see where I was going. Theysprayed me with [tear gas] and started laughing as I tried to run…. Ithink they were just trying to send us away from that place because they couldhave arrested us, they were so many. [The police] left a passage for us to runthrough; they had surrounded us and beat us as we went through. Some kids goback to sleep there. Sometimes [the police] pass by and don’t bother us,but you never know.[59]Some children explained how they sleep in large plasticbags for warmth on cold nights. Police officers have come at night and forced children to stand in theirplastic sleeping bags and hop toward police vehicles while beating them withbatons. A child described how in one incident, police officers tied the bagsover the children’s heads before throwing them onto police trucks.[60]Police officers have also tied the arms and legs of children and forced some ofthem under metal car seats or tied them onto motorcycles to take them tocentral police stations or other police posts.[61]Police officers also abused children during interrogationsto obtain information or confessions relating to other crimes. Childrendescribed officers taking them out of detention cells to rooms and beating themwith batons, wires, and bicycle locks, among other implements. Fifteen-year-oldPeter L. told Human Rights Watch that the police in Lira accused him of smokingmarijuana. Despite his denial, police officers removed his shirt, poured wateron him, and whipped him with bicycle locks to find out where he obtained thedrugs.[62] In June2013 police treated Isaac U. in Kasese similarly, accusing him and five othersof stealing a TV and a DVD player. Isaac said, “They took us to thepolice station and put us in a room and three policemen started beating ususing batons, sticks, and wires, asking where the stolen items are. Wedidn’t know anything about it…. They beat us on the elbows andknees and buttocks.”[63] Policekept Isaac and his peers in detention for three days, only giving them one meala day, and forcing them to clean the police compound. He was never asked to givea written statement and police never brought charges against him.Arbitrary Arrests and Mass RoundupsChildren described organized roundups during which policeand sometimes other officials, including KCCA officers, arrested streetchildren in large numbers. Officials then took the children to government-runcenters or other facilities, or directly back to their home communities. Childrenwere often arrested without charge or held in groups and collectively accusedof being responsible for crimes such as theft.On December 12, 2013, Human Rights Watch interviewed six childrenin Gulu who had just been released after being held for two days in policedetention. They said police officers sprayed a large group of street childrenwith tear gas, arrested 10 of them, and put them in the Gulu Central Policestation.[64] Aproject officer at a local organization that assists street children told HumanRights Watch that he went to advocate for the children’s release: “Weintervened and they were released. The police arrest them even when they have notcommitted any wrong[doing]. The police tell us that when they are carrying outan operation they arrest everybody and sort them out later. The children aregetting used to this because it is very frequent in Gulu.”[65]Human Rights Watch heard from police and NGO staff that the ministryof gender regularly orders police to “clean the streets” ofchildren. These roundups of street children usually occur ahead of special events,official visits, international conferences, or when communities express being“fed up.”[66] HumanRights Watch wrote to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development torequest information regarding the ministry’s involvement in theseorganized roundups. At time of writing, the ministry had not responded. ChristineAlalo, head of the police’s Child and Family Protection Unit based inKampala, said that the police participate in roundups in Kampala when orderedto do so by the ministry of gender. She said that police only provideassistance to the KCCA.[67] In itsresponse to Human Rights Watch, the Uganda Police Force confirmed that it isonly asked by the ministry to provide “security,” but stated thatthey have participated in two roundups since 2011.[68]Local NGOs, however, described recent roundups and police telling them thatthey were “under orders” to bring children to the NGO centers.[69]Children and NGO staff told Human Rights Watch that when policerounded up children, they first took them to a police station for “processing.”Some children described police sorting them by their ages and then either keepingthem at the police post or station and then later releasing them, or takingthem to another facility. If the children were fortunate, police handed themover to local NGOs. Sometimes however, authorities took street children—notcharged with any crime—to government-run centers for children chargedwith crimes or children who had already been charged and convicted of crimes.In other cases, the Ugandan police, or other authorities like KCCA in Kampala,forcefully returned children to their homes without considering the reasons whythe children left their homes in the first place.The Kampala Capital City Authority seems to provide alevel of coordination for roundups carried out in the city. Human Rights Watchwrote to the KCCA about its role in roundups of children in Kampala, and todate KCCA has not responded. In April 2014, Harriet Mudondo, KCCA director ofgender, production, and community services, was quoted in the government-owned NewVision newspaper as saying that “when enforcement officers are tryingto get street kids off the streets, some of them put up a lot of resistancewhich sometimes leads to fights with the officers and that is when the childrenare aggressively handled.”[70]According to one media report, in November 2013, the KCCArounded up 40 children and took them to Kampiringisa, a facility specificallyfor children between the ages of 12 and 18 in conflict with the law.[71]According to various other media reports, authorities also took at least 70street children in 2013 from the streets of Kampala to MasulitaChildren’s Home, operated by an NGO supported by the First Lady JanetMuseveni;[72] and KCCArounded up another 70 children in August 2012,[73] 100children in March 2012,[74] and 300children in July 2011.[75]Outside Kampala, NGO officers in Mbale described theroundup of over 45 children in May 2013, though other sources reported that thenumber nearly reached 80 children.[76] Aprotection officer with a local NGO working at the time told Human RightsWatch: “Their mode of resettlement didn’t work. The street wasclean for four days and then the children started coming back.”[77]Police brought some younger children to the NGO, while they took others to theMbale remand home.[78] Otherreports alleged that on previous occasions, the police and Mbale municipalauthorities took children “to the bus park and load[ed] them onto busesto [districts in the Karamoja region], forcing them to return to theirhomes.”[79] InLira, NGO staff told Human Rights Watch that police conducted roundups aboutfour times in 2013.[80] Intervieweesalso said that in a 2010 operation in Lira, police had tried to forcibly resettleup to 50 children back to their homes.[81]These organized roundups can be just as brutal as the morefrequent arbitrary arrests. A journalist in Lira described witnessing theviolence of the 2010 roundup: “How do they get [the children]? By force,of course. When the police round the kids up, they are beaten. I witnessed it.It is very dehumanizing because [there are] those children who try toresist.”[82]Extortion[The policemen] take money from us. If you do not havemoney they beat you so much…. Last week on Saturday, police came in thenight and beat me when I was sleeping with three other children. The policemanbeat me on the thighs with a rubber whip. He then hit my knees with a baton. Hebeat me until I gave him 1,000 shillings ($0.40) and left me.—Roger P., 13-year-old, living two years on thestreets in Lira,December 2013[83]Whether or not, or the extent to which, street children aresubject to physical abuse or arrest can depend on whether he or she has money theycan hand over to the police or other officials. Police use the threat ofbeatings, arrest, or detention to extort money from children. Over a third of thechildren who spoke to Human Rights Watch said that police or KCAA officersforced them to hand over money or small goods in exchange for not being beatenor being released from detention. Often officers first beat them and thenthreatened to arrest them if they could not pay.For example, police beat 13-year-old Alex J. on threeseparate occasions in Soroti. “When the policemen arrest you they ask formoney. They say, ‘Bring money, bring money!’ When you have moneythey beat you and leave; when you don’t have money they beat you and takeyou to police. These policemen, they like money, they like money! They willcane you until they get money from you.”[84]Sixteen street children described police and KCCA officers forcefullygoing through their pockets, sometimes after beating them, to find goods ormoney. “[A police officer] got hold of my hand in the night. He asked formoney. I said I don’t have any. He pushed his hand into my pockets andchecked them. He got 500 shillings ($0.20) and then caned me with a baton on myshin.”[85] ZacharyL. has lived on the streets since he was nine years old, spent time inKampiringisa in 2010, and said that he has also had to pay agents of the KCCAto avoid arrest. “KCCA comes and just beats you, beating, beating,beating, when you are sleeping. When you run away they check where you weresleeping for money. They can come once a month and take your money. Theythreaten that they are going to take you to Kampiringisa. And because we fearit, we give in and pay not to go.”[86]Police also took money from Zachary after he worked a dayparking cars in Wandegeya market in Kampala.The officer asked me why I was out so late. I told him Idon’t have anywhere to sleep. He told me then he would take me to thepolice station. I asked why, I have not done anything. I am not a thief. Hesaid, “Give me your money.” But I refused, so he ransacked mypockets and took the 17,000 shillings ($6.70) I had earned since morning. Thishas happened many times.[87]One NGO child protection officer in Kampala recountedwitnessing a KCCA roundup and then watching one of the street boys walk away;the boy told him he had paid to avoid arrest.[88] Aformer street child who is now a youth pastor working with street childrenspoke of the KCCA and police rounding up street children: “Instead oftaking them, they go through their pockets and take money, phones, whatever.They are like thieves.”[89]Some police officers also would demand payment for releasewhen they arrest street children. In March 2012, 15-year-old Richard P. wasarrested in Nsambya, Kampala. He witnessed a woman he knows who looks afterstreet children pay 50,000 shillings ($20) for his release.[90]Zachary similarly said that another woman who looks after children in Wandegeyamarket paid for his release the last time he was arrested for four days inOctober 2013. Police demanded 30,000 shillings for his release, so a friend hadto go find the woman to pay the bribe.[91] Payingbribes to police, even done to help street children, unfortunately only feedsthe system of supporting and prolonging corruption in the police force.Treatment andConditions in Police DetentionIn police custody, children are subjected to further abuses, particularly at the hands of adultcell mates. Some children were released after a night in custody, others spendconsiderably longer in detention, from a few days to a few weeks. By Ugandanlaw police should take children before a court or release them within 24-hoursof their arrest.[92] TheUganda Police Force told Human Rights Watch that if there are no juvenile cellsin a police station, children are referred to other stakeholders like the localcouncils or the courts, and that they make sure the cases are handled within the24 hour period.[93] However, the experience ofthe children with whom Human Rights Watch spoke, and what is witnessed by thoseworking with street children, indicates that this is not the case in reality.Many of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watch hadbeen arrested and detained in police stations or posts and said they were detainedin cells with adults. Sixteen-year-old James S. was arrested twice in Soroti in2013; the second time he was found sleeping and was arrested with another boy. Policeofficers took the boys to Soroti Central Police Station. “They put us ina cell with adults,” he recounted. “The people in the cell startedbeating us and asking us for money for lodging. There was a policeman outside[the cell] but he did not stop them.”[94] Anumber of children spoke of adult cellmates forcing them to pay“lodging” fees. Children unable to pay were forced to perform painfuland humiliating tasks for the entertainment of other detainees, such as inflictingharm on themselves by punching the cell wall. Several claimed that adult detaineesbeat them in front of police officers.[95]Other children described the conditions of their cells,including lack of mattresses, blankets, and mosquito nets, as well as limitedaccess to toilets and food. For example, Daniel P. was 8-years-old when he wasdetained with adults in a police cell for five days. He told Human RightsWatch: “There was nothing to sleep on but urine on the floor. We used abucket to defecate in and urinate in, and there was overflow on thefloor.”[96] In 2013police arrested and charged 16-year-old Louis B. with smoking marijuana. Policekept him in custody for over three weeks awaiting his court appearance. Hecomplained that his cell was dirty and that police officers forced him to cleantheir offices. Because police had beaten him severely during his arrest, heasked the officers for medical help while in detention, but he was deniedtreatment.[97] Mostchildren reported that police only provided a single meal per day, usuallyaround 3 p.m. or 4 p.m. Some children spoke of not receiving any meals and onlyeating when other detainees shared food brought in by visitors.[98]Children who were not charged with a crime, taken to court,or taken to one of the government remand homes said that they were released fromcustody only if one of a few things happened. This was either when they hadcompleted forced work in police custody, when someone paid to have themreleased, when a local NGO employee would negotiate on their behalf, or simplyif they managed to escape.Forced LaborChildren told Human Rights Watch that police have forced themto work while in custody, usually to earn their release. Children, from theseven towns where Human Rights Watch conducted research, described very similartreatment at the hands of police, who would force them to do chores, such ascutting grass (“slashing”) or farming (“digging”);fetching water to mop offices and clean cells, including disposing of otherdetainees’ waste; and, in a few instances, they were even made to cleanpolice living quarters.In 2013, police arrested 14-year-old Ibrahim P. severaltimes outside a video hall where some street children spend their time inSoroti, eastern Uganda. “They locked us in the cell in the night. In themorning a policeman took four of us out of the cell to go fetch water. He toldus to go wash the police patrol car. He said, ‘Wash that car, it is yourcar which picks you from town to police’.”[99]Police released Ibrahim and the other children after they washed the vehicle,never charging them with a crime. Police officers also made Zachary L., who wasdetained in October 2013 for four days, clean the police station and private policeliving quarters.[100]Robert U. from Kasese in western Uganda said police arrestedhim a few days before he spoke to Human Rights Watch. “On Friday around11 p.m. police arrested 10 of us from the street and detained us in Nyakasanga[police post] until Sunday. I did not pay any money but I slashed the compoundon Sunday almost the whole day and they released me. I was released just likethat. They did not give me any document, they did not tell me to report back, Idid not write a statement. They just set me free after slashing thecompound.”[101] Policein Kasese initially charged other children with being idle and loitering, like LeoY., but released them after they cleaned toilets and worked in the policecompound.[102]Mob ViolenceThe community always tells us that we are children of thestreet, that we steal, that we should not cross in front of their homes or oneof us will be killed.—Lucas P., 13-year-old, living four years on thestreets in Gulu,December 2013[103]When mob justice comes, they don’t discriminate. Athief is a thief. There is a big negative attitude. Once a child gets to thestreets they are a thief.—Staff member at an international children’s organizationin Soroti, December 2013[104]Occasionally shop owners, market vendors, and others ask streetchildren to undertake small jobs to earn money, offer them places to sleep offthe streets, or assist them when the children are sick or injured, helping themget medical treatment. Some community members have even come to the aid of astreet child when police demanded bribes for their release from detention. However,such assistance is few and far between, as community members have verballyabused, spat on, kicked, or slapped street children who pass by theirbusinesses or homes. In some instances, groups from the communities attacked streetchildren, beating them severely and in Lira town children have died as aresult.The widespread belief that all street children arethieves fuels violent reactions to rumors or actual incidents of theft. Randomchildren have been caught up in indiscriminate retributive violence when crimesare committed.For example, two weeks after coming to the streets of Gulu, 13-year-oldEdward B. was walking by a home in company of two friends, looking for metalscraps to collect and sell. The homeowners stopped him and took him to the police,accusing him of stealing. The police dismissed the boys, but the homeownerswere dissatisfied. They took Edward and his friends to the district local councilofficial who said they should be beaten. “Some people used sticks, othersshoes, some a metal rod. About 10 of them.”[105]The boys never reported the beating to the police. Another 13-year-old boy inGulu, Lucas P., remembers being beaten on at least six separate occasions. “Thelast time was in September. I was picking plastic in a compound…. We weresix, they were about twelve. They took our plastic … [and] beat us withwire locks. We were made to lie down on the ground and they beat us on the backand kicked us.”[106]A journalist in Lira, accompanied by 13-year-old Ali L., describedan August 2013 incident when members of the community beat a street boy,Matthew T., nearly to death. Fourteen-year-old Matthew and Ali were walking inthe evening when a homeless man convinced Matthew to try to break into a home.The three were quickly chased away, stealing nothing in the end. Police caught Alifirst and beat him with a baton, fracturing his arm, and detained him overnightwithout medical treatment. The next morning police took Ali to hunt for Matthewand the homeless adult. The police found and arrested Matthew and another boy, NelsonJ., who was not involved in the attempted robbery. Police looked on while membersof the community beat Nelson with an iron bar, and others in the community beatMatthew to the point where police thought he had died. Matthew regainedconsciousness in the morgue and was taken to the hospital.[107]The journalist showed Human Rights Watch several photographs of the boys’injuries.[108]Members of the community have also accused and abused streetchildren when they are near the scenes of alleged crimes. Ben P., a 14-year-oldboy who stayed some nights with his single mother, other nights in front of apopular nightclub, described being attacked when he was sleeping outside.At 2 a.m. I was sleeping and [members of the community] claimedthat things had been stolen. They were about seven people. I was alone. Theyused a metal rod and a baton from an askari (guard) among them. Mostlythey targeted my joints. During that time I was so badly beaten that my friendshad to help me.[109]Impunity for MobAttacks of Street ChildrenAccording to local activists, Police have been eitherindifferent to mob attacks against street children or complicit in the abuses,as in the Lira case above. Police rarely investigated the mob attacks even whenthey led to death. Vincent Alele from Child Restoration Outreach in Lira toldHuman Rights Watch that “It’s hard to follow the cases [of killingsof street children]. At the scene of the crime, and given this attitude againststreet children, the best the police does is come and pick the body for themortuary.”[110]The journalist who documented the August 2013 attack on thestreet children in Lira visited Matthew later in the hospital, and followed upwith Ali’s mother. He also investigated the killing of three other streetboys between July and September 2013 in Lira town, taking pictures of thescenes, including photos of the assailants, and brought all the evidence to theattention of the Lira deputy police commander. He was told police wouldinvestigate, though, despite repeated efforts to follow the cases, he has neverheard anything further.[111]In Mbale, eastern Uganda, those with knowledge of thesecases voiced similar frustration at the lack of follow up by police when streetchildren are the victims of attacks. “The police never, ever intervene”when members of the community beat street children, said a social worker. “Thechildren themselves fear going to the police since they think they will bearrested instead of being helped.”[112] Inaddition to fearing reporting abuses he faced from the community, 16-year-old LouisB., in the eastern town of Soroti, also refused to report to the police becausehe thought they would ask him for money to carry out investigations.[113]Children feared reporting members of the community because the police would notoffer them any protection. Roger P., who had been collecting metal scraps onthe streets for two years, said the welders in town beat him because they thoughthe was trying to steal their metal. Roger had not reported the beatings to thepolice because of fears the welders would come after him if he said anything.[114]Even children who tried to report incidents to the policesay they get no justice. Fifteen-year-old Elias A. wanted to report the vendorswho burned him with plastic in a market in Kampala. Police asked him to providean eyewitness instead of investigating the allegations.[115]Sexual AbuseMost children have been defiled or raped. It is rare tofind a 13 or 14-year-old girl [on the street] who has not been pregnant.—Lillian Mugeni, public relations officer for the NGODwelling Places in Kampala, February 2014[116]Sexual Abuse of Street GirlsMany girls living on the streets are survivors of sexualassault and rape, including gang rape. Even girls who work on the streets duringthe day are at risk of sexual abuse, including from fellow street boys. None ofthe girls who spoke with Human Rights Watch had reported the abuse to police, afew saying that police would ask for eyewitnesses, for money to investigate,and because of a general belief that police would simply fail to investigate.Some girls sought help and medical attention from NGOs andhospitals. For example, street boys raped Lucy O. when she was 15 years old. A womanin Soroti town helped her seek medical treatment, though she did not report therape to the police because she believed they would just ask her for aneyewitness she could not provide.[117] Onenurse in Mbale told Human Rights Watch that she treated girls as young as 9years old who had been raped while living on the streets, some of whom werealso pregnant.[118] Girlswho have been raped or who are pregnant sometimes seek support from local NGOsbefore going to hospitals. However, those like Lucy, who was pregnant when shespoke to Human Rights Watch, do not seek any kind of help for theirpregnancies. Lucy said people on the street mistreated her because she wasunmarried and pregnant, and so she did not think that she could get any help.[119]Some girls said that their assailants on the streets weremen, not street boys.[120] A manraped 14-year old Rachel M. one night when she was looking for a place tosleep. “We don’t report these things to police. I don’t thinkthat they would listen to us. They will ask us “Are you not an adult? Ifthey raped you so what?’”[121] IreneT. lived on the street for four years before being reunited with her mother. Shedescribed always being threatened with rape by men from the community as wellas street boys. “You keep fighting off men and boys all the time. Peopledo not regard us as human beings.”[122]Sexual Abuse ofStreet BoysYoung boys and boys who have recently arrived on the streetsare particularly vulnerable to sexual assault, in the latter case as an“initiation,” or “hazing period.” Some boys interviewedby Human Rights Watch said they knew street children who had been sexuallyabused by older street boys and men, some of whom were not homeless. Many were veryreluctant to speak about male rape. Clearly this is exacerbated by the additionalstigma and shame due to widespread homophobia in Uganda, which undermines theauthorities’ ability to understand the sexual abuse of boys, conductmeaningful criminal investigations, and hold perpetrators accountable.Several organizations located in different towns acrossUganda that assist street children conceded that they were more and more awareof boys being raped. One nurse working for a street children’s center inMbale said that some boys had talked to her about sexual abuse, but most weresilent and scared.[123] Inmost cases, men raped the boys when they found them sleeping outside at night.Fifteen-year-old Fred N. was anally raped by a man he did not know who foundhim where he was sleeping. “A man came in the night with a knife and arope. He tied my hands and sodomized me. He put a knife on my neck and said‘If you say anything I will kill you’.”[124]Fred never reported the incident to police.Other boys spoke of rape as part of the culture perpetuatedby older homeless children or adults, who they refer to as “big boys.”[125]For example, 15-year-old David A. feared the older boys as they would regularlysexually abuse the smaller children. A man raped him one night when he was comingback to the slum where he sleeps after collecting bottles to sell. Davidreported the incident to a local official who advised him to alert him if heever heard the man’s voice, since David did not see his face. David wasnever able to identify his assailant, nor did he seek any medical assistance.[126]Commercial Sexual ExploitationBoth girls and boys engage in sex work—exchanging sexwith adults for money, food, or a place to sleep—and become victims ofcommercial sexual exploitation. Girls spoke of places around pubs or videohalls in town where they would find customers. In Kampala, Wandegeya market isknown for street children and a popular place where boys engage in sex work. ZacharyL., who worked parking cars in the market, spent seven years on the streets inJinja and Kampala and knew that many of his friends use sex for survival, bothwith men and women.A man came with a very good car and my friend will doanything for money … so he went with him. He came back with 100,000shillings ($40). My friend was then able to rent a house for his clients. Thestreet kids are easily enticed by money and video games.... Even women come andpark their cars. They come and use you and pay you.[127]Boys living on the street and NGO staff described how girls arevictims of commercial sexual exploitation at night, spending their days ingroups in rented rooms or abandoned buildings. Others, like 15-year-old RachelM. in Masaka, spoke of having sex with men in order to have a place to sleepoff the streets at night. “Men take advantage of us and use us….You accept because you want money to buy food. Last week a man found me in avideo hall. He took me to his house to have sex and gave me 5,000 shillings ($2).Then he threw me out and I had to find somewhere to sleep that night.”[128]Violence by Homeless AdultsHomeless adults, some of whom are former street children,also abuse their younger peers. Children reported that adults living on the streetshave beaten, kicked, burned, raped, and forced drugs on them. Fourteen-year-oldBen P. told Human Rights Watch: “When an older street boy finds you andyou don’t have money, you better find another place to sleep because theywill … beat you. Sometimes they burn plastic and drop it on you, or use …[fluorescent] light bulbs to beat you.”[129]Threats and acts of physical violence were usuallyaccompanied by theft. The homeless men forced younger children to hand overwhatever they have earned that day, or they had to go out to bring back moneyto homeless men or older boys, sometimes for “rent.” Some childrenpaid 1,000 shillings ($0.40) for rent to stay with a group or to sleep in acertain location. Other children said they paid 5,000 shillings ($2) orwhatever they had on them at the time they were cornered by the older boys ormen. For example, 14-year-old Isaiah R. would sleep under a shipping containerin Masaka. The older boys told him he had to pay kuwola akabeg,“rent for the street,” telling him he “could not live forfree.” They searched him and took away his 2,500 shillings ($1).[130]Children told Human Rights Watch that the older boys and adults took money offthem at night when sleeping, in addition to stealing their shoes or otheritems.[131]These actions appear to establish a hierarchy on thestreets. A journalist investigating street children in Gulu described how theyhave strict rules among themselves, “like small empires withleaders.”[132]Through intimidation, threats, and physical and sexual abuse, leaders and olderchildren exert control over younger street children. In Mbale, Human RightsWatch spoke to the street children’s “chairman,” a formerstreet child himself, who created a committee to “bring discipline on thestreet and order.” His informal committee allegedly “registered”new children who come to the streets of Mbale, claiming they seek to help children,even at times tracing their families and resettling them to their homes.[133]Forced Drug UseOlder children and adults force petrol, which they refer toas “aviation fuel,” glue, and marijuana upon their younger peerspossibly to make them easier to control and use them to make money.[134]Some children told Human Rights Watch that self-proclaimed “chairmen”and “leaders” of street children are the ones who lead the abuse,asking for money and forcing children to buy and sniff petrol as an intoxicant.[135]Children sometimes buy petrol by the bottle cap, paying 50 to 100 shillings($0.02 to $0.04) in Mbale and up to 500 shillings ($0.20) for the same quantityin Soroti and Lira. Several boys in Mbale said that the chairman buys the petrolfrom Kampala and sells it at a profit to street children.[136]Thirteen-year-old Henry N. told Human Rights Watch that “the big boys [olderchildren or adults] force those who do sniff to do so. They hold you by forceand pour petrol in your nose and all over the face.”[137]In Soroti boys spoke of being forced to also sniff glue—usually a brandof common adhesive used to repair shoes—and other children in areas HumanRights Watch conducted research said they were made to smoke marijuana.[138]Fifteen-year-old Richard P., who spent four years on the streets of Kampala,told Human Rights Watch, “I did not want to smoke marijuana but the bigboys forced me to smoke it. In Kampala this habit is very common because theywant you to buy from them.”[139]Some children claimed that sniffing helped them forget theirhunger and to sleep at night, keeping the cold at bay. Eleven-year-old Amos N.,an orphan living on the streets in Soroti, said he sniffed because “Ifsomebody beats you, if you are thinking of doing something bad, even if yourmother dies, you don’t cry, you don’t mourn because you havesniffed.”[140] ButAlan P., a 16-year-old who still sniffed fuel and glue even though he claimednot to like it, told Human Rights Watch that, “The more you do it themore you become weak. It is a lie that these things help you not to feel thepain or not to feel hungry. You just become weak and you can’t go to lookfor money to buy food.”[141]Older boys and men also forced younger ones to steal, eitherfrom people’s homes or from people on the street.[142]Some boys and men sent younger children to buy drugs for them.[143]If the children refused they were beaten. Twelve-year-old Aden M. said:“When we are beaten by other people or the big boys we do not report tothe police. We fear that the police will also beat us.”[144]Child LaborStreet children collect empty plastic bottles and metalscrap to sell by the kilogram; carry water or trash for businesses; load andunload passenger busses; sell food or other goods; work in restaurants or asdomestic labor; and engage in other temporary work in exchange for food ormoney. Other children are involved in hazardous or illegal activities, such as sexwork, stealing, or begging. Some adults take pity on street children, allowingthem to perform labor for a reasonable sum, or even giving them food andshelter for a short time. But others take advantage of them, paying streetchildren less than they would adults; they know the children have littlechoice. Children are easily exploited, accepting work that adults will not, ordoing it for smaller sums of money than adults would normally be paid.Fifteen-year-old Fred N., who collected scrap metal andcarries garbage and bunches of matoke (plantains or cooking bananas) forpeople in Masaka, described how he is paid very little. Some people treated himwell for his work, while others “pay according to their wish. You carryfor them their stuff and they call you a muyaaye [deviant]. They say a muyaayedoes not deserve much money.”[145]Isa G., a 9-year-old boy, was chased away from home by hismother when he was 7 years old. He would fetch water in 20-liter jerry cans forthe small eating places in Gulu town for 300 shillings ($0.12) per can and hewould sometimes take out trash for 500 shillings ($0.20). He said the work wastoo heavy for him.[146] AdamJ., a 13-year-old boy in Lira, said carrying a 20-liter jerry can on his headand another smaller one in his arms was painful. “I would also be made toroll heavy things in a cart for the same person…. Doing those thingshurt.”[147]Some people pay children very little for their hard work, orin exchange for the work they are given “leftovers,” food that wassometimes spoiled, usually scraps from small restaurants where patrons had notfinished their meals.[148] Otherssaid that employers promised them money and then never paid them. Several boysspoke about being singled out by people in town to do small jobs. A woman told 16-year-oldJack P. in Lira that she would pay him 2,000 shillings ($0.80) per day tocollect metal scrap, but then refused to pay him for a month’s worth ofwork.[149]Girls reported being taken to private homes for domesticwork, including cleaning and washing clothes, and even caring for otherchildren. Helen O., who left home around the age of 13, was taken in by apastor and his wife. “They made me carry heavy things, they did notprovide me with good clothes, and they did not pay me for three months.”When she finally asked to be paid, the pastor drove Helen back to the churchwhere he found her and left her there.[150]Some parents send their children to the streets to hawkitems or food with threats of beatings if children come home without a profit.[151]Adults send or accompany a child to the streets and force them to beg and handoverthe money; some unaccompanied street children also resort to begging for moneyor food, without having to turn over their earnings to anyone else.[152]Alice Z., who was 13 years old, was on the street for just six months inKampala. She found it safer to sleep at night among the disabled and during theday beg for money to buy food.[153] Manychildren resort to begging when they cannot find other work.Several street children spoke of how they were sometimes forcedto steal by their peers, adults on the streets, or by those who offer them foodor shelter as a reward for stealing.[154] Sometimesthey are sent to steal by street adults or older children who claim to want topay them or give them a share of the stolen property. Fifteen-year-old DanielP. in Lira explained that he resorted to stealing when he was not able to makemoney and is hungry. “Sometimes I fail to find metal scraps. Sometimes itpushes me to steal. I hate that it compels me to steal.”[155]III. Laws and Policies for the Protection ofChildrenIn 1993, the United Nations General Assembly recognized theparticular plight of street children, urging governments to respect fundamentalhuman rights and “actively to seek comprehensive solutions to tackle theproblems of street children and to take measures to restore their fullparticipation in society and to provide, inter alia, adequate nutrition,shelter, health care and education.”[156]Uganda is party to a number of international and regionaltreaties that protect the basic and fundamental human rights of children, andhas even matched its international obligations with strong, domesticlegislation on child rights. With a robust framework and multiple governmentactors mandated to play a role in protecting children, Uganda could have the necessarylegal and policy means to provide for and protect its street children.International Legal StandardsUganda has ratified the African Charter on Human andPeoples’ Rights (known as the Banjul Charter), which protects thefundamental civil, political, economic, and social rights of all people, includingchildren.[157] TheConvention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), which Uganda ratified in 1990, andthe African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC), ratified in1994, spell out the principal responsibility of the government underinternational law to protect the specific rights of children.[158]The CRC calls on any actors working unofficially or on behalf of the state inofficial capacity to take all “legislative, administrative, social, andeducational measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mentalviolence, injury, and abuse.”[159]Article 19 of the CRC requires that states protect children from “neglector negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse,while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who hascare of the child.”[160]Right to Protection from AbuseChildren have the right to protection from abuse, including fromviolence, deprivation of liberty, sexual abuse, and the illicit use of drugs.The CRC, the International Covenant on Civil and PoliceRights (ICCPR), and the Convention against Torture require states to preventtorture, as well as other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.This prohibition applies “not only to acts that cause physical pain butalso to acts that cause mental suffering to the victim,” and theinfliction of such treatment can never be justified.[161]Street children in Uganda are at particular risk of prohibited abusive treatmentby the police, KCCA, as well as by members of communities, and adults on thestreet. Many of the instances of police and KCCA abuse and extortion constitutecruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment; in some instances this ill-treatmentrises to the level of torture.Police beatings of children with batons, wires, bicyclelocks, or other objects, and the use of tear gas, that cause severe pain orsuffering and are intended to punish or intimidate children constitute torture.In cases where beatings and harassment of children by police do not rise to thelevel of torture, they may nevertheless produce a level of physical or mentalsuffering that constitutes cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment orpunishment. In addition, violence and exploitation of children by police andKCCA on the streets or in detention violate children’s rights under theCRC.These international treaties also impose an obligation onstates at all levels of government to take measures to protect children againstsexual violence and abuse. The government should provide a remedy wherefundamental protections have been violated. The CRC requires that states“undertake to protect the child from all forms of sexual exploitation andsexual abuse.”[162] Thisincludes ensuring that perpetrators of sexual abuse and exploitation arebrought to justice.[163]Article 33 of the Convention on the Rights of the Childrequires states to take all appropriate measure “to protect children fromthe illicit use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.”[164]In addition to drugs like marijuana, the substances used by children in Uganda,like glue and petrol, can be addictive, altering their state of mind.[165]The government should take legislative, administrative, social, and educationalmeasures to protect children from misuse and forced ingestion or consumption ofdrugs as described in this report.Moreover, the CRC requires states to take all appropriatemeasures to promote physical and psychological recovery and social integrationof child victims of any form of abuse. Such recovery and reintegration shouldtake place in an environment that fosters health, self-respect, and dignity ofthe child.[166]Right to Protectionfrom Arbitrary Arrest and DetentionThe ICCPR, the CRC, and the Banjul Charter prohibit allarbitrary or unlawful deprivations of liberty.[167]There are a number of UN instruments that provide authoritative guidance underinternational law for interpreting treaties’ provisions relevant to thetreatment of children in conflict with the law.[168]With respect to juvenile detention, the InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights highlights the need for the treatment ofchildren appropriate to their age, and the ICCPR along with the ACRWC requirethat children—either those suspected or found guilty of violating penal laws—shouldbe segregated from adults and not be detained alongside them.Organized operations that round up large numbers of childrenas described in this report are arbitrary and unlawful, as are arrests intendedto extort money or information from children. Even when the arrest or detentionof children accused of being “idle and disorderly” or of “vagrancy”is not conducted in an arbitrary manner, it may still be unlawful if childrenare held for an extended period without being charged with an offence.The CRC specifies that depriving children of liberty“shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortestappropriate period of time,” and that “[e]very child deprived ofhis or her liberty shall have the right to prompt access to legal and otherappropriate assistance, as well as the right to challenge the legality of thedeprivation of his or her liberty before a court or other competent,independent and impartial authority, and to a prompt decision on any suchaction.”[169] Asthis report documents, the policy of routinely holding children accused of beingidle and disorderly in custody violates the principle that detention shouldonly be used as a measure of last resort. Furthermore, it violates the nationallaws Ugandan has enacted, as detailed in the section below.According to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, theplacing into institutions of orphans or children requiring alternative careshould be a “measure of last resort and only when family-type measuresare considered inadequate for a specific child, and that institutionalizationis subject to regular review with a view to reassessing the possibility ofreunification.”[170] Thecommittee has urged countries to introduce well-resourced foster care systemsas an alternative to institutionalized care.[171] Whereinstitutionalization is necessary and in the best interest of the child, strictmeasures are needed to ensure that such institutions meet specific standards ofcare and comply with legal protection safeguards. States must ensure effectiveand systematic inspection mechanisms to check on children’s welfare inall institutions, both government and private.[172]Freedom from ChildLaborThe International Covenant on Economic, Social and CulturalRights (ICESCR), which Uganda ratified in 1987, safeguards children from workthat is harmful, dangerous, or likely to hamper their normal development, andrequires signatories to prohibit and punish child labor.[173]Article 32 of the CRC similarly requires states to recognize the right of childrento protection from economic exploitation and hazardous labor, but also laborwhich would interfere with a child’s education.[174]The International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention 182 concerning theProhibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms ofChild Labour prohibits the worst forms of child labor for all children under18.[175] Theconvention defines “work which, by its nature or the circumstances inwhich it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals of thechildren.”[176] Sexwork, commercial sexual exploitation, and forced begging are the worst forms ofchild labor.[177]Article 3 of the ILO convention addresses forced andcompulsory labor. The work police have children do in police stations and livingquarters amounts to forced labor. The convention calls on states to takeimmediate measures to prohibit and eliminate this and all other worst forms ofchild labor.Right to EducationThe right to education is enshrined in international humanrights instruments, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948).The CRC, the ICESCR, the Banjul Charter, and the ACRWC all contain provisionsrequiring states parties to ensure that education leads to the full developmentof the child.[178]Both the CRC and the ICESCR require primary education to becompulsory and free without discrimination.[179]Similarly, the African Charter on the Rights and the Welfare of the Childprovides that “every child has the right to an education” andstipulates that free and compulsory basic education should be achievedprogressively.[180]Secondary education, including vocational training, should be made availableand accessible. States are required to protect children from work thatinterferes with their education.[181]The Ugandan Child Protection FrameworkDespite a strong framework in children’s rights, activistsand NGO staff highlight the failure of the Ugandan government to implementchild protection laws and policies across the country.[182] The 1995constitution reflects many of the basic rights and protections for children setout in international standards. Under the constitution, children are guaranteedthe right to all social and economic benefits free from discrimination;[183]they are protected from “any form of abuse, harassment orill-treatment;”[184] and vulnerablechildren are accorded “special protection,” though what thoseprotections entail is not specified.[185]Children in PoliceCustodyThe Children Act provides the legal framework to protect andpromote the rights of children. The age of criminal responsibility is 12,[186]though with only four percent of births registered between 1999 and 2003determining the age of children can be arbitrary and inaccurate.[187]According to the Committee on the Rights of the Child’s general commenton juvenile justice, 12 years is the absolute minimum age of criminalresponsibility.[188] Article89 of the Children Act, which addresses children in conflict with the law,outlines the procedures of police interaction with children, includingdiscretionary powers on whether or not to caution and release children withoutrecourse to formal hearings;[189] howpolice must contact a probation and social welfare officer at the time of arrestto partake in interviews with children; and that if children cannot be takenimmediately to court and the charges are not serious, the children should bereleased on bond.[190]Both the Children Act and the constitution stipulate thatchildren should be kept separately from adults during detention,[191]and children are not to be detained for more than 24-hours if they are nottaken to court in that timeframe.[192] In itsresponse to Human Rights Watch, the Uganda Police Force said thatchildren’s cases follow the “guidelines in place as outlined in theChildren’s Act.”[193] Andyet, as documented in this report, street children report that they are routinelydetained in police custody with adults, girls were kept with boys and adults,[194]and in some cases well beyond the 24-hour holding limit. The Ugandanpolice’s mixing of children with adult criminal detainees—as wellas the mixing of children of different ages, backgrounds, and legal statusduring detention—in addition to the lengthy detention periods, placeschildren at risk of torture, ill-treatment, and exploitation. These practicesviolate children’s rights under both domestic and international law to beheld separately from adults and to be treated with humanity and respect and ina manner which takes into account their needs.Children andEmploymentThe constitution,[195] theChildren Act,[196] the2006 Employment Act, and the 2006 National Child Labour Policy constitute astrong framework for the protection of children from exploitation and harmfulemployment. The Employment Act sets the terms for employment of children under18 and forbids the employment of children under 12.[197]No child should be employed in work that is detrimental to their “health,dangerous or hazardous or otherwise unsuitable.”[198]The child labor policy provides a framework to mobilize actors to eliminatechild labor, outlining the governmental response to it and its institutionalframework.[199] “Lightwork” outlined in the Employment Act, is deemed acceptable under Ugandanlaw for children over 14 years, which could be applicable to some of the smalljobs street children perform, if supervised by an adult and should not affect achild’s education.[200]Enforcement of ChildRights in UgandaThe government developed anational program specifically targeting orphans and vulnerable children(OVC)—the 2004 National Strategic Programme Plan of Interventions (NSPPI)for OVC—to address high vulnerability of children as a result ofconflict, HIV/AIDS, and poverty. The program was renewed with NSPPI-2 through2015/2016 to guide basic services to this subset of children with coordinated,multi-sector interventions.[201]Along with the National Council for Children Act, the Orphansand Vulnerable Children Policy of 2004 provides a more specified framework forprotection of the critically vulnerable, which explicitly includes children wholive on the streets.[202] It setsguiding principles for the implementation of policies on vulnerable children.And yet, despite the national Council for Children and theorphans and vulnerable children policies, the responsibility of implementationof child protection falls heavily on local government councils in the districtsacross Uganda.[203] As describedboth in article 10 of the Children Act, which provides for local authoritysupport of children, and the Local Government Act of 1997, district councils areresponsible for the welfare of children. Each district, through executivecommittees, is to have secretaries charged with children’s health andwelfare.[204] TheLocal Government Act also makes district councils responsible for services forstreet children and they are the first line of response to child protectionissues.[205]IV. RecommendationsTothe Government of UgandaTothe Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social DevelopmentEnd the ministry’s involvement in orpromotion of roundups of street children in Kampala and elsewhere in Uganda.Empower the National Council for Children toact as a focal point to promote the protection of street children and monitorlaw enforcement practices related to street children. The ministry shouldsolicit international funding for the council and consult national andinternational nongovernmental organizations on best practices in childprotection, particularly domestic organizations working with street children.Ensure that sufficient budgets are allocatedto ministry-led interventions that target street children specifically, workingwith nongovernmental organizations assisting street children to address gaps inprogramming.Address the root causes of child labor bysupporting orphans and other vulnerable children through social protectionschemes for vulnerable populations.Take measures to fight stigma anddiscrimination against street children, for example through awareness-raisingcampaigns about the rights of all children, and creating a campaign and improvingmechanisms to report child abuse to police. Such mechanisms should be availableand accessible to both children and adults, like a free hotline and desksdedicated to receive reports in the offices of district-level probation and socialwelfare officers.Incorporate information on how to respectthe rights of children into existing trainings of police officers, justiceofficials, health workers, district probation and social welfare officers, andothers who interact with vulnerable children.The ministry in its trainings should includespecific actions to tackle sexual violence in prevention, protection,reporting, investigation, and prosecution. It should ensure that allstakeholders support children in need of medical attention, including survivorsof sexual violence.Carry out regular monitoring visits of theKampiringisa National Rehabilitation Center and the four remand homes in Naguru(Kampala), Mbale, Gulu, and Fort Portal, to ensure the health and well-being ofchildren in the centers. Ensure that conditions of confinement meetinternational standards.Allocate sufficient funds to construct andmaintain alternative facilities for children not in conflict with the law ineach district as an alternative to remand homes and the national rehabilitationcenter. Ensure that homes or centers are available to promote rehabilitationand provide appropriate education and healthcare, and family tracing andoptions for resettlement or adoption if necessary.Facilitate access of nongovernmentalorganizations to conduct regular monitoring visits to Kampiringisa and the fourremand homes, and any police facilities used to detain children.To the Ministry of Educationand SportsFormulate and implement a national strategyto progressively reduce and eliminate costs related to education that often preventchildren from going to or staying in school, such as the cost of meals, books,writing instruments, and uniforms.To the Ministry of LocalGovernmentEnsure that all probation and social welfareofficers are trained in child rights.Allocate sufficient budgets to probation andsocial welfare officers to carry out their work on child protection, andimplement programs for officers to conduct regular surveys of the number ofchildren in their district to improve interventions and assistance.Allow, in the absence of governmentservices, NGOs to operate assistance programs for street children and ensurethat district ordinances do not impede the work of NGOs.To the Kampala Capital CityAuthorityEnd the roundups of children and thepractice of taking them to Kampiringisa or forcefully returning them to theirhomes.Ensure that all KCCA officers are trained inchild rights and enforce the prohibition of abuse of children by KCCA officers.Initiateinvestigations into complaints concerning the use and abuse of street children,and disciplinary measures and criminal sanctions should occur whereappropriate.Issue direct orders to all KCCA officers tocease extorting money or goods from street children.To the Parliament of UgandaApprove the pending amendment of theChildren Act that would bring greater protection and access to family communitycourts for vulnerable children who have committed petty and non-capitaloffenses.Tothe Uganda Bureau of StatisticsInclude questions relating to childrenliving, working, and sleeping on the streets in the next August 2014 census, inaddition to existing questions relating to orphans.Tothe Uganda Police ForceEnd arbitrary arrests, detention, androundups of street children.Investigate all allegations of beatings andviolence against street children by police and consider bringing charges underUganda’s 2012 Anti-Torture Act.Enforce the prohibition against policebrutality of street children.Issue direct orders to all police to neverextort money or goods from street children. Initiate investigations into allegations ofthe use and abuse of street children, including sexual exploitation and abuse, andensure there are disciplinary measures and criminal sanctions occur whereappropriate.Improve its investigative and forensiccapacity to combat child abuse.Increase the number of Child and FamilyProtection Unit (CFPU) officers to ensure that they are located in every police station. Recognizing the positive role that CFPUofficers can play in child protection, limiting abuse, and promoting reconciliationswith family members, the government should prioritize the deployment of CFPUofficers throughout the country.Provide adequate support, includingresources for transportation and communication, to the CFPU to carry out itswork on child protection.Improve safeguards for children in policecustody.Guarantee that street children have accessto a member of the CFPU, to relatives, and to a lawyer from the onset ofdetention.Ensure that an officer of the CFPU and alawyer are present during any interrogation or questioning. Ensure that every child deprived of libertyis held separately from adults.Release children who have been kept inpolice custody for over 24 hours if they have not been brought to court, asrequired under the Children Act.Investigate cases of child abuse in homeswhere parents or guardians are reported to physically or sexually abusechildren. Cases should be immediately referred to the probation and socialwelfare officers at the district level.ToUganda’s International PartnersUrge the government of Uganda to investigateabuses of street children committed by the Uganda Police Force and KCCA; pushfor charges to be brought under Uganda’s 2012 Anti-Torture Act whereappropriate, and for the government to carry out fair and credible trials foranyone suspected of criminal acts against street children.Condemn roundups of street children regularlywhen they occur and consistently raise concerns with Ugandan governmentofficials, especially the inspector general of police, the minister of gender,labour and social development, and the executive director of the KCCA.Monitor any funding to government and thepolice to ensure it does not support roundup operations of street children.If considering support to the government, providetechnical and financial assistance specifically to improve the protection of children’srights. Donors could consider earmarking assistance for:Training of all police and other lawenforcement personnel on the rights of the child and handling of juvenilecases.Support trainings for police ininvestigating and gathering evidence in cases of sexual exploitation or abuseof children. Supporting the National Council for Childrengovernment action on issues relating to street children.Improving conditions in all detentionfacilities where children are held—particularly the separation of cellsfor children from those for adults—and including funding new centers or alternativefacilities for children not in conflict with the law.Supporting programs that identify andprovide assistance to street children and that facilitate the reunification ofstreet children with their families, if all parties are amenable toreunification.Supporting credible and effective measuresto end the social causes of child labor, for example, through projects thatimprove access to education.Funding for primary education and anyrelated costs such as uniforms, books and meals, to ensure that every child hasaccess to schooling. Support a nation-wide needs assessment oforphans and vulnerable children, highlighting street children, in possiblepartnership with the government and nongovernmental organizations who supportstreet children. Support the Justice Law and Order Sectorproposal to establish an ombudsperson for children, which could serve as afocal point and independent entity to promote the interests of children andensure that the government complies with international and national provisionson children’s rights. Promote the role and work of nongovernmentalorganizations in Uganda working with street children and help coordinate amongNGOs and the government on child protection issues.Develop community reintegration programs, alternativefacilities, and income-generating programs for families of street children toassist children returning home and to decrease the likelihood of their returnto the streets.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Jamie Vernaelde,senior associate in the Africa Division at Human Rights Watch. Additional interviewswere conducted by a research assistant in the Africa Division. The report was reviewedand edited by Maria Burnett, senior Africa researcher; Juliane Kippenberg,senior researcher in the Children’s Rights Division; and Agnes Odhiambo, seniorresearcher in the Women’s Rights Division. Aisling Reidy, senior legaladvisor, and Babatunde Olugboji, deputy program director, provided legal andprogram reviews. Lianna Merner, senior associate in the Africa Division,provided editing assistance, and the report was prepared for publication by Kathy Mills, production specialist, and FitzroyHepkins, production manager.Human Rights Watch would like to thank the activists and manynongovernmental organizations working in the field of child rights and streetchildren who provided assistance and shared their insight and analyses with us.Above all, we express our appreciation to all the children whoshared their time and experiences with us.Annex I: Human Rights Watch Letter to the Uganda Police ForceMarch 18, 2014Gen. Kale KayihuraInspector General of the UgandaPoliceUganda Police ForceP.O. Box 6329Kampala, UgandaMr. Erasmus TwaruhukwaHuman Rights DirectorateUganda Police ForceP.O. Box 6329Kampala, UgandaVia email to kayihurakale1@gmail.com and eraspats@yahoo.com; and via facsimile to +256-414-255-630RE: Street Children inUgandaDear Gen. Kayihura and Mr.Twaruhukwa,It was good to speak with youboth a month ago, and to meet you, Mr. Twaruhukwa. Thank you for your generoustime. On behalf of Human Rights Watch I am now writing in connection to recentinvestigation into abuses against street children in Uganda and to request someinformation regarding the role of the police in child protection issues. Wehope you or your staff will respond to the questions and concerns below so thatyour views are accurately reflected in our reporting.In December 2013 and early2014, Human Rights Watch examined the human rights dimensions of the plight ofstreet children in Uganda. We visited six different towns throughout thecountry and Kampala, and interviewed over 130 current and former streetchildren. We focused primarily on speaking to children between the ages of 8and under 18 who live, work, and sleep full-time on the streets. We also spokewith part-time street children who typically stay or work on the streets duringthe day, but then return home at night. Human Rights Watch conducted another 45interviews with service providers and organizations assisting street children,among others. We did not focus our work on babies and very young childrenbrought to the streets by adults to beg for money, though we recognize that isanother challenge Uganda, among other countries, faces.Our work examined the factorsdriving children to the streets, but more specifically it focused ondocumenting the conditions and risks children face living, working, andsleeping on the streets, including violence, sexual abuse, and child labor. Weexamined the abuses they face from their peers, the communities in which theyreside, and the police.We would appreciate yourresponse to the following questions related to our ongoing work.Mandate and Budget:1. Whatis the police’s official mandate for assisting and/or protecting streetchildren throughout Uganda?2. Whatpolicies or protocols are there for officers when interacting with street children?Do police, including Special Police Constables, receive training inchildren’s rights?  Kindly share information regarding any trainingin children’s rights police officers, including Special PoliceConstables, have received.3. Whatare the numbers of Child and Family Protection Unit (CFPU) officers in Uganda,and how many are there per district? What mandate do CFPU officers have inaddressing issues regarding street children? What is the budget for the unit?4. Kindlyprovide budgets or other information regarding the operational funds allocatedfor child protection and details regarding funding of programs for streetchildren.5. Howdo police coordinate with nongovernmental organizations in order to ensure thatthe needs of street children are met in the course of police work? Can youprovide any examples?6. Howmany district police stations have cells dedicated specifically for children?How does the police ensure that children are not held with adults in the eventno children’s cells are available? When there are no children’scells, what is the protocol for detaining children?Round-upsof Street Children:7. Fromwhom do the police receive operational orders for round-ups of street childrenin Kampala and in the districts? What is the legal basis upon which policeconduct such round-up operations?8. Howoften was the police involved in officials operations to round-up children in2011, 2012, and 2013?9. Howdoes the police conduct operations related to street children in cooperationwith other government actors, including the Kampala Capital City Authority(KCCA), Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Office of thePrime Minister, and the Ministry of Local Government? How has the police beeninvolved in KCCA activities regarding removal of street children in Kampala,and in particularly in taking children to Kampiringisa National RehabilitationCentre?Monitoringand Grievance Mechanisms:10. Hasthe police received any allegations of abuse of children by its officers duringpolice patrols or during organized round-ups and what has transpired as aresult of any reports?11. Doesthe Police Professional Standards Unit (PPSU) monitor or has it investigatedalleged abuses against street children at the hands of police? What is thesystem in place to collect and respond to such allegations? Kindly provide anyinformation or documentation relating to the systems for monitoring ordocumentation pertaining to investigation into abuses by police of streetchildren.12. Howmany PPSU officers are there and how many deal with issues specifically relatedto children? What are the operational funds for the PPSU?We would appreciate a responseto these requests by April 4, 2014. If for some reason that is not possible,please get in touch with us to propose another timeframe.Thank you for your attention tothis matter and we look forward to your response.Sincerely,MariaBurnettSeniorResearcher, AfricaDivisionCc:ChristineAlalo, In Charge Child and Family Protection Unit, Uganda Police Force,alalochristine@yahoo.comAnnex II: Response from the Uganda Police Forceto Human Rights WatchThe following response was received from Mr. ErasmusTwaruhukwa, Human Rights Directorate, Uganda Police Force, by emailcorrespondence on April 7, 2014:REPORTON STREET CHILDREN OPERATIONS IN UGANDAMandateand Budget1. The Police mandate is to protectlife and property which includes protection of children’s rights aswell. The mandate of child and family protection department is to createan environment in which children and women’s rights are protected,promoted, recognized and respected due to their vulnerability. Thereforeall children’s rights are protected including street children.2. There are no policies orprotocols currently. However, when interacting with street children,police officers use the office’s mandate of protecting, promotingrecognizing and respecting their rights. During the initial trainingcourse, the special police constables are not trained on children’srights. However, child and family protection officers have receivedvarious trainings from other stakeholders whose work relates to protectionof children’s rights like ANNPCAN, Crane Network, and Platform forLabour Action, etc.3. There are about 450 child andfamily protection officers across the country and the mandate does notdiffer from the one mentioned above. The department has no budget to carryout activities related to street children in Uganda because it’s themandate of Ministry of Labour and Social Development (MoSLD).4. Refer to 3 above5. Police networks with other NGOswhose work relates to protection of children’s rights throughmeetings, workshops, visits, referrals, etc.6. In case there are no juvenilescells at police stations, the children are referred to other stakeholderslike LCs, Courts and we make sure that cases are handled immediatelywithin 24 hours and children who commit petty offences are not detainedbut diverted or referred according to the guidelines in place as outlinedin the Children’s Act.Round-upsof Street Children7. Police does not get any ordersin relation to the round up of children because that does not fall underthe police mandate but falls under MoGLD. Police is only asked forsecurity during the exercise.8. Policeis rarely involved in these operations but we are occasionally requestedfor security. However, we have only participated twice in the operationssince 2011.9. Refer to qns 7 & 8 aboveMonitoringand Grievance Mechanisms10. A complaint was received verbally from one of theRETRAK official an NGO that works with street children a couple of years ago atthe head office of child and family protection department. He was referred tothe Central Police Station (CPS) to file a complaint since the alleged matterhad taken place in its jurisdiction but unfortunately it wasn’t. Any casethat is not entered in our station diary books is not followed because there isno law backing it up officially.11. No cases of abuses against streetchildren have been reported to PSU and PSU does not monitor or investigateabuses against street children.12. There are 98 PSU officers. Thereis no Desk in PSU specifically handling children issues. No operationalfunds are designated to handle street children cases by PSU.AnnexIII: Human Rights Watch Letterto the Ministry of Gender, Labour andSocial DevelopmentMarch 18, 2014Hon. MaryKarooro OkurutMinister ofGender, Labour and Social DevelopmentMinistry ofGender, Labour and Social DevelopmentP.O. Box 7136Kampala, UgandaVia email: ps@mglsd.go.ug, and via facsimile: +256 414 256 374RE: Research onStreet Children in UgandaDear HonorableOkurut,On behalf ofHuman Rights Watch I am writing in connection with research carried out byHuman Rights Watch into abuses against street children in Uganda. We requestsome information regarding the role of the Ministry of Gender, Labour andSocial Development given the ministry role in child protection and the NationalStrategic Programme Plan of Interventions for Orphans and other VulnerableChildren (NSPPI-2).Human RightsWatch is one of the world’s leading independent organizations dedicatedto protecting human rights. We conduct objective, rigorous field investigationsin more than 90 countries worldwide and produce reports on our findings toraise awareness about human rights issues and to develop and promote policyrecommendations for change. Human Rights Watch is committed to producingmaterial that is well informed and objective and we want to ensure that ourreport properly reflects the views, policies, and practices of the governmentof Uganda. We hope you or your staff will respond to the questions and concernsbelow so that your views are accurately reflected in our work.In December2013 and early 2014, Human Rights Watch examined the human rights dimensions ofthe plight of street children in Uganda. We visited six different townsthroughout the country and Kampala, and interviewed over 130 current and formerstreet children. We focused primarily on speaking to children between the agesof 8 and under 18 who live, work, and sleep full-time on the streets. We alsospoke with part-time street children who typically stay or work on the streetsduring the day, but then return home at night. Human Rights Watch conductedanother 45 interviews with service providers and organizations assisting streetchildren, among others. We did not focus our work on babies and very youngchildren brought to the streets by adults to beg for money, though we recognizethat is another challenge Uganda, among other countries, faces.Ourinvestigation examined factors driving children to the streets and focused ondocumenting the conditions and risks children face, including violence, sexualabuse, and child labor. We examined the abuses they face from peers, thecommunities in which they reside, and the police. We would appreciate yourresponse to the following questions related to our ongoing research.Mandate andBudget:1. Does the ministrymaintain any statistics on the total number of street children in Ugandaand if so, please share the total number of children for 2011, 2012, and2013. How does the ministry account for any fluctuations in the numbers ofstreet children over recent years?2. Kindly provide anyresearch or documentation regarding street children and childvulnerability/protection led or supported by the ministry.3. How does the ministrycoordinate with other government actors, including the police, the KampalaCapital City Authority (KCCA), the Office of the Prime Minister, and theMinistry of Local Government? How has the ministry been involved in KCCAactivities regarding street children in Kampala?4. How does the ministrypartner with nongovernmental organizations on issues related to streetchildren? What roles do these organizations play?5. What are theoperational funds within the ministry for child protection? What is thededicated budget for issues relating to street children and more broadlychildren at risk? Kindly provide budgets or other information regardingthe operational funds allocated for child protection and details regardingfunding of programs for street children.6. What are the officialmandates for probation and social welfare officers regarding streetchildren? How many officers are there in Uganda and what are the numbersper district? What are the budgets for these officers?7. NSSPI-2 identifiesstreet children as a category of most vulnerable children and in need ofprotection in Uganda. What are the specific ministry-led interventionsthat target street children? What are the budgets for these interventions?Round-ups ofStreet Children:8. Human Rights Watch hasdocumented the round-up of street children during which they are arrested,taken to police posts, central police stations, or taken to either remandhomes or to Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre. The children arethen either detained, released, or attempts are made to resettle them.What is the purpose of the round-ups of street children, both within andoutside of Kampala and what changes has the ministry observed as a resultof the round-ups? What is the legal basis upon which orders are given forthe round-ups?9. How and under whatofficial mandate does the ministry participate in conducting round-ups, incoordination with other actors?10. How many round-ups hasthe ministry taken part in, where, and how many total children have beenrounded up as a result in 2011, 2012, and 2013?Monitoring and GrievanceMechanisms:11. What systems are inplace to monitor or investigate alleged abuses against street children?Kindly provide any information or documentation relating to ministrysystems for monitoring or documentation pertaining to investigation intoabuses against street children by security agencies and the public.12. Has the ministryreceived any allegations of abuse of children during round-ups and whathas transpired as a result of any reports?Kampiringisa and RemandHomes:13. Given that streetchildren are often taken to Kampiringisa or other remand homes despite notbeing in conflict with the law, are there new children’s homesplanned for construction in response to meet the needs of street children?How many does the ministry plan to erect, where, and who would theyspecifically serve?14. What monitoring orinvestigations does the ministry undertake into the conditions atKampiringisa and remand homes where street children have been taken afterroundups in Kampala? What records does the ministry keep of the number ofstreet children held in these locations and their cases to ensure theirrights are respected? Kindly provide any information or documentationrelating to ministry monitoring or investigation into the situation inKampiringisa or the remand homes.We wouldappreciate a response to these requests by April 4, 2014. If for some reasonthat is not possible, please get in touch with us to propose another timeframe.Thank you foryour attention to this matter and we look forward to your response.Sincerely,MariaBurnettSeniorResearcher, AfricaDivisionCc:Hon. Kibuule Ronald,Minister of State for Youth and Children, rkibuule@parliament.go.ugMr. JamesSsembatya Kaboggoza, Assistant Commissioner for Children, Ministry of Gender,Labour andSocial Development,skabogooza@mglsd.go.ugMrs. JaneStella Ogwang, Principal Probation and Welfare Officer, Ministry of Gender, Labourand Social Development,jsogwang@mglsd.go.ugAnnexIV: Human Rights Watch Letterto the Ministry of Local GovernmentMarch 18, 2014Hon. Adolf MwesigeMinister of Local GovernmentMinistry of Local GovernmentP.O. Box 7037Kampala, UgandaVia email to ps@molg.go.ug; and via facsimile to +256-414-258-127, +256-414-347-339RE: Street Children inUgandaDear Minister Mwesige,On behalf of Human Rights WatchI am writing in connection with research carried out by Human Rights Watch intoabuses against street children in Uganda. We request some information regardingthe role of the Ministry of Local Government in addressing the needs of streetchildren. Because of the role district probation officers play in childprotection, and that district councils are responsible for services for streetchildren and orphans, we hope you or your staff will respond to the questionsand concerns below so that your views are accurately reflected in our work.Human Rights Watch is one ofthe world’s leading independent organizations dedicated to protectinghuman rights. We conduct objective, rigorous field investigations in more than90 countries worldwide and produce reports on our findings to raise awarenessabout human rights issues and to develop and promote policy recommendations forchange. Human Rights Watch is committed to producing material that is well informedand objective and we want to ensure that our report properly reflects theviews, policies, and practices of the government of Uganda.In December 2013 and early2014, Human Rights Watch examined the human rights dimensions of the plight ofstreet children in Uganda. We visited six different towns throughout the countryand Kampala, and interviewed over 130 current and former street children. Wefocused primarily on children between the ages of 8 and under 18 who live,work, and sleep full-time on the streets. We also spoke with part-time street childrenwho typically stay or work on the streets during the day, but then return homeat night. Human Rights Watch conducted another 45 interviews with serviceproviders and organizations assisting street children, among others. We did notfocus our work on babies and very young children brought to the streets byadults to beg for money, though we recognize that is another challenge Uganda,among other countries, faces.Our investigation examinesfactors driving children to the streets and focuses on documenting theconditions and risks children face, including violence, sexual abuse, and childlabor. We examined the abuses they face from peers, the communities in whichthey reside, and the police.We would appreciate yourresponse to the following questions related to our ongoing work.Mandate and Budget:1. What is theministry’s official mandate for assisting and/or protecting children atrisk and specifically street children?2. How manytotal probation and social welfare officers are in Uganda? How many officersare there per district?3. Whatpolicies, guidelines, or best practices are used by local government officialsor probation and social welfare officers in dealing with street children?4. What are theoperational funds for the district officials responsible for services for streetchildren? What is the budget specifically for working on child protection, vulnerablechildren, and street children? And what is the budget for the probation andsocial welfare officers? Kindly provide budgets or other information regarding theoperational funds allocated for child protection and details regarding fundingof programs for street children.5. How does theministry coordinate with other government actors on child protection, includingthe police and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development?6. How do theprobation and social welfare officers or local government officials partner withnongovernmental organizations in order to ensure that the needs of street childrenare met and that their rights are protected?Round-ups of Street Children:7. What are theroles and responsibilities of local councils and the probation and social welfareofficers in conducting round-ups of street children and resettlement? When policeor other actors conduct round-ups of street children to return them to their homes,at what point do local councils or the probation and social welfare officers becomeinvolved?8. Has theministry investigated claims of abuse of street children by police or others, inparticular the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), or is the ministry awareof such claims? If so, what actions has it taken?Child Protection Ordinances:9. We are awarethat in some districts child protection ordinances have been enacted witharticles designed to keep children from staying on the streets by preventing themfrom receiving assistance from NGOs or the public. This makes, for example, givingmoney or food to children illegal. Is there a uniform format for formulating childprotection ordinances for all the districts in Uganda? What is the ministry’srole in making these ordinances, especially provisions relevant to streetchildren? Is there such ordinance for KCCA?10. Kindlyprovide copies of all existing ordinances pertaining to child protection with clausesrelating to street children.We would appreciate a responseto these requests by April 4, 2014. If for some reason that is not possible,please get in touch with us to propose another timeframe.Thank you for your attention tothis matter and we look forward to your response.Sincerely,MariaBurnettSeniorResearcher, AfricaDivisionAnnex V: Human Rights Watch Letter to the Kampala Capital City AuthorityMarch 18, 2014Jennifer Semakula MusisiExecutive DirectorKampala Capital City AuthorityP.O. Box 7010Kampala, UgandaVia email to info@kcca.go.ug; and via facsimile to +256-414-231-916RE: Street Children inUgandaDear Mrs. Musisi,On behalf of Human RightsWatch, we are writing to share some concerns about the treatment of streetchildren in Kampala and request some information regarding the role of theKampala Capital City Authority (KCCA).Human Rights Watch is one ofthe world’s leading independent organizations dedicated to protectinghuman rights. We conduct objective, rigorous field investigations in more than90 countries worldwide and produce reports on our findings to raise awarenessabout human rights issues and to develop and promote policy recommendations forchange.Human Rights Watch is committedto producing material that is well informed and objective and we want to ensurethat our report properly reflects the views, policies, and practices of thegovernment of Uganda. We hope you or your staff will respond to the questionsand concerns below so that your views are accurately reflected in our work.In December 2013 and early2014, Human Rights Watch examined the human rights dimensions of the plight ofstreet children in Uganda. We visited six different towns throughout thecountry and Kampala, and interviewed over 130 current and former streetchildren. We focused primarily on speaking to children between the ages of 8and under 18 who live, work, and sleep full-time on the streets. We also spokewith part-time street children who typically stay or work on the streets duringthe day, but then return home at night. Human Rights Watch conducted another 45interviews with service providers and organizations assisting street children,among others. We did not focus our work on babies and very young children broughtto the streets by adults to beg for money, though we recognize that is anotherchallenge Uganda, among other countries, faces.Our investigation examinedfactors driving children to the streets and focused on documenting theconditions and risks children face, including violence, sexual abuse, and childlabor. We examined the abuses they face from peers, the communities in whichthey reside, and the police.We would appreciate yourresponse to the following questions related to our ongoing work.Mandate and Budget:1. What isKCCA’s official mandate for assisting and/or protecting street childrenin Kampala? Does KCCA maintain any statistics on the total number of streetchildren in Kampala and what changes have you observed in the number of streetchildren over recent years?2. What are theKCCA policies or protocols for KCCA employees interacting with street children?3. How does KCCAcoordinate with other government actors on child protection, including thepolice, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Office ofthe Prime Minister, and the Ministry of Local Government?4. What is theoverall operational budgetary funding for KCCA’s Directorate of Gender andCommunity Services and its probation officers working on child protection? Whatis the dedicated budget for issues relating to street children and more broadlychildren at risk? Kindly provide budgets or other information regarding the operationalfunds allocated for child protection and details regarding funding of programsfor street children.5. How manyprobation officers are working on child protection issues within KCCA? What istheir precise mandate in regards to street children?6. How does KCCApartner with nongovernmental organizations in order to ensure that the needs ofstreet children are met and that their rights are protected? Does KCCA everseek to prohibit organizations from assisting street children and if so, why?Round-ups of StreetChildren:7. Does KCCAreceive operational orders for the round-up of street children in Kampala, fromwhom, and in what context do these orders occur? What is the legal basis upon whichorders are given to round-up children and for KCCA’s involvement?8. How and whendo KCCA employees participate in conducting round-ups of street children? Whichofficers are responsible for these round-ups and what procedures or policies dothey follow?9. How manyoperations involving rounding up street children has KCCA conducted in 2011,2012, and 2013?10. How manychildren in total have been rounded up by KCCA since its inception in 2011?Other than Kampiringisa, are children taken to any other locations inside or outsideKampala?Monitoring and GrievanceMechanisms:11. Has KCCAreceived any allegations of abuse of children by its officers during roundups andwhat has transpired as a result of any reports?12. What systemsare in place to monitor and investigate alleged abuses by KCCA staff? Kindlyprovide any information or documentation relating to the systems for monitoringor documentation pertaining to investigation into abuses of street children.We would appreciate a responseto these requests by April 4, 2014. If for some reason that is not possible,please get in touch with us to propose another timeframe.Thank you for your attention tothis matter and we look forward to your response.Sincerely,MariaBurnettSeniorResearcher, AfricaDivisionCc:Harriet Mudondo, Director,Gender and Community Services, Kampala Capital City Authority[1]Human Rights Watch interview with Gabriel A., 15-year-old, Mbale, December 5,2013.[2]Human Rights Watch interview with civil society activist, Mbale, December 3,2013.[3]Human Rights Watch interview with Andrew F., 17-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013.[4]Uganda Human Rights Commission, “Children working and/or living on thestreet,” undated, http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Children/Study/UgandaHRightsCommission.doc(accessed February 19, 2014).[5]The Government of Uganda, “The State of Uganda Population Report2012:Uganda at 50 years: Population and Service Delivery; Challenges, Opportunitiesand Prospects,” 2012, http://mail2.unfpa.or.ug/pub/2012/2012_SUPRE.pdf(accessed April 29, 2014).[6]Ibid., p. 57. According to a June 2014 report, 3.7 million children under theage of five live in poverty and extreme deprivation, with limited access tohealth care, nutrition, education, sanitation, and shelter. See Didas Kisembo,“3.5m children living in abject poverty – report,” DailyMonitor, June 11, 2014, http://mobile.monitor.co.ug/News/Number-of-children-on-streets-rises-to-10-000/-/691252/1748668/-/format/xhtml/-/os8ivs/-/index.html(accessed June 16, 2014).[7]Abdu Kiyaga, “Number of Children on Streets, Rises to 10,000,” DailyMonitor, April 15, 2013, http://www.monitor.co.ug/News/National/Number-of-chilren-on-streets-rises-to-10-000/--688334/1748668/-/index.html(accessed February 19, 2014), and Yudaya Nangozi, “Street children:choice between order, charity,” The Observer, May 6, 2013,http://www.observer.ug/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=25117:street-children-choice-between-order-charity&catid=34:news&Itemid=114(accessed March 5, 2014).[8]Human Rights Watch interview with Sudha Murali and Harriet Akullu, the UnitedNations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Kampala, February 6, 2014.[9]Human Rights Watch interviews with NGO child protection officer, Mbale,December 4, 2013; NGO nurse, Mbale, December 4, 2013; and email correspondencewith Moroto NGO program director, February 17, 2014.[10]Human Rights Watch interview with Lillian Mugeni, public relations officer,Dwelling Places, Kampala, February 7, 2014.[11]SeeArbeiter-Samariter-Bund (ASB), “Inter agency protection mission,”Mbale, 26 June to 27 June 2008, on file with Human Rights Watch; and ASB,“On the footsteps of Karimojong: Rapid situation assessment inEastern-Uganda,” September 2007, on file with Human Rights Watch.[12]The LRA is a Ugandan rebel group that originated in the late 1980s in northernUganda as a response against the abuses the Acholi communities faced at thehands of successive governments. In the early 1990s the LRA became increasinglyviolent against civilians, abducting and killing thousands of civilians innorthern Uganda and replenishing its ranks by abducting, terrorizing, and“brainwashing” children to fight. See Human Rights Watch, TheScars of Death: Children Abducted by the Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda,September 1997, http://www.hrw.org/reports/1997/09/18/scars-death; StolenChildren: Abduction and Recruitment in Northern Uganda, March 2003,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/03/28/stolen-children; and Abducted andAbused: Renewed War in Northern Uganda, July 2003,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/07/14/abducted-and-abused-0.[13]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ruth Birungi, research and informationcoordinator, ANPPCAN, Kampala, February 10, 2014; and Christine Alalo, Childand Family Protection Unit in charge, Uganda Police Force, Kampala, February 6,2014. For more on Karamoja, see Human Rights Watch, “How Can WeSurvive Here?” The Impact of Mining on Human Rights in Karamoja, Uganda,February 2014, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2014/02/03/how-can-we-survive-here-0.[14]Human Rights Watch interview with Vincent Alele, program manager, ChildRestoration Outreach (CRO), Lira, December 9, 2013.[15]Human Rights Watch interviews with civil society activist, Mbale, December 3,2013; NGO child protection officer, Mbale, December 4, 2013; NGO resettlement officer1, Mbale, December 4, 2013; journalist, Lira, December 8, 2013; Vincent Alele,program manager, CRO, Lira, December 9, 2013; NGO program officer, Masaka,December 19, 2013; and Ruth Birungi, research and information coordinator, ANPPCAN,Kampala, February 10, 2014.[16]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO acting country director, Kampala,February 7, 2014.[17]Human Rights Watch interviews with NGO child protection officer, Mbale,December 4, 2013; NGO resettlement officer 1, Mbale, December 4, 2013; and NGOprogram officer, Masaka, December 19, 2013.[18]Human Rights Watch, Letting Them Fail: Government Neglect and the Right toEducation for Children Affected by AIDS, vol. 17, no. 13(A), October 2005, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/10/11/letting-them-fail-0;and UNICEF, “Uganda,” Statistics, December 31, 2013, http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/uganda_statistics.html(accessed March 25, 2014).[19]A preliminary 2013 Transparency International report on UPE found gross abuseof funds in Northern Uganda, including teacher absenteeism, low pay forteachers, and mismanagement of receipts and expenditures. The report alsoindicated that “the lack of midday meals was partly contributing to thedrop out of school children as they prefer to stay at home or take merchandiseto markets where they get something to eat.” Stephen Kafeero,“Transparency International report shows misuse of UPE funds in NorthernUganda,” The Independent, June 28, 2013, http://www.independent.co.ug/news/news/7961-transparency-international-report-shows-misuse-of-upe-funds-in-northern-uganda(accessed May 10, 2014).[20]Human Right Watch interview with NGO resettlement officer 1, Mbale, December 4,2013.[21]Human Rights Watch interview with Vincent Alele, program manager, CRO, Lira,December 9, 2013.[22]Construction of two new remand homes in Kabale and Arua were ongoing as of a2013 Auditor General report. The Ministry of Gender also runs vocationalrehabilitation centers and sheltered workshops, though the Auditor General hasalso found the facilities to be inadequate. See Office of the Auditor General,Republic of Uganda, “Annual Report of the Auditor General for the YearEnded 30th June 2013,” vol. 2, on file with Human RightsWatch.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with civil society activist, Mbale, December 3,2013. Human Rights Watch visited Naguru and Fort Portal remand homes in 2011and 2012 and observed improvements in the conditions of detention of thechildren.[24]Sustain for Life, “No Place for Children – Kampiringisa,”March 2013,http://www.sustainforlife.org/2013/03/no-place-for-children-kampiringisa(accessed May 29, 2014); and Marianne Moore, “Juvenile Detention inUganda: Review of Ugandan Remand Homes and the National RehabilitationCentre,” October 2010,http://www.crin.org/docs/Juvenile%20_detention_Uganda.pdf (accessed May 29,2014); and Human Rights Watch interview with Lillian Mugeni, public relationsofficer, Dwelling Places, Kampala, February 7, 2014.[25]The government has often used Kampiringisa as a holding center for groups ofwomen and children from Karamoja who are rounded up from the streets of Kampalaand then forcibly returned to Karamoja. See “Uganda: Gov’t relocates‘beggar’ pastoralists,” IRIN, April 19, 2007, http://www.irinnews.org/indepthmain.aspx?InDepthID=63&ReportID=71702.[26]In Kampiringisa, some children described being kept apart from the main groupon arrival in a room called “black house,” for one week to a month.Children described how both the other children and the Kampiringisa staff wouldbeat them, the unsanitary living conditions, and that they would receive littlefood. Human Rights Watch interviews with Tom N., 15-year-old, Masaka, December19, 2013; Arthur B., 13-year-old, Kampala, February 7, 2014; Cecelia B.,11-year-old, Kampala, February 8, 2014; Patrick N., 10-year-old, Kampala,February 8, 2014; Luke L., 12-year-old, Kampala, February 8, 2014; David A.,15-year-old, Kampala, February 8, 2014; Zachary L., 16-year-old, Kampala,February 9, 2014; and John L., 15-year-old, Kampala, February 9, 2014.[27]Al-Mahdi Ssenkabirwa, “Government to give Kampiringisa children’shome facelift,” DailyMonitor, October 23, 2013, http://www.monitor.co.ug/News/National/Govt-to-give-Kampiringisa-children-s-home-facelift/-/688334/2043246/-/gco4kn/-/index.html(accessed May 23, 2014).[28]Ibid.[29]Jordan Mubangizi, “PAC Faults Min. of Gender Officials ,” NBSTV Uganda, February 7, 2014, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rCJDKod5Y7E(accessed May 10, 2014).[30]Ibid. Human Rights Watch wrote to the Ministry of Gender asking forclarification on its budget for assistance to street children, though theministry did not reply, see Annex III. The current exchange rate is 2,600Ugandan shillings to the US dollar.[31]The final report from the parliamentary committee was not yet available at thetime of writing. The 2013 Auditor General’s report documents theinspection of rehabilitation centers and remand homes throughout the country.It described how the Fort Portal, Gulu, Mbale, and Naguru remand homes run bythe ministry of gender have dilapidated facilities, some lack bedding andblankets, children share mattresses, and in the case of Mbale, children areheld for longer than six months without appearing in court. See Office of theAuditor General, Republic of Uganda, “Annual Report of the AuditorGeneral for the Year Ended 30th June 2013,” vol. 2, on filewith Human Rights Watch.[32]The Republic of Uganda, “Approved Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure(Recurrent and Development) FY 2013/14,” http://www.budget.go.ug/budget/sites/default/files/National%20Budget%20docs/Approved%20Estimates%202013-14.pdf(accessed June 30, 2014). The ministry of gender received 37 billion shillings($14 million) for 2013/2014.[33]The Uganda Gazette, Local Governments (Kasese District) Child Protection andLabour Recruitment Ordinance, Supplement No. 1, Vol. CV, No. 20, April 13,2012, on file with Human Rights Watch; and the Uganda Gazette, LocalGovernments (Lira District) Child Protection Ordinance, Supplement No. 2,Vo.CH, No. 18, April 24, 2009, on file with Human Rights Watch. Each districtcan enact local ordinances, approved at the district level, and are thusdifferent from the national scope of child protection legislation.[34]Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, “About Us,”undated, http://www.mglsd.go.ug/?page_id=8 (accessed March 17, 2014).[35]The Republic of Uganda, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development,“National Strategic Programme Plan of Interventions for Orphans and OtherVulnerable Children 2011/2012-2015/2016,” May 2011,http://www.unicef.org/uganda/Final_Printed_OVC_Strategic_Plan_Uganda_-NSPPI_2.pdf(accessed March 17, 2014), p. 5.[36]Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, “Youth and ChildrenAffairs,” undated, http://www.mglsd.go.ug/?page_id=36 (accessed March 16,2014).[37]The council members are drawn from other ministries, regional representatives,civil society organizations, and “persons of integrity.”  Thecouncil is meant to coordinate all actors involved in child-related activities,not just those of the ministry of gender. Ministry of Gender, Labour and SocialDevelopment, “National Council for Children,” undated,http://www.mglsd.go.ug/?p=256 (accessed March 16, 2014).[38]Local Government Act, 1997, amended 1999, chapter 243, schedule 2, art. 16(4).[39]Ibid., part 2, art. 3(v).[40]The Republic of Uganda, The Children Act, 2003, Chapter 59, art. 10(7).[41]Ibid., art. 40.[42]Uganda Police Force and UNICEF, “The Role of the Uganda Police,”http://sgdatabase.unwomen.org/uploads/Uganda%20-%20Police%20training%20manual%20-%20gov.unicef.pdf(accessed March 25, 2014). p. ii.[43]See Annex II, response from the Uganda Police Force to Human Rights Watch.[44]Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Consideration of Reports Submittedby States Parties Under Article 12 (1) of the Optional Protocol to theConvention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, ChildProstitution and Child Pornography – Uganda,” August 16, 2007,CRC/C/OPSC/UGA/1,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/CRC.C.OPSC.UGA.1.doc (accessedMarch 25, 2014).[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Christine Alalo, Child and Family ProtectionUnit in charge, Uganda Police Force, Kampala, February 6, 2014.[46]See Annex II, response from the Uganda Police Force to Human Rights Watch.[47]Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, “Kampala Capital City AuthorityAct,” 2010, 3rd schedule.[48]Ibid., art. 28(d).[49]Kampala Capital City Authority, “Services rendered by KCCA,” ChildCare and Protection, 2014,http://www.kcca.go.ug/services.php#youth_and_community_development (accessedMarch 17, 2014).[50]Kampala Capital City Authority, “Services rendered by KCCA,” ChildCare and Protection, 2014, http://www.kcca.go.ug/services.php#youth_and_community_development.[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Sam L., 15-year-old, Masaka, December 19,2013.[52]United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, “Consideration ofReports Submitted by States Parties Under Article 44 of the Convention,Concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child:Uganda,” Fortieth session, November 23, 2005, CRC/C/UGA/CO/2,http://www.refworld.org/publisher,CRC,CONCOBSERVATIONS,UGA,45377eb70,0.html(accessed March 19, 2014), para. 71.[53]Ibid.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with Daniel P., 15-year-old, Lira, December 9,2013.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Richard N., 11-year-old, Mbale, December 4,2013.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Gabriel A., 15-year-old, Mbale, December 5,2013.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Christopher P., 15-year-old, Lira, December10, 2013.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Edward B., 13-year-old, Gulu, December 12,2013.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Ryan N., 14-year-old, Kampala, February 7,2014.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Luke L., 12-year-old, Kampala, February 8,2014.[61]Police posts are smaller detachments than police stations. Human Rights Watchinterviews with Rehan F., 11-year-old, Soroti, December 8, 2013; Rashid P., 12-year-old,Lira, December 12, 2013; Ronald P., 17-year-old, Lira, December 13, 2013; SamL., 15-year-old, Masaka, December 19, 2013; Leo Y., 17-year-old, Kasese,January 20, 2014; and Theo A., 16-year-old, Kasese, January 21, 2014.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Peter L., 15-year-old, Lira, December 13,2013.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Isaac U., 16-year-old, Kasese, January 20,2014.[64]Human Rights Watch interview with Brian P., 12-year-old, Gulu, December 13,2013.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Darren P., Gulu, December 13, 2013.[66]Human Rights Watch interviews with NGO child resettlement officer 2, Mbale,December 5, 2013; NGO staff member 1, Soroti, December 6, 2013; NGO staffmember 2, Soroti, December 6, 2013; NGO acting country director, Kampala,February 7, 2014; and Ruth Birungi, research and information coordinator, ANPPCAN,Kampala February 10, 2014.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Christine Alalo, Child and Family ProtectionUnit in charge, Uganda Police Force, Kampala, February 6, 2014.[68]See Annex II, response from the Uganda Police Force to Human Rights Watch.[69]Human Rights Watch interviews with NGO resettlement officer 1, Mbale, December4, 2013; and Ruth Birungi, research and information coordinator, ANPPCAN, Kampala,February 10, 2014.[70]Vivian Agaba, “KCCA tasked to enact ordinance on handouts to streetchildren,” New Vision, April 12, 2014, http://www.newvision.co.ug/news/654475-kcca-tasked-to-enact-ordinance-on-handouts-to-street-children.html(accessed May 10, 2014).[71]Betty Byatesa, “KCCA Remands 40 Street Kids to Kampiringisa,” Chimpreports,November 23, 2013,http://chimpreports.com/index.php/mobile/special-reports/14392-kcca-remands-40-street-kids-to-kampiringisa.html(accessed February 19, 2014).[72]US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor,“Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2013: Uganda,”February 27, 2014, http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/2013/af/220173.htm(accessed May 10, 2014).[73]Juliet Waiswa, “KCCA rounds up 70 children off the streets,” NewVision, August 9, 2012,http://www.newvision.co.ug/mobile/Detail.aspx?NewsID=633950&CatID=1(accessed March 5, 2014).[74]“Street Children Increasingly Becoming a Public Nuisance,” UgandaRadio Network, March 21, 2012, http://ugandaradionetwork.com/a/story.php?s=41106(accessed March 5, 2014).[75]Retrak, “300 Children ‘Round-Up’ in Kampala,” July 5,2011, http://www.retrak.org/newsDetail.aspx?uid=126 (accessed March 5, 2014).[76]Human Rights Watch interviews with NGO child protection officer, Mbale,December 4, 2013; NGO nurse, Mbale, December 4, 2013; and NGO childresettlement officer 2, Mbale, December 5, 2013.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO child resettlement officer 2, Mbale,December 5, 2013.[78]Human Rights Watch interviews with NGO child protection officer, Mbale,December 4, 2013; NGO nurse, Mbale, December 4, 2013; and NGO childresettlement officer 2, Mbale, December 5, 2013.[79]Denis Olaka, “80 Street Children Rounded Up in Mbale,” Uganda RadioNetwork, May 7, 2013, http://ugandaradionetwork.com/a/story.php?s=52249(accessed February 19, 2014).[80]Human Rights Watch interviews with Vincent Alele, program manager, CRO, Lira,December 9, 2013; Daniel P., 15-year-old, Lira, December 9, 2013;and Eugene A.,18-year-old, Lira, December 10, 2013.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with journalist, Lira, December 8, 2013; and VincentAlele, program manager, CRO, Lira, December 9, 2013.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with journalist, Lira, December 8, 2013.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Roger P., 13-year-old, Lira, December 10, 2013.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Alex J., 13-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with Lewis P., 16-year-old, Lira, December 10,2013.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Zachary L., 16-year-old, Kampala, February 9,2014.[87]Ibid.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO staff member 4, Kampala, February 7,2014.[89]Human Rights Watch interview with youth pastor, Kampala, February 9, 2014.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Richard P., 15-year-old, Gulu, December 13,2013.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Elias A., 15-year-old, Kampala, February 9,2014. Elias said the same woman previously helped him.[92]Children Act, 2003, art. 89(7).[93]See Annex II, response from the Uganda Police Force to Human Rights Watch.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with James S., 16-year-old, Soroti, December 8,2013.[95]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ali L., 13-year-old, Lira, December 11,2013; Ben P., 14-year-old, Gulu, December 12, 2013; and Rashid P., 12-year-old,Gulu, December 12, 2013;[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Daniel P., 15-year-old, Lira, December 9,2013.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with Louis B., 16-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013.[98]Most detainees in police custody in Uganda rarely receive meals and aredependent on family or friends to bring food to the police post. In the case ofchildren living on the street, such support is obviously extremely unlikely,leaving them vulnerable to going without food.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim P., 14-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013.[100]Human Rights Watch interview with Zachary L., 16-year-old, Kampala, February 9,2014.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Robert U., 18-year-old, Kasese, January 19,2014.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Leo Y., 17-year-old, Kasese, January 19,2014.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucas P., 13-year-old, Gulu, December 12,2013.[104]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO staff member 3, Soroti, December 6, 2013.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Edward B., 13-year-old, Gulu, December 12,2013.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucas P., 13-year-old, Gulu, December 12,2013.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali L., 13-year-old, Lira, December 11, 2013.[108]Email communication from journalist in Lira, January 23, 2014.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with Ben P., 14-year-old, Gulu, December 12, 2013.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Vincent Alele, program manager, CRO, Lira,December 9, 2013.[111]Ibid. The Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC) reported in June 2014 concernfor rising instances of mob justice, particularly in response to theft. SeeHilary Heuler, “Uganda Fears ‘Unprecedented’ Rise in MobJustice,” Voice of America, June 6, 2014,http://www.voanews.com/content/uganda-fears-unprecedented-rise-in-mob-justice/1931384.html(accessed June 16, 2014).[112]Human Rights Watch interview with civil society activist, Mbale, December 3,2013.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Louis B., 16-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with Roger P., 13-year-old, Lira, December 10,2013.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Elias A., 15-year-old, Kampala, February 9,2014.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with Lillian Mugeni, public relations officer,Dwelling Places, Kampala, February 7, 2014.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucy O., 16-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013.[118]Human Rights Watch Interview with NGO nurse, Mbale, December 4, 2013.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucy O., 16-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013.[120]Human Rights Watch interviews with Stella H., 14-year-old, Lira, December 9,2013; and Hannah Z., 21-year-old, Gulu, December 13, 2013.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Rachel M., 14-year-old, Masaka, December 18,2013.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Irene T., 16-year-old, Masaka, December 18,2013.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO nurse, Mbale, December 4, 2013.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Fred N., 15-year-old, Masaka, December 19,2013.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Carl A., approximately 18 years old, Mbale,December 5, 2013; and Abel C., 16-year-old, Masaka, December 19, 2013.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with David A., 15-year-old, Kampala, February 8,2014.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with Zachary L., 16-year-old, Kampala, February 9,2014.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Rachel M., 14-year-old, Masaka, December 18,2013.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Ben P., 14-year-old, Gulu, December 12, 2013.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with Isaiah R., 14-year-old, Masaka, December 19,2013.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Shafi O., 12-year-old, Mbale, December 4,2013.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with journalist, Gulu, December 11, 2014.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with “the chairman,” Mbale, December5, 2014.[134]Human Rights Watch interview with NGO child protection officer, Mbale, December4, 2013; Gabriel A., 15-year-old, Mbale, December 5, 2013; and Richard P., 15-year-old,Gulu, December 13, 2013.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with Zain N., 8-year-old, Mbale, December 4, 2013;Henry N., 13-year-old, Mbale, December 4, 2013; and Gabriel A., 15-year-old,Mbale, December 5, 2013.[136]Human Rights Watch interviews with Henry N., 13-year-old, Mbale, December 4,2013; and Gabriel A., 15-year-old, Mbale, December 5, 2013.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Henry N., 13-year-old, Mbale, December 4,2013.[138]Human Rights Watch interviews with Amos N., 11-year-old, Soroti, December 8,2013; James S., 16-year-old, Soroti, December 8, 2013; Ted K., 15-year-old,Lira, December 11, 2013; Will N., 16-year-old, Lira, December 11, 2013; RichardP., 15-year-old, Gulu, December 13, 2013; Stewart A., 15-year-old, Lira,December 13, 2013; Fred N., 15-year-old, Masaka, December 19, 2013; ; Leo Y.,17-year-old, Kasese, January 20, 2014; Paul K., 17-year-old, Kasese, January21, 2014; Solomon A., 14-year-old, Kampala, February 7, 2014; and Nicholas T.,15-year-old, Kampala, February 9, 2014.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with Richard P., 15-year-old, Gulu, December 13,2013.[140]Human Rights interview with Amos N., 11-year-old, Soroti, December 8, 2013.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with Alan P., 16-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013.[142]Human Rights Watch interviews with Idris N., 11-year-old, Soroti, December 8,2013; Andrew F., 17-year-old, Soroti, December 7, 2013; Alan P., 16-year-old,Soroti, December 7, 2013; Christopher P., 15-year-old, Lira, December 10, 2013;Lucas P., 13-year-old, Gulu, December 12, 2013; and Fred N., 15-year-old,Masaka, December 19, 2013.[143]Human Rights Watch interviews with Rashid P., 12-year-old, Lira, December 12,2013; Ronald P., 17-year-old, Lira, December 13, 2013; and Abdullahi K.,13-year-old, Kasese, January 20, 2014;[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Aden M., 12-year-old, Mbale, December 4,2013.[145]Human Rights Watch interview with Fred N., 15-year-old, Masaka, December 19,2013.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Isa G., 9-year-old, Gulu, December 12, 2013.[147]Human Rights Watch interview with Adam J., 13-year-old, Lira, December 9, 2013.[148]Human Rights Watch interviews with Louis B., 15-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013; and Ivan M., 17-year-old, Soroti, December 8, 2013.[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Jack P., 16-year-old, Lira, December 10,2013.[150]Human Rights Watch interview with Helen O., 16-year-old, outside Kampala,February 10, 2014.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with Stella H., 14-year-old, Lira, December 9,2013.[152]Human Rights Watch interviews with Lawrence T., 12-year-old, Mbale, December 3,2013; Roland N., 10-year-old, Mbale, December 4, 2013; Ismael P., 15-year-old,Lira, December 11, 2013; Edward B., 13-year-old, Gulu, December 12, 2013; IdrisP., 19-year-old, Gulu, December 12, 2013; Rose P., 12-year-old, Gulu, December13, 2013; and Alice Z., 13-year-old, Kampala, February 8, 2014.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with Alice Z., 13-year-old, Kampala, February 8,2014.[154]Human Rights Watch interviews with Simon F., 16-year-old, Soroti, December 7,2013; Adam J., 13-year-old, Lira, December 9, 2013; Doug M., 13-year-old,Kampala, February 9, 2014; and Brendan T., 15-year-old, Kampala, February 9,2014.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with Daniel P., 15-year-old, Lira, December 9, 2013.[156]United Nations General Assembly, “Plight of Street Children,”A/RES/48/136, 85th plenary meeting, December 20, 1993,http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/48/a48r136.htm (accessed April 1, 2014).[157]African [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, adopted June 27,1981, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 I.L.M. 58 (1982), entered into forceOctober 21, 1986, ratified by Uganda on May 10, 1986, art. 18(3).[158]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A.Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989),ratified by Uganda on August 17, 1990; and the African Charter on the Rightsand Welfare of the Child (ACRWC), OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), entered intoforce November 29, 1999, ratified by Uganda on August 17, 1994.[159]CRC,art. 6.[160]CRC, art. 19.[161]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified byUganda on June 21, 1995, art. 7.[162]CRC, art. 34.[163]Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations: Benin,CRC/C/BEN/CO/2, para. 70(f).[164]CRC, art. 33.[165]UNICEF, “Implementation Handbook for the Convention on the Rights of theChild, Part 3 of 3,” 2007, http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/Implementation_Handbook_for_the_Convention_on_the_Rights_of_the_Child_Part_3_of_3.pdf(accessed May 23, 2014), p. 503.[166]CRC, art. 39. See also Committee on the Rights of the Child, General CommentNo. 4: Adolescent health and development in the context of the Convention onthe Rights of Child, CRC/GC/2003/4 (2003), para. 37.[167]ICCPR, art. 9(1) and 9(3), and CRC, art. 37(b).The UN Human Rights Committee,in its interpretation of article 9 on the right to liberty and security, statesthat it is applicable to “all deprivations of liberty, whether incriminal cases or in other cases such as, for example, mental illness, vagrancy,drug addiction, educational purposes, immigration control, etc.” UN HumanRights Committee, General Comment 8: Right to liberty and security of persons(Art. 9), Sixteenth session, June 30, 1982, para. 1.[168]See the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration ofJuvenile Justice (The Beijing Rules), G.A. Res. 40/33, annex, 40 U.N. GAORSupp. (no. 53), U.N. Doc A/40/53 (1985); the United Nations Guidelines for thePrevention of Juvenile Delinquency (The Riyadh Guidelines), G.A. Res. 45/112,annex, 45 U.N.GAOR Supp. (no. 49A), U.N. Doc A/45/49/ (1990); the UnitedNations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (TheU.N. Rules), G.A. Res. 45/113, annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (no. 49A), U.N. Doc.A/45/49 (1990); the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment ofPrisoners, adopted by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention ofCrime and the Treatment of Offenders, held in Geneva in 1955, and approved bythe Economic and Social Council by its resolution 663 C (XXIV) of July 31, 1957and 2076 (LXII) of May 13, 1977; the Basic Principles for the Treatment ofPrisoners, G.A. Res. 45/111, December 14, 1990; and the Body of Principles forthe Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, G.A.Res. 43/173, December 9, 1988.[169]CRC, arts. 37(b) and 37(d).[170]Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations: Latvia,CRC/C/LVA/15/Add.261, para. 333. See also CRC, art. 10; and Committee on theRights of the Child, Report of the fortieth session, September 2005, CRC/C/153,para. 670.[171]Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations: Nepal,CRC/C/15Add.261, para. 50.[172]CRC, art. 3(3). See also Committee on the Rights of the Child, ConcludingObservations: Nepal, CRC/C/15Add.261, para. 50; and Committee on the Rights ofthe Child, General Comment 3 on HIV/AIDS and the rights of the child,CRC/GC/2003/3, para. 35.[173]International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16)at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3,1976, ratified by Uganda June 21, 1995, art. 10(3).[174]CRC, art. 32(1).[175]ILO Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Eliminationof the Worst Forms of Child Labour (Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention), adoptedJune 17, 1999, 38 I.L.M. 1207 (entered into force November 19, 2000), ratifiedby Uganda on June 21, 2001.[176]Ibid., art. 3.[177]Ibid.[178]CRC, art. 29; UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 1,The Aims of Education, 2, U.N. Doc. CRC/GC/2001/1 (2001); ACRWC, art. 11; andICESCR, art. 13.[179]CRC, art. 28; and ICESCR, art. 13.[180]ACRWC, art. 11.[181]CRC, art. 28; and ICESCR, art. 13.[182]Olive Eyotaru, “Child protection should be priority for post 2015, saysactivists,” Daily Monitor, March 9, 2014,http://www.monitor.co.ug/News/National/Child-protection-should-be-priority/-/688334/2236326/-/xgry5tz/-/index.html(accessed April 2, 2014).[183]Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, art. 34(3).[184]Ibid., art. 17(c).[185]Ibid., art. 34(7).[186]Children Act, 2003, art. 88.[187]UNICEF, “Strengthening Birth Registration in Africa: Opportunities andPartnerships Technical Paper,” undated, http://www.unicef.org/esaro/Technical_paper_low_res_.pdf(accessed May 21, 2014).[188]Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 10, Children’sRights in Juvenile Justice, CRC/C/GC/10 (2007), http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/CRC.C.GC.10.pdf(accessed June 17, 2014).[189]Children Act, 2003, arts. 89(1) and 89(2).[190]Ibid., art. 89(6).[191]Ibid., art. 89(8); and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, art.34(6).[192]Ibid., art. 89(7).[193]See Annex II, response from the Uganda Police Force to Human Rights Watch.[194]The Children Act, 2003, stipulates that female children in custody should beunder the care of a female officer, art. 89(9).[195]The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, art. 34(4).[196]Children Act, 2003, art. 8.[197]The Republic of Uganda, Employment Act, 2006, art. 32(1).[198]Employment Act, 2006, art. 32(4).[199]The Republic of Uganda, National Child Labour Policy, 2006.[200]Employment Act, 2006, art. 32(2).[201]The Republic of Uganda, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development,“National Strategic Programme Plan of Interventions for Orphans and OtherVulnerable Children 2011/2012-2015/2016,” May 2011,http://www.unicef.org/uganda/Final_Printed_OVC_Strategic_Plan_Uganda_-NSPPI_2.pdf(accessed March 17, 2014), p. 5.[201] TheRepublic of Uganda, Local Government Act, 1997, amended 1999, chapter 243,schedule 2, art. 16(4).[202]The Republic of Uganda, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, “TheNational Orphans and Vulnerable Children Policy,” November 2004, National_OVC_Policy(accessed July 6, 2014).[203]The ministry of gender has put in place the Youth Livelihood Programme toempower young people with skills and access to start up incomes; however thisprogram only targets unemployed youth between the ages of 18 and 30. Ministryof Gender, Labour and Social Development, “Youth LivelihoodProgramme,” December 2013, on file with Human Rights Watch.[204]Local Government Act, 1997, amended 1999, chapter 243, schedule 2, art. 16(4).[205]Ibid., part 2, art. 3(v).Related ContentJuly 16, 2014News ReleaseUganda: Homeless Children Face Violence, ExploitationEnd Roundups, Detention with AdultsJuly 16, 2014News ReleaseUganda: Homeless Children Face Violence, ExploitationRegion / CountryAfrica UgandaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch