Toxic Toil: Child Labor and Mercury Exposure in Tanzania’s Small-Scale Gold Mines | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: Photo featureDownload the summary and recommendations in Swahili: Photo featureDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload the summary and recommendations: Photo featureDownload the summary and recommendations in Swahili: Photo featureAugust 28, 2013Toxic ToilChild Labor and Mercury Exposure in Tanzania’s Small-Scale Gold MinesA 15-year-old boy mixes mercury and ground gold ore at a processing site in Mbeya Region, Tanzania.© 2013 Justin Purefoy for Human Rights WatchToxicToilChild Labor and Mercury Exposure in Tanzania’sSmall-Scale Gold MinesMap of Gold Mining in TanzaniaKey TermsSummaryKey RecommendationsTo the Tanzanian GovernmentChild LaborMercury ExposureTo Donor Countries, the World Bank,and Relevant UN AgenciesTo Tanzanian and InternationalCompanies Trading in Artisanal GoldMethodologyI. Background: Artisanal Gold Mining,Mercury Use, and Child Labor in TanzaniaArtisanal and Small-Scale Gold Miningin TanzaniaThe Mining ProcessMercury Use in Gold MiningChild Labor in TanzaniaII. “I Fear a Lot”: ChildLabor and Exposure to Mercury in Small-Scale Gold MinesThe Hazards of Mining GoldPhysical Dangers of Mining GoldWorking Hours and RemunerationSexual ExploitationHarm to EducationMercury Exposure and Effects onChildren’s HealthMercury Exposure around Small-ScaleGold MinesLevels of Mercury Exposure inSmall-Scale Mining AreasThe Health Effects of MercuryExposureIII. Government Efforts to ReduceChild Labor and  Mercury Exposure in Gold MiningChild Labor in Gold MiningChild Labor Inspections inSmall-Scale Mining: Few and Far BetweenInadequate Support for Orphans andOther Vulnerable ChildrenWeaknesses in Education PoliciesMercury Use in Gold MiningFailure to Enforce Protectionsagainst Mercury in MiningFailure to Adopt and Implement theNational Strategic Plan for Mercury ManagementLack of a Comprehensive HealthStrategy to Prevent and Address Mercury ExposureFailure to Take Action on the IllegalMercury TradeIV. The Role of the InternationalCommunityWorld Bank Support of Small-ScaleGold Miners and Vulnerable ChildrenInternational Labour Organization,Donor, and Local NGO Support of Child Labor InitiativesGlobal Mercury Project and otherLocal NGO Support for Mercury AbatementV. The Responsibility of GoldTraders  and the Gold IndustryThe Trade in Tanzanian Artisanal GoldChild Labor in Tanzania’sSupply Chain for Artisanal GoldVI. The Legal FrameworkTanzania’s National andInternational Human Rights ObligationsChild LaborEducationProtection against Violence andSexual AbuseHealthInternational Human RightsObligations of BusinessesVII. RecommendationsTo the Tanzanian GovernmentThe Ministry of Labour and EmploymentThe Ministry of Energy and MineralsThe Ministry of EducationThe Department of the EnvironmentVice President’s OfficeThe Ministry of Health and SocialWelfareThe Ministry of CommunityDevelopment, Gender and ChildrenThe Government Chemist LaboratoryAgency, Ministry of Health and Social WelfareThe Ministry of FinanceTo Local and Village AuthoritiesTo Artisanal Miners’AssociationsTo Large-Scale Gold Mining CompaniesTo the African UnionTo Donor Countries, the World Bank,and Relevant UN AgenciesTo Tanzanian and InternationalCompanies Trading in Tanzanian Artisanal GoldAcknowledgmentsMap of Gold Mining in TanzaniaClick to expand ImageKey TermsAmalgamationThe process of mixing and merging ground gold ore andmercuryArtisanal and Small-Scale Gold MiningSmall groups of people engaged in low-cost, low-tech,labor-intensive excavation and processing of goldBiomonitoringThe process of measuring human exposure to chemicalsDue diligenceThe process of evaluating details before making a businessdecision; the care a person or organization takes to avoid harmFormalizationThe licensing and regulation of small-scale gold miningLicensed mineA legal, formal, small-scale mine with an owner who holdsa Primary Mining LicenseMercury abatementThe process of reducing mercury use and exposureMercury intoxicationPoisoning caused by mercuryMethylmercuryA toxic compound of mercury that tends to accumulate infishOreA naturally occurring material from which a metal or othervaluable mineral can be extractedOrphanA child that has lost one or both parentsPrimary Mining LicenseA mining license authorizing Tanzanian citizens andspecific corporations to mine an area of 10 hectares for 7 yearsRetortA device that captures harmful mercury vaporUnlicensed mineAn illegal, informal, small-scale mine that operateswithout a Primary Mining LicenseSummaryRahim T. is a small,soft-spoken, 13-year-old boy who lives with his aunt in a village in Chunyadistrict in southern Tanzania. Hisfather died and his mother lives in a larger town in the same district. Rahim T.started to working on mining sites over the weekends and during the schoolholidays, around the age of 11, because he was sometimes left at home alonewithout enough money or food to eat. He told Human Rights Watch, “Myparents were not present at home. I saw my friends going there. I was hungryand in need of money so I decided to go there.”Rahim T. uses mercury, a highly toxic silvery liquid metal,to extract the gold at home. He mixes roughly half a tablespoon of mercury withground gold ore. He then stands a few meters away from an open flame where heburns the gold-mercury amalgam on a soda cap for about 15 minutes, releasingdangerous mercury vapor into the environment. Until our interview, no one hadever told him mercury can cause serious ill-health, including brain damage, andeven death.Soon after Rahim T. startedmining, he was involved in a pit accident:I was digging with my colleague. I entered into a shortpit. When I was digging he told me to come out, and when I was about to comeout, the shaft collapsed on me, reaching the level of my chest … theystarted rescuing me by digging the pit and sent me to Chunya hospital.The accident, Rahim T. toldHuman Rights Watch, knocked him unconscious and caused internal injuries. Heremained in the hospital for about a week and still occasionally feels pain inhis waist when he sits. After the accident, he was scared of returning to thepits, but he felt he had no choice, explaining: “Whenever my aunt travelsis when I go, because I need something to sustain myself.”*****Mining, the type of work described by Rahim T., is one ofthe most hazardous forms of child labor. Thousands of children in Tanzania,some as young as eight years old, risk serious injury and even death from workin this industry. Many children, especially orphans, lack basicnecessities such as food, clothing, and shelter, and seek employment to supportthemselves and their relatives.This report examines child labor and exposure to mercury insmall-scale gold mining in Tanzania, Africa’s fourth-largest goldproducer. It documents the harmful effects of mining on children, including itsimpact on the enjoyment of their rights to health, education, and protectionfrom violence and abuse. The report focuses on hard rock mining, wherebysmall-scale miners remove and process rocks from pits to extract the ore. HumanRights Watch conducted research in Chunya district (southern Tanzania), in Geitaand Kahama districts (northwestern Tanzania), and in the cities of Dar esSalaam, Mwanza, and Mbeya.Small-scale gold mining is labor-intensive and requireslittle technology. Mining operations in Tanzania typically involve people who control the mine, pit holders (who lease pits from thepeople who control the mine), and workers, including children.Children are involved in every phase of themining process. They dig and drill in deep, unstable pits during shiftsof up to 24 hours. They transport heavy bags of gold ore and crush the ore intopowder. After concentrating the gold further, children mix the powder withmercury and water in a pan. The mercury attracts the gold particles, creating agold-mercury amalgam. Children burn the amalgam to evaporate the mercury andrecover the gold. Children who work in mining are exposed to serious healthrisks, including: accidents in deep pits, injuries from dangerous tools,respiratory diseases, and musculoskeletal problems.Mercury poses a threat to children and adults who work inmining, as well as to surrounding communities. Miners, including children, riskmercury poisoning from touching the mercury and breathing the mercury vapor.People who live in mining areas may also be exposed to mercury when communityor family members process the gold at home, or from eating mercury-contaminatedfish from nearby rivers. Mercury attacks the central nervous system and cancause developmental and neurological problems. It is particularly dangerous tofetuses and infants, because their young bodies are still developing. Mostadult and child miners are unaware of the grave health risks connected to theuse of mercury.Girls on and around mining sites in Chunya and Kahama districtsface sexual harassment, including pressure to engage in sex work. As a result,some girls become victims of commercial sexual exploitation and riskcontracting HIV and other sexually transmitted infections.Children who work in mining sometimes miss out on importanteducational opportunities and experiences. In some cases, mining causeschildren to skip classes or drop out of school. It can also impactstudents’ time and motivation for study.This report also examines how gold traders may contribute tochild labor in mining. Small traders purchase gold directly at the mines or inmining towns—including from children—and sell it to larger traders.Sometimes the gold passes through several intermediaries before reaching thelargest traders who export gold. The top destination for artisanal gold from Tanzania is the UnitedArab Emirates (UAE); gold is also exported to Switzerland, South Africa, China,and the United Kingdom.Under international and domestic law, the Tanzaniangovernment is obligated to protect children from violations of their rights,including the worst forms of child labor such as mining and commercial sexualexploitation. Tanzania should provide free primary education and make secondaryeducation, including vocational training, available and accessible. Thegovernment should also take measures to avoid occupational accidents anddiseases, and reduce the population’s exposure to harmful substances.Scientific evidence shows that mercury is a harmful substance.While the Tanzanian governmenthas taken some important steps to reduce child labor and mercury exposure ingold mining, it has failed to adequately enforce its child labor laws andaddress some of the socioeconomic problems contributing to child labor.In June 2009, the Tanzanian government launched the NationalAction Plan for the Elimination of Child Labour. Under its mining, childprotection, and employment laws, the government also prohibits children underthe age of 18 from engaging in hazardous work, including mining. Occasionallygovernment officials inspect mines for child labor.Despite these positive actions, the government’s 2009 childlabor action plan remains unimplemented, its child labor inspection process isflawed, and key ministries are failing to prioritize and devote resources toenforce child labor laws.The Ministry of Labour and Employment is the lead ministryon child labor, but it has taken limited action to counter child labor inmining. Its labor officers rarely, if ever, visit licensed small-scale minesfor child labor inspections, and virtually never conduct child laborinspections on unlicensed, informal mines—the majority of sites. TheMinistry of Energy and Minerals is also failing to carry out itsresponsibilities under the mining regulations, which authorize mining officialsto order mining license holders who have hired children to pay a fine or takeremedial action. Both ministries lack adequate staff and means to visit remotemining areas. When labor or mining officials did carry out child laborinspections, they sent younger-looking children away from the mines, but didnot properly assess the ages of older children or follow up to support thechildren’s transition out of child labor. Mining officials oftenprioritized revenue collection and other health and safety issues over childlabor when visiting licensed and unlicensed mines. Both ministries seldompenalized employers who hired children.The government has also failed to adequately address some ofthe underlying socioeconomic causes of child labor. In particular, thegovernment provides too little support to orphans and other vulnerable children,many of whom seek employment in mining to cover their basic needs. Moreover,weaknesses in the education system indirectly contribute to child labor. Inparticular, despite the official abolition of school fees through the 2002-2006Education Development Plan, schools sometimes request illegal financialcontributions, prompting students whose parents are unable to pay such expensesto either seek additional income on the mines or to drop out of school. Also,many children across Tanzania do no transition from primary to secondary orvocational school and start full-time work in sectors such as mining. This is partlybecause of the cost of attending secondary school and limited vocationaltraining opportunities.The threat of mercury is recognized by Tanzania, but its usein small-scale mining continues unabated. Tanzania has laws and institutions inplace to regulate the mercury trade and promote safer mercury use in mining. In2009 the government developed a National Strategic Plan for Mercury Management,which includes strategies to raise awareness on the hazards of mercury andintroduce mercury-free technology to extract gold. Under the miningregulations, an owner of a licensed mine must use a retort—a device thatcaptures harmful mercury vapor—and provide employees with protectivegear. The government also requires those who intend to import, export,transport, store, and deal in chemicals to register specified quantities ofmercury with the Chief Government Chemist. By controlling the flow and use ofmercury in the country, the government can incentivize miners to explorealternative gold extraction methods.However, the government has done little to put these lawsand policies into action. It almost never enforces the regulations that requirethe registration of mercury for small-scale gold mining or the use of retortsand protective gear on mining sites. It has also failed to launch theMercury Management Plan and to devise a health sector response to mercury poisoning.Donors, United Nations agencies, international financialinstitutions, and civil society organizations play an important role inassisting poorer nations to fulfill their obligations under international law. Thesegroups have taken some steps to support initiatives on child labor, mercuryuse, and mining generally, but only a handful of donor initiatives specificallyaddress child labor or mercury use in small-scale gold mining. Some programs,such as the World Bank’s Sustainable Management of Mineral ResourcesProject (SMMRP), which supports Tanzania’s small-scale miners, couldpotentially do more to target child labor in small-scale gold mining.Businesses, under international law and other norms, alsohave a responsibility to identify, prevent, mitigate and account for the impactof their activities on human rights, and to adequately address abuses connectedto their operations. Gold traders in Tanzania who were interviewed for thisreport lacked specific due diligence procedures to avoid supporting unlawful childlabor. Meanwhile, international standards for human rights due diligence havelargely focused on due diligence for “conflict gold”—gold whichbenefits conflict parties and hence contributes to armed conflict. As a result,companies have done less to prevent supply chains from becoming entangled withsuppliers who exploit unlawful child labor.Ending child labor in gold mining requires the government,UN agencies, donors, artisanal miners, gold traders, and companies toprioritize and fully support its elimination. Failure to act places children atrisk of serious injury or death and may destroy their educationalopportunities. Additionally, failure to limit the use of mercury may causedevastating health and environmental effects for both children and adults.Key RecommendationsTo the Tanzanian GovernmentChild LaborInstruct mining and labor officials toregularly inspect and withdraw children from mining work on licensed mines andimpose penalties on those who employ child labor. Government measures mustrespect human rights and should not lead to retribution or severe punishments;Instruct labor officers to inspectunlicensed mines. If mining officials informally visit an unlicensed mine, theyshould remind employers of child labor laws, encourage them to comply, and requestthe Ministry of Labour and Employment to conduct further inspections and, wherenecessary, impose penalties;Instruct labor officers, social welfare officers,and parasocial workers to identify and protect girls who work in mining fromsexual abuse;Conduct awareness-raising and outreach activitieson the hazards of child labor in mining;Support orphans and other vulnerablechildren by, for example, implementing the National Costed Action Plan on theMost Vulnerable Children and expanding the Tanzania Social Action Fund whichprovides grants and conditional cash transfers to vulnerable populations;Instruct district officers to investigateand eliminate illegal primary school fees to ensure they do not thwart accessto education in mining areas;Increase access to post-primary education inmining areas by allowing children to retake the Primary School LeavingExamination and compete for a place at a secondary school and by increasingopportunities for vocational training;Strengthen and intensify efforts toformalize the artisanal and small-scale gold mining sector without engaging ina mass clampdown on unlicensed mining activity;Explicitly address child labor and mercuryexposure in current efforts to promote the development and professionalization ofartisanal mining, including through the government-led Strategy to SupportArtisanal and Small-Scale Mining Development and the Multi-StakeholderPartnership between the government, World Bank, Anglo-Gold Ashanti, and AfricanBarrick Gold.Mercury ExposureUrge an immediate end to mercury use by anyoneunder age 18 as part of broader efforts to raise awareness and enforce safemining practices and to promote mercury-free alternatives;Develop a health response to address mercuryexposure and poisoning in artisanal mining communities, with a focus on childhealth, including by revising and launching the National Strategic Plan onMercury Management.To Donor Countries, theWorld Bank, and Relevant UN AgenciesProvide financial, political, and technicalassistance to address child labor and mercury exposure in mining, includingthrough programs on artisanal mining.To Tanzanian andInternational Companies Trading in Artisanal GoldNational and international companies buyinggold from Tanzania’s small-scale gold mines should have due diligenceprocedures in place to ensure that their supply chains are free from childlabor. If child labor is found, companies should work with their suppliers toend child labor in the supply chain within a defined timeframe and ceaseworking with suppliers who are unable or unwilling to comply.MethodologyThis report examines child labor and mercury exposure insmall-scale gold mining in Tanzania. It documents the harmful effects of miningon children, including its impact on the enjoyment of their rights to health,education, and protection from violence and abuse. It focuses on hard rockmining, whereby small-scale miners remove and process rocks from pits toextract the ore.Human Rights Watch chose to focuson Tanzania because it is one of Africa’s largest gold producers and ithas a substantial small-scale gold mining community. Despite previousinterventions by the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the UnitedNations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), child labor and mercuryuse are still prevalent in small-scale gold mining in Tanzania.Human Rights Watch conducted research in October andDecember 2012 in mining areas in northwestern and southern Tanzania, and in thecities of Dar es Salaam, Mwanza, and Mbeya. Tanzania has roughly 12 gold miningregions and researchers visited 11 mining sites in 3 of these areas: Geitadistrict (Geita region), Kahama district (Shinyanga region), and Chunyadistrict (Mbeya region) (see map). Human Rights Watch focused on these areasbecause of their geographic diversity and large artisanal gold mining communities.Human Rights Watch interviewed over 200 people, including 80children between the ages of 8 and 17 working in artisanal gold mining areas. Ofthese 80 children, 61 were directly involved in the gold mining process (48boys and 13 girls). Another 13 (7 boys and 6 girls) did other jobs on the minessuch as selling wood, food, water, and coal; and six girls engaged in sex worknear the mines. Researchers also spoke to four young adults between the ages of18 and 20 who were working in gold mining. At least 20 of the children interviewedwere orphans. Human Rights Watch selectedthe children who work in mining randomly on the mining site or at a nearbyschool. A nongovernmental organization (NGO) helped researchers to identifychildren engaged in sex work near the mines.Human Rights Watch interviewed a wide range of other individualsin mining areas, including parents and guardians of child laborers, adultminers, representatives of regional miners’ associations, teachers andprincipals, health workers and health experts, village authorities, localgovernment officials, NGO activists, and gold traders. In addition, HumanRights Watch researchers met with representatives of United Nations agencies,donor governments, and a large-scale mining company.Researchers interviewed representatives of the Ministry ofLabour and Employment, the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, the Ministry ofEducation, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (specifically the SocialWelfare Department and the Government Chemist Laboratory Agency),theMinistry of Community Development, Gender, and Children, and the EnvironmentalDivision of the Vice President’s Office. Outside of Tanzania, HumanRights Watch interviewed several international experts on small-scale goldmining, mercury use, and the health effects of mercury. Researchers also metwith gold trading and refining companies in Switzerland and Dubai. Noinducement was offered to or solicited by the interviewees.Where possible, Human Rights Watch carried out interviewswith children in a quiet setting, somewhere near the mining site or in a schoolclassroom, without others present. All children were informed of the purpose ofthe interview, its voluntary nature, and the ways the information would beused. Each orally consented to the interview. Because of the difficulty ofmaintaining privacy on large mining sites, some interviews were conducted inthe presence of a few adult miners and other children. Researchers interviewedthe girls engaged in sex work in small focus groups in Mbeya and Chunya town. HumanRights Watch adapted the length of the interview and complexity of the questionsto the age and maturity of each child. Interviews with children under the ageof 10 did not last longer than 20 minutes, while those with older children tookup to 90 minutes. The interviews were semi-structured, and not all childrenwere asked the same questions.In addition to these interviews, Human Rights Watch carriedout desk research, consulting a wide array of written documents from theTanzanian government, UN agencies, NGOs, media, academia, privately ownedinternational companies, and other sources.In this report, “child” and“children” are used to refer to anyone under the age of 18,consistent with usage under international law. The names of all children havebeen replaced with pseudonyms to protect their privacy and to preclude any potentialretaliation. In several instances Human Rights Watch has also withheld the nameof some adult interviewees for security reasons.Most interviews were conducted in Swahili, the main languageof Tanzania, through the help of an interpreter. Some of the interviews inKahama district were conducted in Sukuma.One challenge during this research was the assessment ofchildren’s ages. Some children did not know their exact age. Researchersonly classified interviewees as children when this was clearly indicated by theinterviewees’ own assessment and physical appearance.I. Background: Artisanal Gold Mining, Mercury Use, andChild Labor in TanzaniaArtisanal and Small-Scale GoldMining in Tanzania“Artisanal” and “small-scale” goldmining refers to small groups engaged in low-cost, low-tech, labor-intensiveexcavation and processing of gold.[1]According to the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), the global artisanalgold mining sector produces an estimated 15 percent of the world’s gold(approximately 400 tonnes) and employs 90 percent of the global gold miningworkforce—around 10 to 15 million miners, including children.[2]In 2011, Tanzania wasthe fourth largest gold producer in Africa.[3] Roughly 5 percent of Tanzania’s gross domestic product and one-thirdof its exports come from mining.[4] Experts estimate that around 10 percent of the country’s goldcomes from small-scale mining, a number which continues to grow inresponse to rising gold prices and limited alternative sources of income.[5]The remainder of the gold is produced by medium and large-scale miningcompanies. In 2011, Tanzania earned US$2.1 billion in mineralexports, of which more than 95 percent came from six gold mines.[6] Accordingto government figures, there are more than 800,000 small-scalegold miners,[7] thousands of whom are children.[8]Despite Tanzania’s goldwealth, the country is poor. The 2011 Human Development Index, which measureshealth, education, and income, ranked Tanzania as 152ND out of 187countries.[9] About67.9 percent of the population lives below the international poverty line of US$1.25per day.[10]The Mining ProcessIn hard rock mining, the focus ofthis report, small-scale miners remove the rocks from pits and process them onthe mining site, in processing areas, or at home, to extract the ore.[11]Click to expand ImageSmall-scale gold mining occurs bothillegally and with government sanction in Tanzania. To mine legally, Tanzaniancitizens must apply for a renewable Primary Mining License (PML) authorizingthem to mine an area of 10 hectares for 7 years.[12] Citizens can apply for multiple licenses. Themining regulations, Law of the Child Act, and Employment and Labour RelationsAct prohibit license holders from employing anyone under the age of 18.[13]Once the PML is issued, the owner is legally responsible for activities on the site,including compliance with mining, environmental, and safety regulations.[14]However, the majority of small-scale mining takes place onunlicensed, unauthorized mines.[15] Someunlicensed mines exist for many years and are usually controlled by the land owneror a prominent community member.[16] Other“gold rushes” spring up quickly and exist for a few months, typicallyon land owned by another individual or mining company.[17]Communities rush to these areas when there is news of someone striking gold andsettle there until the deposit depletes or until they are evicted by localauthorities.[18]Currently, few individuals are able to apply for a PMLbecause large mining companies hold prospecting and mining licenses over much ofTanzania’s mineral-rich areas.[19]Additionally, applying for a PML may require overcoming significant costs andbureaucratic hurdles. At present a PML costs 20,000 Tanzanian Shillings (T Sh)(US$12.28).[20]According to one researcher, miners may also have to pay other hidden expensessuch as the cost of finding the coordinates of a mining area or a $50 fee toaccess information from a database at the Zonal Mines Office about the locationof other mining licenses.[21]Small-scale miners may also lack knowledge of the legal requirements andinstitutional procedures to apply for a PML.[22]The government recently commenced a process to make licensesmore accessible to small-scale miners by negotiating for land with large-scalemining companies and by cordoning off some relinquished land from prospectivelicense holders.[23]There are up to three hierarchicalcategories of labor on small-scale gold mines: the person who controls the mine(a PML holder, land owner, or prominent community member, who is commonlycalled the “owner”), pit holders (who lease pits from the personwho controls the mine) and workers (who dig in the pits, and who may alsoengage in other processing activities).[24] Mostmines operate using a production-sharing model, meaning the owner, pit holder,and workers each take a percentage of the ore or gold produced.[25]Typically the owner claims between 20 and 50 percent of the gold production.[26]Once the miners dig up the ore from the pits, specialized workers sometimes processthe gold. Their activities include ore transportation and crushing, as well asseparation of the gold through mixing with mercury.[27]They typically receive payment in the form of a fixed amount of cash or ore.[28]Childrenare involved in both digging in the pits as well as processing activities.Mercury Use in Gold MiningThe use of mercury to extract gold in hard rock mining iswidespread. While large mining operations have the capacity to use cyanide formore complex and efficient processing, poorer small-scale miners in some 70countries, including Tanzania, rely on mercury to extract the gold.[29]They mix the crushed gold ore with the mercury and heat the amalgam toevaporate the mercury, leaving gold behind. Evaporated mercury can travel longdistances, even between continents, and can impact areas far away fromsmall-scale mines.[30] Accordingto the expert database Mercury Watch, Tanzania is the third highest mercuryemitter in Africa after Ghana and Sudan, releasing an average of 45 tonnes ofmercury in 2010.[31]Small-scale miners favor mercury over other forms ofextraction because of its ease, affordability and accessibility.[32]It allows miners to work efficiently and independently.[33]Current mercury-free extraction alternatives are more difficult to introducebecause of their cost, training, and organizational requirements.[34]Child Labor in TanzaniaChild labor is a problem in mining and across many other sectors in Tanzania, including in agriculture,domestic work, and fishing. Agricultureemploys close to 80 percent of Tanzania’s rural labor force and thegreatest number of children.[35]According to a 2006 government survey, about 20 percent of children between theages of 5 and 17 are engaged in some form of child labor in Tanzania, thoughthis number may be higher, because of the definition of child labor used in theresearch.[36]The International Labour Organization (ILO) considers miningamong the most hazardous sectors and occupations, because of the rates ofdeath, injury and disease in the sector.[37] Althoughthe Law of the Child Act, Employment and Labour Relations Act, and the mining regulationsprohibit mine owners from employing children, the United Nations and NGOs havedocumented the use of child labor in tanzanite gem mines and in small-scalegold mining.[38] Thousands of children are likely to beinvolved in this sector.[39] Thegovernment has also adopted a list of hazardous work, under the regulations ofthe Law of the Child Act, which names and prohibits many forms of laborincluding small-scale mining and commercial sexual exploitation.[40]Poverty drives many children to seek employment in mining.[41]Most of the child laborers interviewed by Human Rights Watch said they usedtheir earnings for basic necessities such as food, rent, clothes, and schoolsupplies such as exercise books, pens, and uniforms.Children who have lost one or both of their parents—orphans—areparticularly likely to be involved in the worst forms of child labor.[42]Tanzania has an estimated 3 million orphans, of whom roughly 1.3 million havelost a parent due to AIDS.[43] Many ofthese children lack financial and other support from their guardians or extendedfamilies.[44] Otherfactors, such as the gender, health status, and remarriage of the survivingparent or caregiver, may also contribute to orphans’ vulnerability tochild labor.[45] A 2002 ILOstudy found that roughly 53.8 percent of children engaged in fulltime work inTanzania were either orphans or came from families where the father was absentor had died.[46]II. “I Fear a Lot”:Child Labor and Exposure to Mercury in Small-Scale Gold MinesThe Hazards of MiningGoldChildren work long hours, in hazardous conditions, onunlicensed and licensed small-scale gold mines, despite the prohibition of thistype of work in Tanzania’s employment, mining, and child protection laws.Mining activities, such as digging and drilling in pits, working underground,crushing ore, and using mercury to extract the gold, expose children to manyphysical dangers, including dangerous tools, unstable pits, and toxic gases.Interviewees suffered from fatigue, headaches, muscularpain, blistering, and swelling. Research suggests that long-term problems mightinclude respiratory diseases, musculoskeletal problems, and mercury poisoning. Childrenoften contributed some or all of their earnings to their families or relatives.Human Rights Watch interviewed girls who work on or near mining sites and foundthey sometimes became victims of sexual exploitation and abuse. Child labor inartisanal mining also affects school attendance and performance, and can cause childrento drop out of school entirely.Physical Dangers of Mining GoldDigging and DrillingPitsThe first phase of small-scale gold mining involves manuallydigging pits ranging from a few meters to up to 70 meters deep.[47]Human Rights Watch interviewed 18 children (14 boys and 4 girls) in Geita,Kahama, and Chunya districts, who dug in pits—a task that is especiallycommon on new sites. For example, Issa M., about 12 years old, told HumanRights Watch that he dug the rocks with a pick, adding “It’s hardwork. It’s hard rock. It’s hard to break. Yesterday was the firstday I did it. My hands are aching.”[48] An11-year-old boy, Jalil H. said, “When I was digging one of the rocks, therock hit [my hand]. There is a scar. I found a piece of cloth to cover it andcontinued. My hand is aching.”[49]While most children dug with shovels, hammers, and picks, afew said they used drills. This tool is particularly dangerous because it is heavyand flings stones into the surrounding area. Thirteen-year-old Michael H. describedlosing control of the drill for a moment:I was hurt from the instrument I use to dig. I wasdrilling. I was sent to hospital. I hurt a toe. The whole nail was peeled off.I took medicine. When I was drilling I drilled on the stone and then theinstrument lost direction and landed on my foot…. I was 12 [when theaccident happened].[50]Prolonged exposure to dust from drilling operations andhandling and crushing ore may cause lung diseases such as silicosis.[51]Miners with silicosis are at a high risk of developing tuberculosis (TB).[52]The severity of childhood pulmonary TB is not well understood because it isdifficult to diagnose and limited information is known about the outcomes ofchildren with TB.[53]Working UndergroundWork underground in unstable pits is one of the mosthazardous aspects of mining. The Mining Regulations require adult miners toascend and descend on a ladder on one side of the pit and to hoist the mineralsretrieved in the mine on the other side.[54] However,children use a range of dangerous techniques to climb down deep pits to dig andcollect ore, risking injury and even death from falling. Several boys told HumanRights Watch that they climbed down the pits by either holding onto the sidesof the pit or onto a rope. Fumo D., who was 15 years old, stated:We go down the pit by holding onto the sides [with theright and left foot]. The pits are 8 to 10 meters deep, even 15 meters….Several people go down to different levels. We hoist the ore up, passing thesacks from person to person…. Sometimes we use ropes, tied to a tree.[55]These dangerous climbingtechniques have sometimes resulted in children falling. Fumo D. also told HumanRights Watch: “One of the students, Anthony D., slipped and had afracture. He was treated in Geita. He was in class 4, 11 or 12 years old.”[56]Bakari J., a 16-year-old boy, said: “Last week I slipped in the pit whenI was climbing up. I fell. I hurt my elbow.”[57]Two children interviewed by Human Rights Watch said they wereinvolved in accidents where the pits collapsed. Adam K., a 17-year-old boy sharedhis harrowing experience:One time the pit collapsed. It was September last year. Ithought I was dead, I was so frightened. I was digging down and I wenthorizontally and then the rest of the land slid. I was just behind thelandslide, not inside. Two of my friends [both adults] who were on the otherside died. I was so scared. I just cried and despaired.[58]A pit also collapsed on13-year-old Rahim T. in Chunya district. Fellow miners nearby had to dig himout of the pit and he spent about a week in the hospital.[59]Medical officials in Geita andChunya districts described attending to fractures, broken bones, and cuts frommining accidents, particularly from collapsed pits.[60]Children who work in deep pits may be exposed to dangerousand sometimes deadly gases that may be released during the mining process.[61]This includes gas from pumps, which the government prohibits underground, butwhich miners often use to remove water from the pits.[62]In order to mitigate the dangerous effects of the gas, 15-year-old Fumo D., whomined in Geita district explained, “We throw branches when there is gas [toincrease the oxygen levels in the pits]. We sense this when we are going downinto the pit. Near the ground, you feel how your chest tightens.”[63]Medical officials in Matundasi Ward in Chunya district andone child miner reported seeing a total of five adult deaths caused by gas fromthe mines.[64] Amedical official working near the mines in Chunya told Human Rights Watch:We see that the most dangerous are gas accidents becausewhen they [the miners] are drilling they use those chemicals and gases to drill… When they feel like the gold is already maybe near, they just go downbefore the gases are finished [have escaped into the atmosphere].[65]Carrying and Crushing Gold OreAfter miners retrieve gold ore from the pits, they carry therocks to a processing area where they or other workers crush the ore intopowder. Transport of ore is a common form of work for boys and girls on theartisanal gold mines.Sacks of ore can weigh up to 60 kilograms and can causepotentially serious injuries.[66]Abasi L., who worked in Geita district, said he transportedore for the first time at age 16. Once he carried a load that was too heavy forhim over a distance of roughly 15 meters. He started feeling pain in his chestand had to be hospitalized. It took him three days to recover.[67]Even small children haul heavy loads. Faraji J., a boy about 8 years old, toldHuman Rights Watch: “I help my mum by collecting stones [ore]. I carrythe stones in bags on a bicycle. I bring them to the crusher. I don’tlike the work.”[68] Liftingand carrying heavy ore can lead to skeletal deformation and accelerated jointdeterioration.[69]Miners first crush the ore manually using hammers, stones,and other metallic objects. Eight children we spoke to said they hadaccidentally hit their hands while crushing the ore and two had lostfingernails. Akilah O., a 10-year-old girl, explained:[I] once knocked till my nail was removed. I was taken to ahospital and they put a bandage…. I was seven years old. It was a hammerthat hit me…. [I am] scared a lot, nowadays I do not prefer crushing, Ido other processes.[70]The miners also crush or further process the gold ore usinga type of grinder called a ball mill—a large, cylindrical machine. Onechild laborer complained that sometimes the belt from the ball mill would hithis hands.[71]After crushing the gold ore into dust, miners oftenconcentrate the gold by pouring water over the ore and passing it through asluice. They then rinse the accumulated particles and remaining dust out of thesacks in a barrel or pan.[72]Mixing and BurningMercury-Gold AmalgamIn order to separate the gold from the remaining dirt andother minerals, miners use mercury to retrieve the gold. Using roughly half a tablespoonof mercury for a pan of water and ground ore, miners mix the solution withtheir bare hands until the mercury has attracted the gold particles, creating agold-mercury amalgam. They then burn the amalgam to evaporate the mercury and recoverthe gold. During this process, children may have direct contact with mercury bytouching it with their bare hands and by breathing in fumes as the mercury isburned away, both of which places them at risk of mercury poisoning. Mercury cancause irreversible damage to a child’s development and a wide range ofserious conditions.[73]Michael H., a 13-year-old boy, described the amalgamationprocess to Human Rights Watch:I take the ground sand and put it in a basin and I pour inwater and put in a small amount of mercury.... Then I start mixing the sandwith the mercury. When l finish, I take a piece of cloth [to squeeze theamalgam in the cloth to get rid of the water]…. When I finish filtering,I take the cloth out and … I find gold [the mercury-gold amalgam] …I take a certain bowl made of metal and I burn [the amalgam] … and itturns to gold. Sometimes I do it by myself. Sometimes I do it with my friends.After I burn, I take the gold when it cools.[74]Nineteen children (seventeen boys and two girls) interviewedby Human Rights Watch said they had used mercury on the mines. The youngest was12 years old. He told us he accompanied his mother to the mine daily where hesometimes mixed the mercury and gold and burned the amalgam. He complained thathe experienced dizziness and pain in his head every day.[75]The most serious health hazard comes from exposure tomercury vapor.[76] Afteramalgamation, gold miners burn the amalgam on a small fire to recover the gold.Some children do this a few times per week. During the school holidays,13-year-old Zaki S. said he mixed and burned the mercury gold amalgam up totwice a day; 13-year-old Rahim T. said he processed gold with mercury about threetimes per week.[77] Mostchildren we interviewed said that they stood between one and three meters wayfrom the amalgam as it burned. The length of time for burning is usually a fewminutes, but it varies, depending on the quantity of gold.[78]Exposure to mercury vapor occurs even when children do notburn the amalgam themselves. Some children, like 14-year-old Taji J., said theyhanded the amalgam to an adult who specialized in amalgamation—an “amalgamator”—ora trader, and watched it burn, adding: “The one who buys the gold is theone who burns it. I am always there when they burn it.”[79]The evaporated mercury can travel long distances, potentially impactingchildren near the burning site and many kilometers away.[80]Despite widespread knowledge that mercury is dangerous, manyinterviewees did not know how it could affect their own health and had limitedinformation about how they could protect themselves.[81]Some adult and child miners said they tried to avoid exposure to the mercuryvapor by covering their noses, and by standing far away from the burningamalgam or in the opposite direction of the wind.[82]One adult interviewee told Human Rights Watch, “People drink tea withlots of milk to protect themselves.”[83]Working Hours and RemunerationChildren described working long hours and earning moneyeither through selling the gold they extracted or for discrete tasks on themine. They often used their earnings to contribute to their family or otheradults they lived with.Working HoursMost of the children we interviewed said they worked forlong hours. Almost half were not enrolled in school and said they came to themine several days per week, sometimes daily.[84] Theirshifts on the mine lasted between 6 and 24 hours. Six said they worked late atnight or early in the morning, in violation of the Law of the Child Act, which prohibitschildren from working between the hours of 8 p.m. and 6 a.m.[85]Asani A., a 17-year-old boy, described how he worked underground through thenight, with a group of five to ten people in Geita district: “You enterin the morning and stay for around 24 hours, then you have a day of rest.Yesterday I was in the mine from 1 p.m. to 6 a.m.”[86]Musa N., a 15-year-old boy, also told Human Rights Watch about his 24 hourshift: “Some days I work day and night. I start my duty at 11 p.m. until11 p.m. [the next day]. We divide into two groups so I can rest when the othersare working.”[87]Other children in Geita, Kahama and Chunya districts saidthey attended school but worked after school, over the weekend, and during theschool holidays. Combining school and mining work may affect children’seducation as it limits their time for study, reduces their eagerness to learn,and may impact their performance.[88]RemunerationSome child laborers said they earned money by processing andselling the gold they had extracted to traders; others said they were paid cashfor specific tasks. The pay was not regular, as gold mining is unpredictable.Children reported selling 1 gram of gold for 50,000 to 70,000 TanzanianShillings (TSh) (US$30.70 - $42.98). Child laborers involved in processingearned between 1,000 and 5,000 TSh (about $0.61 - $3.07) for crushing a pile ofrocks, 2,000 TSh (about $1.23) for mixing a basin of mercury and gold, and 1,000to 20,000 TSh ($0.61 - $12.28) for a day’s work. Like adults, childrenwho mined in a group normally shared the proceeds with their team and sometimeshad to pay the owners of the mine or pit a portion of the gold or a percentageof the sale.[89] Childrenoften used the income they earned to help to support their families orrelatives they lived with.Sexual ExploitationSmall-scale gold mining communities are largely made up ofmakeshift settlements of single, male migrants with some disposable income,contributing to high levels of sexual exploitation of children and adult sexwork. Some girls on and around mining sites, including those working in smallrestaurants preparing food for the miners (a common job for girls at mines),reported sexual harassment, being pressured into having sex, and commercialsexual exploitation.[90] Thisplaces girls at heightened risk of sexual violence and transmission of HIV andother sexually transmitted infections.Yasmin D, a 15-year-old girl who extracted and processed herown gold in Chunya, described the practice of men approaching girls on the sitefor sex:A lot of men approach me … always showing memoney…. Sex work is very common. [There are] many women coming fromtown…. I had a friend who is doing that. Most of those are working in thebar. Sometimes they stay here [on the mine] … they sacrifice themselvesin the forest. They create a hut and stay.[91]Two cousins, both girls, Eidi B., age 16, and Farida C., age15, sold food on a gold rush site in Kahama district with their grandmother.They also described men harassing them on the site. Both girls were living onthe mine with no running water to bathe or go to the toilet. Eidi B., told HumanRights Watch:It’s a bad situation here. There are no latrines andno water for bathing…. I do not like it here. Men want to haverelationships…. A guy came to the restaurant and said I want you to be mygirlfriend and to make you laugh, because I love you … Later when Irefused, he said I was foolish. There have been many other cases like this.Some come to buy you food or soft drinks…. I would like to go to Mwanza[the capital of the region] and get tuition to go to school there again.[92]Six girls interviewed in Mbeya region had engaged in sexwork near the mines. Some came to stay in guesthouses in mining towns for briefperiods of time.[93] Othersworked as barmaids in Chunya district in Mbeya region. The barmaids said theyhad no option but to engage in sex work because they did not receive regularpay.[94] WandaS., age 14, explained, “Some bosses don’t give money for food [toeat]. If they don’t provide money for food, [you have to do sexwork]…. I want to stop it…. I am regretting doing it [sex work].”[95]Girls are also at risk of sexual violence. Medical officialsat Chunya District Hospital said that they treated one victim of rape per month,including girls, mostly from small-scale gold mining areas in the district.[96]A 2013 baseline survey, conducted by Plan International on the eradication ofthe worst forms of child labor in eight mining districts, found that 19.2percent of the working children surveyed were sexually abused.[97]Girls who are victims of commercial sexual exploitation are particularlyvulnerable to rape and other forms of sexual violence, as are adult sexworkers.[98] InItumbi village in Chunya district, one sex worker complained they did not have anofficial place to report abuse from their clients.[99]Girls who are sexually exploited are at risk of gettinginfected with HIV and other sexually transmitted infections. HIV prevalenceamong sex workers in Tanzania is significantly higher than the prevalence inthe general population between ages 15 and 49, which is at 5.6 percent.[100]A 2003 study conducted in the mining regions of Geita and Shinyanga found that 41.8percent of female food and recreational workers were infected with HIV oranother sexually transmitted infection.[101] Astudy of female bar workers in Mbeya region found an even higher HIV prevalencerate of 68 percent.[102] Althoughcondoms are sometimes sold in the bars in mining areas, some of the girls neverused them. Ituri K., a 16-year-old girl engaged in sex work, told Human RightsWatch that she did not know about HIV and that she had never used a condom withany of the men she had sex with.[103] Someof the girls who used condoms with their clients still feared contractingsexually transmitted infections.[104]Harm to EducationIn some cases, child labor in mining affects children’sschool performance and attendance and can cause them to drop out of schoolentirely.Children told us they sometimes missed school to work inmining. Lila A., a 12-year old girl who lived in Kahama district explained,“When I come to the mine I never go to school on that day.”[105]Dahlia A., a 10-year-old orphan who lived with her grandparents, said hergrandmother sometimes encouraged her to skip school so she could transport oreat the mine.[106] Teachersin mining towns complained of low attendance during mining season. A deputy headteacher from a primary school in Kahama district stated, “The childrenwho work in the mine are not attending classes. Before mining started [in July],attendance was so high. Since mining started, attendance has been poor.”[107]Another teacher in Kahama district told Human Rights Watch that during a goldrush period in his town, he could see a visible difference in attendance.[108]Teachers in mining areas described incidents of students being absent for twodays per week and sometimes even a month or two.[109]Mining can also hurt children’s performance bylimiting their time for study and by making them sick. Fumo D., a 15-year-oldboy, stated:It is difficult to combine mining and school. I don’tget time to go through tutoring [which takes places on the weekends]. It[mining] hampers my schooling because sometimes it makes me less good atschool. I wonder about the mine, it distracts me…. One day I did not takethe bath [after mining] and then I fell sick [and missed classes]. I had painall over my body.[110]Loss of motivation and time for studies can cause childrento fall behind in school. One child laborer described how he thought he hadfailed an exam because he was mining.[111] Ateacher in a mining village stated that students that missed school laggedbehind academically.[112] A 2013baseline survey conducted by Plan International for their project on theeradication of the worst forms of child labor in eight mining wards in Geitadistrict similarly found that fatigue and sickness caused by work in varioussectors contributed to absenteeism and reduced the children’s rates ofconcentration in class.[113]Some government and education officials stated that small-scalemining contributed to dropouts. The district commissioner of Geita stated,“Boys leave schools and prefer going to themine.... Children’s dropout [rate] is on the increase because of theirinvolvement in mining.”[114] In a group interview, three teachers who work in Geita districtexplained that children are tempted to go to the mines when they see formerclassmates with cellphones and that mining is the main reason children dropout.[115]Mercury Exposure andEffects on Children’s HealthMercury use on small-scale gold mines poses a threat toartisanal miners as well as to surrounding communities.The previous section describes how children who work inmining inhale toxic mercury vapor when burning the mercury-gold amalgam. Theymix mercury and ground ore with their bare hands, creating a gold-mercuryamalgam. They then burn the amalgam on a small fire to evaporate the mercuryand recover the gold. The most serious health hazard comes from exposure tomercury vapor.[116] Somechildren in Chunya district processed the gold and mercury multiple times aweek.This section shows that even children who are not workingwith mercury are at risk of exposure. They may inhale mercury vapor or ingestmercury-contaminated dust when family or community members process gold athome. Also, mercury from mining sites can enter the environment and betransformed into a compound called methylmercury which may make its way intofish, posing risks to all fish-eating populations in the affected region. As aresult, more children may be exposed to mercury in the home than through workin mining.Mercury poisoning can cause a wide range of serious healtheffects for children. It attacks the central nervous system and can causedevelopmental and neurological problems. Mercury is particularly dangerous tofetuses and infants.Mercury Exposure around Small-Scale Gold MinesBurning Amalgam in Residential AreasMiners sometimes process gold ore at home because ofsecurity concerns and scarcity of water on the mine. A study conducted by alocal nongovernmental organization (NGO) on the impact of mercury use bysmall-scale gold miners found that “[d]ecomposition of gold-mercuryamalgam is either done at home, in the bush, mining sites, processing sites oranywhere the miners feel that they are safe.”[117]This practice exposes children in these areas to toxic mercury vapor.Human Rights Watch interviewed seven individuals whoprocessed gold in their homes. Three were adult miners who regularly broughtgold home. One of the miners lived with his wife and 4 children, ages 14, 12, 5,and 1, in a village in Chunya district.[118] He hada small outdoor area in the center of his compound where he had processedcrushed gold daily since 2007. He kept some of the mercury-contaminated sandyremains in the center of the compound after amalgamation. Human Rights Watchfound his one-year-old daughter playing in these remains. When the minerfinished amalgamating the gold ore and mercury, he burned it in a spoon or bowlabout two meters away from the entrance to the kitchen and a sleeping area.When asked whether he was ever afraid of his children inhaling the mercuryvapor, he responded, “[There is] no way out … that is how wesurvive.”[119]Human Rights Watch also visited a trader’s home inChunya district where miners processed the gold they extracted, in an areaoutside of the house, about five times a day.[120]One child explained that it was common for gold traders to have an amalgamationarea in their homes: “Most buyers have [an amalgamation area]. They livethere. I mix and burn … [the gold and mercury] there.”[121]Three children told Human Rights Watch that they usedmercury at home.[122] FaizaJ., a 13-year-old girl, said: “I burn it [the amalgam] on a cooking stoveat home…. In the house, not outside … near the dining place.”[123]Mercury Contamination of Water and FishIn addition to children being directly exposed throughbreathing mercury vapor in their homes, they may also be exposed through eatingcontaminated fish. The use of mercury in mining can contaminate the surroundingenvironment, including water sources. Bacteria in water can convert mercuryinto a compound called methylmercury, which collects in fish and putscommunities that eat fish at risk of mercury poisoning.A study by a Tanzanian NGO noted that people build goldprocessing areas close to wetlands and rivers because water is important forgold extraction.[124] Miningregulations require Primary Mining License holders to construct washing andsettling ponds 50 meters away from a water source.[125]However, miners do not always adhere to these standards. Human Rights Watchvisited two mines in Chunya district that were located approximately 40 metersaway from the Chunya River.A teacher at one of the schools in the area complained thatpeople were scared to drink the water in Chunya River because of possiblecontamination from the mines.[126] Arepresentative from the Environmental Sanitation and Hygiene section of theMinistry of Health and Social Welfare stated that he had seen a small-scalegold mine in Sinjilili village in Chunya district about 10 meters away from theSinjilili River.[127] He hadalso visited a mine in Manyanya village in Chunya district located on the edgeof the river.[128]Moreover, even if washing and settling ponds are more than50 meters away from water sources, mercury from the mine may still end up innearby rivers. This can occur if contaminated water overflows from the mine, orthrough the erosion of contaminated soil or tailings into the river.[129]A 2002 International Labour Organization (ILO) report on child labor in miningstated that in Mlimanjiwa village in Chunya district, “soil erosion is acommon phenomenon and rivers are contaminated with mercury.”[130]Studies have found unsafe levels of mercury in fish adjacentto some gold mining sites in Tanzania. For example, a 2004 United NationsIndustrial Development Organization (UNIDO) study showed that the mercurylevels in some fish in the immediate Rwamgasa mining area exceededinternational quality guidelines.[131]Levels of Mercury Exposure in Small-Scale MiningAreasScientific studies show that people who work or live inTanzanian mining areas have a higher mercury burden than people livingelsewhere in the country. These mercury levels sometimes exceed internationalsafety standards.For example, as illustrated in the graphs below, a study ofadults in Rwamgasa in Geita district showed that the levels of mercury inparticipants living in Rwamgasa, a small-scale mining area, were higher thanthe levels of mercury in participants in the control area located 30 kilometersaway.[132]Mercury exposure was even higher among miners who burned the mercury-goldamalgam— demonstrating the seriousness of inhaling mercury vapor.The graphs below also show two threshold values (calledHuman Biomonitoring levels, HBM) developed bythe German Human Biomonitoring Commission todescribe the health risk from mercury found in blood and urine.[133] Any results below HBM I are considered“safe” levels of mercury exposure.[134] Results between HBM I and HBM II are“alert” levels where people may suffer from adverse health effectsand should take steps to reduce exposure.[135] Mercury levels above HBM II are “action”levels associated with negative health effects where exposure reduction iscritical.[136] As seen below, mercury levels in some of the peoplein the Rwamgasa study who either lived in Rwamgasa or worked in mining,exceeded HBM I and HBM II.Click to expand ImageMore recent studies continue to show high mercury levels in communitiesnear small-scale gold mines. In a 2012 study, about nine out of fourteen peoplehad mercury levels in their hair that exceeded levels comparable to the HBM I“alert” and HBM II “action levels”.[137]Some of the data for the study was collected in Matundasi in Chunya district,an area visited by Human Rights Watch.Click to expand ImageThe Health Effects of Mercury ExposureThe inhalation of mercury can lead to a number of harmfulhealth effects. Acute mercury exposure (occurring suddenly) can affect thecentral nervous system and kidneys and, at higher concentrations, may alsoimpact the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, gastrointestinal tract, andthe skin.[138]Chronic mercury exposure (occurring over a long period of time) may affect thecentral nervous system, gastrointestinal and reproductive tracts, kidneys, oralcavity, lungs, eyes, and skin.[139]Symptoms of mercury intoxication in children include memory and coordination(ataxia) problems and tremors.[140]Mercury is particularly harmful to fetuses and infants. It can be transmitted in utero and throughbreast milk.[141] It ishighly toxic to the developing brains of infants.[142]III. Government Effortsto Reduce Child Labor and Mercury Exposure in Gold MiningChild Labor in GoldMiningThe Tanzanian government has taken some steps to addresschild labor in mining through the adoption of laws on child labor in hazardouswork and through occasional child labor inspections on licensed, small-scalemines. However these initiatives have failed to end child labor in mining,largely because the government is not prioritizing and devoting enough resourcesto enforce child labor laws in this sector. Officials from the Ministry ofLabour and Employment are also failing to conduct child labor inspections onunlicensed mines—the majority of sites—and mining officials rarelycheck for children during informal visits to these mines. On the few occasionsthat officials act on child labor, they do not properly assess the age ofchildren and only send younger-looking children away. They also fail to supportchildren’s transition out of child labor through, for example, reportingthe children who work in mining to a social welfare officer or re-enrollingthem in school.The government has also failed to adequately address some ofthe underlying socioeconomic causes of child labor. In particular, thegovernment has not provided adequate support to orphans and other vulnerablechildren. It also needs to strengthen efforts to eliminate illegal school contributionsand to increase the number of children in Tanzania who can continue with theireducation after primary school.Child Labor Inspections in Small-Scale Mining: Fewand Far BetweenGovernment Officers Failing to Implement andEnforce Child Labor LawsDespite strong laws andregulations for monitoring child labor, key government institutions arefailing to carry out their responsibilities and enforce child labor laws.Tanzania’s Law of the Child Act, Employment and LabourRelations Act, and the Mining Regulations prohibit children under the age of 18from engaging in hazardous work, including mining.[143]The government has also adopted a list of hazardous work, under the regulationsof the Law of the Child Act, which names and prohibits many forms of labor,including small-scale mining and commercial sexual exploitation.[144]In June 2009, the Tanzanian government launched a NationalAction Plan for the Elimination of Child Labor.[145]Under the leadership of the Ministry of Labour and Employment, this ambitiousplan aims to reduce the worst forms of child labor in all sectors in the shortterm, and to eliminate all child labor in the long-term.[146]However, four years later, the government has yet to adequately implement theplan.A number of government actors are tasked with monitoring andwithdrawing children from hazardous labor, but have taken limited action toenforce the laws and policies described above.At the national level, the Regional Administration and LocalGovernment in the Prime Minister’s Office (PMORALG) chairs the National IntersectoralCoordination Committee on Child Labour, which brings together governmentministries, social partners, and civil society organizations to highlight childlabor issues and strengthen structures to eliminate child labor.[147]The committee meets twice a year and held its last meeting in December, 2012.[148]The Ministry of Energy and Minerals is not a member of the committee,potentially limiting the flow of information to other groups about childreninvolved in mining.[149]At the district level, the Ministry of Labour and Employmentis the lead ministry for enforcing child labor laws, but it rarely conductschild labor inspections on the mines or enforces penalties on employers whohire children. Seventy-one labor officers are supposed to conduct inspectionsof all formal businesses across the country.[150] Duringan inspection, a labor officer may withdraw the child from the activity andserve the employer with a compliance order, which stipulates specific steps andtimeframes for remedial action.[151] Theofficer should also report the matter to a social welfare officer and thepolice.[152] It isan offense to employ or procure a child for employment in a mine and laborofficers may initiate proceedings in the Resident’s or District Court andprosecute the violator in the name of the labour commissioner.[153]Employers who are found guilty may receive a fine, imprisonment, or both.[154]Although the Ministry of Labour and Employment appears tohave had some success in addressing child labor, labor officers rarely conductinspections for child labor in small-scale gold mining. During the 2011-2012reporting period, the Ministry of Labour and Employment only conducted 2,401inspections in all workplaces, which is 38.7 percent of its target of 6,200inspections.[155] TheMinistry stated that it withdrew 17,243 children and prevented 5,073 childrenfrom engaging in the worst forms of child labor during this period.[156]Tanzania has 12 main mining regions, but children were only withdrawn orprevented from entering into the worst forms of child labor in five of theseareas.[157] Roughly91 percent of the children withdrawn from the worst forms of child labor camefrom Tabora, a gold mining region, but most of them worked in agriculture.[158]The labor offices visited by Human Rights Watch lackedsufficient staff and resources to conduct inspections in mining areas. TheMbeya regional office has only two officers and operates on a limited budget.[159]It only conducts approximately 20 to 25 inspections annually in all sectors,not just mining.[160] In thelast two years, Mbeya labor officers only conducted two inspections ofartisanal mines in Chunya—these were prompted by complaints of workersabout pay, not about child labor.[161] Alabor office in Mwanza, with three labor officers, similarly suffered fromresource constraints and lacked fuel for transportation to the mining areas in Geitadistrict.[162] Alabor officer from Mwanza recalled only visiting small-scale gold mines in Geitadistrict once, as part of a donor-supported child labor project in March 2012.[163]Labor officers are also failing to take strong actionagainst employers who violate child labor laws. One regional office stated thatit had not yet issued a compliance order for child labor.[164]During the 2011-2012 period, only two compliance orders were issued inmining—one in Mwanza and the other in Shinyanga.[165]There have also been very few, if any, recent prosecutions for child labor.[166]According to labor officers, they primarily educate people who employ childrenabout the labor laws and advise them to take remedial action.[167]Another important entity tasked with monitoring child laborin mining is the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. Mining officials may requesta Primary Mining License holder that has hired children to take remedial actionor pay a fine.[168]However, mining offices lack sufficient staff to carry outregular inspections of small-scale mines.[169] Onemining official described the shortage of workers as one of the biggestchallenges faced by the ministry.[170]Because the Ministry of Energy and Minerals does not have a presence in everydistrict, it has limited monitoring capacity and must sometimes rely on the districtcommissioner and district executive director, who lead and manage the localgovernment.[171] Inparticular, the district commissioner and the district executive director playa substantial role in helping to remove miners from large, illegal, gold rushsites.When the inspectors from the Ministry of Energy and Mineralsdo visit licensed mines, they tend to prioritize revenue collection and otherhealth and safety issues over the problem of child labor. They visit large andsmall-scale mines to check for compliance with safety, environmental and otherregulations, as well as collect royalties on a regular basis. One miningofficer explained:If someone is given a work to inspect and make sure thatthere is … compliance … that means he must be a law enforcer. Atthe same time you are given the task to collect revenue. And the primeobjective of the government at the end of the day… [is] whether you have attainedthe target of the collection…. [The government will] judge you accordingto what you have collected.[172]In one case, a representative of the Ministry of Energy andMinerals believed that village authorities were responsible for acting on childlabor, not mining officials.[173]Thegovernment has acknowledged that lack of understanding of child labor laws is acommon problem among many government departments.[174]When mining officials act onchild labor, they rarely impose fines on employers. Like labor officers, mineinspectors usually raise awareness about child labor laws with employersor  in some cases, issue warnings if they find children on a mining site.[175]Government actors from the Ministry of Health and SocialWelfare, and the Ministry of Community Development, Gender and Children, overseecommunity development officers and social welfare officers who should raiseawareness of child labor issues in mining villages, monitor child labor at thedistrict and village level, and report their findings to the prime minister’soffice.[176]However,community development officers in two of the district offices visited by HumanRights Watch were severely short-staffed and often lacked adequate resources tocarry out their work.[177]Finally, at the village level, village authorities have noresponsibility to enforce child labor laws, but can adopt legally enforceablebylaws to help to discourage child labor. None of the villages visited by HumanRights Watch had such bylaws in place. Also, according to village authoritiesin Kahama district, it is difficult to impose village laws on migrantpopulations in the area.[178]Unchecked Unlicensed MinesMining and labor officials also seldom conduct child laborinspections on unlicensed gold mines. Twenty-eight of the children interviewedby Human Rights Watch worked on unlicensed gold rush sites, suggesting they aresignificant sources of child labor.Labor officers are authorized to enter any“premises” for inspection—which could theoretically includebusinesses in the informal sector.[179]However, labor officers infrequently inspect informal businesses.[180]Mining officials sometimes visit unlicensed sites to addresslegal, security, and safety concerns, and to collect taxes– but generallynot to look for children.[181] Amining official in Chunya district explained, “Sometimes we do go there[to unlicensed mines] and find out … where they are actually workingillegally, to inform the owner … If we find that the situation is somehowserious and might cause a risk and death to them, we might tell them tostop.”[182] Miningofficials are sometimes wary of visiting unlicensed mines because they do notwant to appear to provide the site official recognition and legitimacy.[183]The Tanzanian government recognizes the need to formalizeand professionalize the artisanal mining sector and has embarked on aformalization program. This includes efforts to free up land for unlicensedminers, because there are currently few areas remaining where miners can applyfor a mining license.[184]  Butformalization is a long process. In the interim, the Ministry of Labour andEmployment should exercise some oversight over unlicensed mines and, duringinformal visits, officials from the Ministry of Energy and Minerals shouldcheck unlicensed sites for children engaged in unlawful child labor.Flawed Government InspectionsOn the few occasions that government officials conduct childlabor inspections, they often fail to stop child labor. Human Rights Watchfound evidence of at least one government intervention in Kahama district thatprompted children to leave the mine and return to school, but others overlookedolder adolescents and did not stop children from returning to the mine.Human Rights Watch visited a gold rush site in Kahamadistrict where, even though they were not required to act under the law, wardand village authorities enforced child labor laws.[185]Enos F., a 13-year-old child working in mining, explained that towards the endof the school holidays, the village government told children to vacate themines so they could attend classes.[186]Several children returned to school. This intervention may have been successfulbecause village authorities were present to enforce the ban on children inmining.However, in a number of other cases in Chunya district, governmentofficials failed to identify older children working on the mines and takeadequate action to prevent children from returning to the mines. Human RightsWatch interviewed inspectors who said they determined the age of a child bylooking at the child’s appearance. An official from the Ministry ofEnergy and Minerals said that inspectors “just look” at the childto determine his or her age, and a labor officer said he interviewed childrento determine their ages.[187] Manychildren’s births are not registered so officials should conduct rigorousinterviews with various people on the mine to determine children’s ages.If they do not, children like Rashid A., a 17-year old boy, will work on themines unnoticed. He explained, “They [officials] are not bothered withme, they think I am big.”[188]Two child laborers told Human Rights Watch that theyreturned to the mines after a government official inspecting the mines sent themaway.[189] In one case, a childidentified the official as an inspector from the Ministry of Energy andMinerals.[190] Nonementioned receiving assistance to transition out of child labor into school orvocational training. Thirteen-year-old Rahim T. explained, “They chasedus and said ‘don’t come again.’ I went again. I work at thatparticular mine and other places…. If we are chased we go to search forother areas.”[191]Inadequate Support for Orphans and Other VulnerableChildrenOrphans are particularly likely to be involved in the worstforms of child labor, because of inadequate support from guardians or extendedfamily members, and other factors which contribute to their vulnerability suchas gender, health status, and remarriage of the surviving parent or caregiver.[192]Like many children, some orphans seek employment in mining to cover theirneeds. The government should provide greater economic and psychosocial supportto orphans and other vulnerable children to curb child labor.Few orphans and other vulnerable children receive directassistance from the government. Unable to survive, some seek employment inmining. Each village is supposed to have a committee to identify vulnerablechildren.[193] Localgovernment is responsible for addressing community needs but because of the gapin resources, officials often look to local NGOs for assistance.[194]However, even with outside help, demand for support remains high. A 2008 governmentstudy found that only 7 percent of orphans and vulnerable children received atleast one type of external support, most of which came in the form ofschool-related assistance.[195] Someof the orphans interviewed by Human Rights Watch used their money to purchasebasic necessities such as food, clothing, shelter, and provisions for going toschool, such as uniforms and other fees.[196] JoanaS., a 15-year-old girl whose parents died when she was very young, said shelived with her older sister and received some support from a local NGO, butstill complained of experiencing hunger. She explained that the reason shefirst went to the mine was “due to the situation at home I had no option.The conditions I was living in … my sister told me to go.”[197]The government should support orphans and vulnerablechildren, and address child labor, by committing adequate resources to socialprotection strategies, such as income or in-kind support for very poorhouseholds, and programs to increase access to services such as healthcare,nutrition and education.[198] In apromising step, the government recently adopted its National Costed Plan ofAction for Most Vulnerable Children for 2013 to 2017, led by the Ministry ofHealth and Social Welfare, in conjunction with other ministries, developmentpartners and stakeholders.[199] Thisplan is targeted at children living with severe deprivations such as orphansand children engaged in the worst forms of child labor. Some of its key objectives includestrengthening the capacity of households and communities to protect, care, andsupport the most vulnerable children, providing a regulatory framework for achild protection system, expanding access to health and education, andstrengthening coordination, leadership, policy and service delivery.[200]However, at the time of writing, the government had yet to provide funding toimplement the plan.Although limited in scope, another promising initiative isthe third Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF III) which provides grants andconditional cash transfers to vulnerable populations. President Kikwetelaunched TASAF III, supported by the World Bank, the United States Agency forInternational Development (USAID), and the United Nations Children’s Fund(UNICEF) in August 2012. TASAF III was designed to provide a community-basedcash transfer to certain families living under the poverty line who are able tocomply with conditions such as “school attendance for children, regularhealth check-ups for under-five children and the elderly, incentives for girlsto remain in school, incentives for pregnant women to deliver at healthfacilities, ensuring nutrition for children through information on mealpreparation, and micro-nutrient initiative supplements.”[201]The program targets 275,000 households—a small fraction of the Tanzanianswho live below the poverty line.[202] Duringthe current phase of TASAF III, the government will provide infrastructure suchas schools to support the project.[203] Otheraid agencies should commit resources to scale up the program and ensure greatersupport for orphans and other vulnerable children.Weaknesses in Education PoliciesWeaknesses in the education system contribute to child laborin Tanzania. In particular, the government has failed to abolish unlawfulfinancial contributions at the primary school level and ensure access topost-primary educational opportunities.Failure to Eliminate Primary School Contributions and ExpensesEven though the National Education Act and the 2002-2006Education Development Plan have secured children’s rights to a free andcompulsory primary education, in practice children must pay a range of illegal contributionsand other expenses.[204] Withroughly 67.9 percent of the population living below the international povertyline of US$1.25 per day, many parents may struggle with even smallschool-related expenses.[205] Thesecosts can cause children to seek additional income from the mines and cancontribute to their dropping out of school.Primary school children pay for items such as desks, food,and security guards. Eleven children who worked in mining in Chunya, Kahama,and Geita districts told Human Rights Watch that they spent part of their moneyon school supplies such as exercise books, pens, and uniforms. Staff at severalprimary schools in Chunya district and a student in Geita district stated thatthey charged students fees for desks, security guards, and meals. A recentstudy shows that at least one school required children to provide acontribution for food and building projects.[206] Atthree primary schools in Chunya district, Human Rights Watch found that whenchildren enrolled, they had to pay a onetime “desk fee” rangingfrom the equivalent of US$6.14 to $24.56.[207] Two ofthe primary schools also charged students for a security guard.[208]In some cases, school expenses discouraged children fromenrolling or caused them to drop out of primary school. Teachers from a primaryschool in Nyarugusu explained, “We carry out outreach with the parentswho don’t send their kids to school. We have tried, but the outcomes arenegative. A large number say they don’t have the money to send theirchildren to school.”[209] HakiE., a 14-year-old boy, stated that one of the reasons he left primary schoolwas because of these costs: “I got involved in mining last year, I was13. I started it to get money for clothes…. I dropped out of schoolbecause I could not meet my needs for school – uniform, books, and thecontribution to school.”[210]Limited Access to Secondary School or Vocational TrainingAlthough most children of primary school age in Tanzania areenrolled in primary school, few children continue on to secondary or vocationalschool.[211] Thisis partly because many children fail the required Primary School Leaving Exam(PSLE), and because the cost of attending secondary school either detersprospective students’ enrollment or causes them to drop out. Thegovernment also has a shortage of vocational training opportunities. With nooption to continue their studies, children seek full-time employment in varioussectors, including mining.Children are not entitled to attend secondary school inTanzania—only if they pass the PSLE are they allowed to advance beyondthe final grade of primary school. Usually they get only one chance to pass andthey are not allowed to retake the exam.[212] During2011 to 2012, only 58.3 percent of students passed the PSLE.[213]In the schools visited by Human Rights Watch in Geita, Kahama, and Chunyadistricts, officials told us that between 35.9 and 86.3 percent of studentspassed the exam and enrolled in secondary school in 2011.[214]Roughly half of the students who pass the PLSE continue onto secondary school.[215] Manyfail to enroll or drop out because of school expenses. Human Rights Watchvisited one secondary school in a mining town that charged the equivalent of $21.49per year.[216] KondoK., a 17-year-old boy who worked on a mine in Mwabomba after passing theStandard 7 exam, explained, “I couldn’t continue because my fatherhad no money to pay for fees, uniform, books. There’s a fee foracademics, paper, and my father couldn’t pay. I was supposed to be atMasumba Secondary School.”[217]In addition to the difficulties in enrolling children insecondary school, the government also faces a shortage of vocational trainingopportunities. Between the 2011 and 2012 reporting period, the governmentstated it had approximately 233,795 places at vocational training institutions.[218]Between 2006 and 2010, an average of 402,305 students per year could not jointhe first year of secondary school.[219] If onealso considers the children who drop out from secondary school, it is likelythat the demand for vocational education outstrips supply.Children who do not continue their education beyond primaryschool often seek full-time employment in sectors such as gold mining and somegirls enter into sex work in mining areas. An ILO study in Tanzania found thatthe largest group of child laborers in gold mining was between the ages of 14and 17, because they had finished their primary education and had limitededucational opportunities thereafter.[220] Thehead teacher at Mwabomba Primary School explained, “Most children who donot pass Standard 7 [by passing the PSLE] immediately go into mining, grazing,and family activities.”[221] Anadult miner in Geita district commented, “Most of the ones [children]that are here failed Standard 7. If they do not come here they are called forother training at the local militia. They are running away from training. Theyhave nothing else to do.”[222]Mercury Use in Gold MiningThe government has failed to enforce mining safetyregulations, effectively reduce the use of mercury, and prevent, test, andtreat children and adults affected by mercury. Although Tanzania has played apositive role in pushing for the Minamata Convention on Mercury (aninternational mercury treaty), sought to raise awareness on the dangers ofmercury, and adopted laws and regulations to control the purchase and use ofmercury, its use in mining continues unabated.Failure to Enforce Protections against Mercury inMiningThe government rarely enforces regulations that requireminers to take precautions when using mercury.Tanzania’s National Environmental Management Act and MiningRegulations both address the use of mercury in licensed small-scale gold mining.[223]The National Environment Management Act stipulates that anyone generatinghazardous waste will be responsible for its disposal and liable for any damageto human health, living beings, and the environment.[224]Under the Mining Regulations, a Primary Mining License (PML) holder must:[225]Conduct an environmental and socialinvestigation and submit an Environmental Protection Plan to a zonal minesoffice prior to starting mining work. Inthe plan, the PML holder must describe his mining and processing methods,emissions and discharges, waste disposal strategy, and how he will use andstore chemicals.Dispose of tailings in a manner approved byan inspector.Use a retort when burning the mercury-gold amalgam. Retorts are devices thatcontain and condense the mercury vapor and, if used properly during extraction,allow miners to recycle up to 95 percent of the mercury.[226]Provide employees with protective gear.Construct washing or settlingponds–areas where amalgamation may take place–at least 50 metersfrom water sources.Unfortunately, the government has largely failed to enforcethese mining provisions. A study published in August 2012 stated that somezonal mine offices found it difficult to enforce the requirement for anenvironmental protection plan.[227] Only oneout of the eleven mining sites visited by Human Rights Watch used retorts tooccasionally burn gold. Some miners were reluctant to use gloves because theythought particles of gold stuck to the gloves.[228]Additionally, one local study found that miners did not use protective gearbecause it was not sold in mining areas.[229]If PML holders fail to take the necessary safetyprecautions, the government may require them to either take reasonable measuresto mitigate the impact of the breach, or pay a fine of up to 100,000 TSh(roughly US$61.98).[230] HumanRights Watch found no evidence of inspectors taking either of these actions. Oneofficial suggested this was because the Ministry lacked the capacity to enforcethe regulations:You are supposed to use a retort. But then the capacity tosupervise that is very, very difficult. You cannot expect the three mineralofficers located in Chunya, trying to receive the application, trying to do allthe small dispute resolutions, trying to move around to see what the big minesare doing, trying to move around to see what the prospecting companies aredoing, and at the same time to have them trying to chase those who are burning.[231]Other departments with the capacity to monitor mercury usealso described difficulties conducting inspections in mining areas due to lackof transportation.[232] Some officers from important divisions alsohad little knowledge of the dangers of mercury. An inspector from theOccupational Health and Safety Authority (OSHA) told Human Rights Watch:“We need more education and training to know the effects of cyanide andmercury… [to] know what to do…. Without being trained we cannotknow or understand.”[233]Failure to Adopt and Implement the NationalStrategic Plan for Mercury ManagementDespite taking steps in October 2009 to develop a NationalStrategic Plan for Mercury Management, three-and-a-half years later, thegovernment has yet to launch and implement the plan. One government officialindicated that limited funding may have contributed to the delay.[234]The Mercury Plan outlines activities to reduce and managemercury emissions from 2010 to 2014 at a cost of about $3 million.[235]It aims to manage mercury emissions in a number of areas, including small-scalegold mining by, for example, collecting data from sites that emit mercury,raising awareness on the hazards of mercury, and introducing mercury-free technologyto extract gold.[236] The planalso seeks to minimize intentional mercury use and to improve the management ofmercury waste.[237]The government should ratify the Minamata Convention onMercury and revise the Mercury Plan in accordance with treaty provisions. Thetreaty will require governments to develop “[s]trategiesto prevent the exposure of vulnerable populations, particularly children andwomen of child-bearing age, especiallypregnant women, to mercury used in artisanal and small-scale goldmining.”[238] Under the convention, governments will have to eliminateparticularly harmful practices of mercury use in mining, such as burning theamalgam in the open and in residential areas.[239] The treaty also promotes appropriate health care servicesand health professional capacity to address mercury exposure.[240] The government should launch the plan as soon as possible,prioritize ending the most harmful practices, and provide political andfinancial support to implement the plan.Lack of a ComprehensiveHealth Strategy to Prevent and Address Mercury ExposureThe government has failed to put in place a comprehensivestrategy to address the health effects of mercury through health prevention andtreatment. A well-rounded health strategy on mercury should include: theidentification and targeting of at-risk communities, awareness-raising,periodic biomonitoring, policies to improve access to testing and treatment formercury exposure, and policies to strengthen the health professional capacityto prevent, diagnose and monitor treatment of mercury compounds.[241]In resource-constrained settings, the government should focus on efforts toreduce exposure and train health officials to recognize symptoms of extrememercury poisoning.The government does not conduct regular data-gathering ofmercury levels in mining communities or the broader population. This limits itsability to identify at-risk populations and monitor government strategies. TheGovernment Chemist Laboratory Agency (GCLA) only collects samples from aparticular area after an accident has taken place or to inform governmentdecision-making.[242]The government also has no systematic strategy forawareness-raising and training. Representatives from the Ministry of Energy andMinerals, the GLCA, OSHA, and the Department of the Environment have conductedsome training programs for miners on mercury and cyanide, some of which havebeen open to health officials or the broader community.[243]However, the GCLA, and possibly others, only conduct trainings when funding isavailable.[244] The government shouldprioritize and devote resources to a targeted campaign to reduce worstpractices.Moreover, the Tanzanian healthcare system is ill-equipped toprevent, treat, and diagnose mercury intoxication. Most health facilities inTanzania cannot test for or treat mercury poisoning. Additionally, healthissues related to mercury are currently not part of the curriculum for medicalworkers, though the government said it is committed to introducing thistraining.[245]Only one group of medical officials among the five health facilities visited byHuman Rights Watch in Kahama, Chunya, and Geita districts received someinformation on mercury as part of a broader training conducted by a large-scalemining company.[246] Few of the medical staff knew how toidentify and treat symptoms of mercury poisoning.When Human Rights Watch asked medical officials at a dispensaryin Matundasi Ward, a mining area in Chunya district, whether they were familiarwith any of the symptoms of mercury poisoning they explained, “Actuallywe know mercury, but [we] don’t know the symptoms.”[247]Similarly, a clinical officer at a dispensary in NyarugusuWard in Geita district stated she was not an expert and knew little about mercurypoisoning.[248]Medical officials from Chunya District Hospital expressed concern thatthey might be failing to diagnose people suffering from mercury poisoning becauseof their lack of knowledge about mercury.[249]In a promising development, the government, in partnership with theWorld Health Organization, is in the process of establishing a national andregional poison center which may help to address severe cases of mercuryexposure.[250]Failure to Take Action on the Illegal Mercury TradeThe government has failed to curb the illegal trade ofmercury. The Industrial Chemical and Consumer Chemicals (Management andControl) Act requires those intending to import, export, transport, store, anddeal in chemicals to register specified quantities of mercury with the ChiefGovernment Chemist.[251]However, most of the mercury used in artisanal and small-scale gold mining ispurchased and traded illegally, without registration. Human Rights Watchinterviewed officials at the GCLA who said it was rare to receive a requestwith mercury.[252] A study conducted by a Tanzanian NGO foundthat most of the mercury used in small-scale mining is purchased illegally.[253]The government has also acknowledged that illegal importation of mercury takesplace.[254] Sometraders told Human Rights Watch that they sell mercury directly to children.[255]Gold traders and other businessmen bring mercury intoTanzania from border countries. Human Rights Watch conducted interviews withminers and traders who stated that their mercury came from a range of sourcessuch as the Kenyan health sector, and from traders from Zimbabwe, Malawi, andZambia.[256]Sometimes Tanzanian traders travel across the border to purchase mercury. TheGCLA in Mbeya stated they had three inspectors checking for chemicals on theMalawian and Zambian borders, and on the border of Lake Tanganyika.[257]An employee of a gold trader and a government official said thatmercury could be purchased within Tanzania from government hospitals. Mercuryis sometimes used in dental amalgam, hospital equipment, and laboratorychemicals.IV. The Role of the International CommunityCurrently, despite broad international support forTanzania’s mineral sector and efforts to reduce child labor in other sectorssuch as agriculture and domestic work, few donor initiatives specificallytarget child labor or mercury use in small-scale gold mining.World Bank Support ofSmall-Scale Gold Miners and Vulnerable ChildrenThe World Bank plays a critical role in supportingsmall-scale gold miners and vulnerable children in Tanzania.The Bank is developing Tanzania’s mining industrythrough the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project (SMMRP). TheSMMRP runs from June 2009 to June 2014 and aims to strengthen the government'sability to manage the mineral sector, to improve the socioeconomic impacts oflarge and small-scale mining, and to enhance private investment.[258]In a February 2013 assessment, the World Bank’s progress towardsachieving these goals was deemed “moderately satisfactory,” andimplementation of the SMMRP was behind schedule.[259]Under the SMMRP, the World Bank does not actively targetchild labor or measure the impact of its initiatives on this problem. Prior toimplementation, the World Bank assessed the potential benefits and risks of theproject, but it did not identify child labor as an issue.[260]The Bank believes that child labor primarily occurs on unlicensed, informalmines, which operate outside of Tanzania’s legal framework.[261]Rather than support specific child labor projects, the World Bank aims toaddress this and other issues through encouraging, advocating, and supportingformalization—the process of licensing and regulating small-scale mines.[262]The impact of this strategy is not clear because child labor is not measured inthe SMMRP monitoring and evaluation instruments.[263]Moreover, Human Rights Watch has documented children working in licensed goldmines.Despite limited engagement on child labor, the SMMRP’sefforts to address mercury abatement are more promising. Prior totheimplementation of the SMMRP, the World Bank identified mercury as a potentialpolluter of the soil and water near mining areas.[264]However, it did not identify or develop strategies to mitigate the healthhazards associated with mercury exposure or poisoning.[265]The SMMRP includes initiatives that both directly andindirectly support mercury abatement, though their impact is unclear. Forexample, the World Bank is preparing guidelines and codes of practice onvarious issues including mercury reduction.[266] Italso supports several environmental programs, such as efforts to strengthen theEnvironmental Management Unit, conduct environmental and social awarenessprograms, and improve environmental monitoring capacity, which could help toreduce mercury exposure.[267]Moreover, the SMMRP grants program aims to promote either alternativelivelihoods, or safe, environmentally sound, and economically sustainablemining (through, for example, promoting the use of safe mining and processingmethods).[268] Aswith child labor, the World Bank also views formalization as a way to improvemining safety and reduce mercury exposure.[269] However,because some of the environmental programs only recently came underway,[270]and because the World Bank does not directly measure how its initiatives areimpacting mercury use and exposure,[271] it isunclear what impact these initiatives have on mercury abatement.Recently, the World Bank has been involved in a newinitiative which provides various actors an opportunity to direct funds tocombat child labor and mercury exposure. The Bank, Tanzanian government, andprivate companies are members of a multi-stakeholder partnership (MSP) tosupport the formalization and development of artisanal mining.[272]The partnership held its first meeting in November 2012 and will launch twopilot projects later this year.[273] At thetime of writing, partners were still defining their pilot project activities.The World Bank is also involved in funding the thirdTanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF III- described in the section on“Inadequate Support for Orphans and Other Vulnerable Children”),which provides cash transfers to certain families living below the poverty linein exchange for compliance with conditions such as ensuring their childrenattend school. Although the program is currently limited in scope, it can playan important role in increasing school attendance and ensuring children do notbecome involved in child labor.International LabourOrganization, Donor, and Local NGO Support of Child Labor InitiativesFew international organizations working in Tanzania focus onchild labor in gold mining. Past initiatives include the International LabourOrganization’s International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour(ILO-IPEC) which, through assistance from the United States Department ofLabor, ran from 2001 to 2010. It reportedly withdrew 29,000 child laborers frommining, commercial agriculture, commercial sexual exploitation, and domesticwork.[274] From2008 to 2009, the final major years of the project, the extra ILO budget fortechnical cooperation in Tanzania was US$4,575,577.[275]The current budget is far smaller.[276] For2012 to 2013, the ILO in Tanzania received only $153,000 from the BrazilianCooperation Agency to support capacity building and implementation of theNational Action Plan for the Elimination of Child Labour.[277]The United States Department of Labor is currently focusing on funding NGOs tosupport child labor programs in agriculture and domestic service.[278]Despite the limited engagement by internationalorganizations on child labor in gold mining, some non-governmental groups,including Plan International and other smaller NGOs are involved.[279]Moreover, some donors support efforts to strengthen education and socialprotection systems in Tanzania, helping to reduce some of the causes of childlabor. In particular, Sweden, the United Kingdom Department for International Development(DFID), the World Bank, and USAID provide funding for education initiatives,and UNICEF provides support for developing child protection systems.[280]Global Mercury Projectand other Local NGO Support for Mercury AbatementAs with child labor in gold mining, few internationalorganizations work to reduce mercury exposure. From 2002 to 2007, the GlobalMercury Project (GMP) launched the biggest mercury initiative in Tanzaniafunded by United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the Global Environment Facility (GEF), andthe United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The project aimed to reducemercury pollution, introduce cleaner gold extraction methods, and monitormercury pollution.[281] It targeted areas adjacent Lake Victoria such asareas in Geita district.[282] According to UNIDO, by the end of the project, goldminers and buyers in the two areas were using 98 retorts.[283] However, researchers returning to the project site afew years later found that very few miners had continued to use the retorts ortake other safety precautions.[284] Today, mercury abatement in mining is led by localnon-governmental organizations.Donors and other institutions should collaborate with thegovernment to actively address child labor and mercury exposure in small scalegold mining. To be effective, programs should measure their impact on childlabor and mercury exposure in their results frameworks.V. The Responsibility of Gold Traders and the GoldIndustryWhile governments have the primary obligation to promote andensure respect for human rights, international law and other norms recognizethat businesses also have human rights responsibilities, as recognized in theUN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.[285]Owners and managers of gold mining operations, national and international goldtraders, as well as gold refiners and jewelers have a responsibility to ensurethat they do not contribute to unlawful child labor or other human rightsabuses.In Tanzania, the responsibility ofthe extractives industry came into focus when it emerged that armed groups inthe Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)—responsible for mass human rightsabuses—benefited from the trade in artisanal gold.[286]The United Nations andother sources have found that Tanzania has been a transit route for thesmuggling of conflict gold from the DRC.[287]Companies that are listed in the US nowhave to disclose the origin of gold they buy from the DRC as well as Tanzania.[288]The Trade in Tanzanian Artisanal GoldAccording to theTanzanian government, small-scale miners produced about 1.6 tons of gold in2012 (worth about US$85 million).[289]Gold production may be significantlyhigher. One gold trader estimated that the artisanal mines in the Lake regionalone produce around 200 kilograms of gold per week (amounting to about 10 tonsof gold per year).[290]There are no official figures on the exportof artisanal gold. Some sources indicate that there is significant illegaltrading, including smuggling.[291]The trade inTanzania is organized by a network of local traders. Under Tanzanian law, thereare two types of licensed gold traders: brokers and dealers. Brokers are onlyallowed to trade inside Tanzania, while dealers possess a license to exportgold and other minerals.[292]The government estimates there were 128 registereddealers in Tanzania during 2011 to2012.[293]Brokers and dealers can only legally buyfrom miners who have a mining license. Trade among persons who are not mineralright holders, licensed brokers, or licensed dealers is qualified as“unauthorized trading of minerals.”[294]In practice, manybrokers also buy from unlicensed mines or work without a license themselves;the government does not penalize them for this.[295] Small brokers buy gold directly at themines or from miners in mining towns. Dealers often rely on a network of smallbrokers to whom they advance money to buy gold, and who send them the purchasedgold on a regular basis.[296] A few dealers in Dar es Salaam, many ofthem jewelers of Indian descent, dominate the export of artisanal gold,including illegal export (smuggling).[297] A source told Human Rights Watch that someof this gold is picked up twice a week from Indira Gandhi Street in Dares Salaam and taken to the airport for export, but we could not independentlyverify this.[298]Other dealers are based in Mwanza andShinyanga, near the gold mining area of the Lake region.[299]According to arepresentative of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, artisanal gold fromTanzania is exported to the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Switzerland, SouthAfrica, China, and the United Kingdom.[300]Dubai in the United Arab Emirates (UAE)is the main buyer, according to several sources.[301]Child Labor inTanzania’s Supply Chain for Artisanal GoldTanzanian law does not explicitly require due diligencemeasures to identify if there is unlawful child labor used in the supply chain,though traders have to buy gold from licensed mines where such child labor isprohibited. Unless laws and policies are enforced, this requirement is aninsufficient tool to prevent child labor in the supply chain, as child labor alsooccurs in licensed mining sites.[302]None of the 13 traders interviewed by Human Rights Watchsaid that they attempted to avoid child labor in their supply chain. In fact,some traders benefit directly from child labor by buying gold from the childrenwho mined it.Thirteen-year-old Michael H. described how he regularlysells to one of the many local traders: “After I burn, I take the goldwhen it cools. I take it to the buyer… I know his name. They aremany.”[303]Fifteen-year-old Fumo D. who works in artisanal gold mining told Human RightsWatch that he sells the gold he has mined to a trader and gets mercury inreturn.[304] Otherchildren also explained that they are selling their gold directly to brokers.[305]Some traders confirmed that children regularly sell themgold, though they did not specify whether the children worked themselves in themine or were selling gold mined by their parents or other adults.[306]One trader in Chunya explained, “Young children come to sell gold. Mostare at school. Some might be sent by their parents and bring gold.”[307]Brokers told Human Rights Watch that they were buying fromwhoever was selling to them. One trader in Chunya said, “I buy fromanyone and I sell to anyone. I sell… to individuals in Dar es Salaam andthey sell to Dubai.”[308]Another trader said, “Anyone can come…. We buy all kinds ofgold…. We sell to special jewelers ….. The jewelers in Dar [esSalaam] sell abroad to Dubai.”[309] Othertraders confirmed this laissez-faire approach.A recent initiative under the Fairtrade and Fairmined Standard for GoldfromArtisanal and Small-Scale Mining seeks tointroduce child labor due diligence into the artisanal gold mining sector inTanzania. Under this fair tradelabel, producers have to be formalized in cooperatives or other structures,exclude the use of child labor, and abandon risky practices such as amalgamburning in homes.[310]The Alliance for Responsible Mining (ARM) and Fairtrade are currentlydeveloping a program to certify artisanal gold from selected mining sites inTanzania under the label.[311]VI. The Legal FrameworkTanzania’s National and International Human RightsObligationsThe Tanzanian government is a party to a number ofinternational and regional treaties aimed at preventing and protecting childrenfrom human rights abuses, including the worst forms of child labor.[312]It also has a well-developed national legal framework on child rights.Child LaborChild labor is defined by the International LabourOrganization (ILO) as work that is “mentally, physically, socially, ormorally dangerous and harmful to children” and “interferes withtheir schooling.”[313] TheMinimum Age Convention and the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention describewhat types of work amount to child labor, depending on the child’s age,the type and hours of work performed, the impact on education, and otherfactors.The Worst Forms of Child LaborILO Convention 182 concerning the Prohibition and ImmediateAction for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour prohibits theworst forms of child labor for all children under age 18. The conventiondefines the worst forms of child labor as “all forms of slavery orpractices similar to slavery, such as forced or compulsory labor,” aswell as “work which, by its nature or the circumstances in which it iscarried out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals of children.”[314]The latter type of work is also defined as hazardous work and includes a numberof mining activities such as work underground, work with dangerous machineryand tools, transport of heavy loads, work that exposes children to hazardoussubstances.[315]Tanzania’s Law of the Child Act, Employment and LabourRelations Act, and the Mining Regulations, prohibit children under the age of18 from engaging in hazardous work, including mining.[316]Minimum AgeFor work other than the worst forms of child labor, internationallaw requires states to set a minimum age for admission into employment andwork. The Minimum Age Convention states that “the minimum age shall notbe less than the age of compulsory schooling and, in any case, shall not beless than 15 years.”[317] As anexception, developing countries are allowed to specify a lower minimum age at14 years at the moment of ratification.[318] TheMinimum Age Convention also permits light work from the age of 13.[319]Under Tanzanian labor law, children below the age of 14 are not allowed towork.[320]EducationBoth the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and theInternational Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), towhich Tanzania is a party, require primary education to be compulsory and freewithout discrimination.[321]Secondary education, including vocational training, must be made available andaccessible.[322] Statesare required to protect children from work that interferes with theireducation.[323]While the rights under the ICESCR are subject to progressiverealization, states also have core obligations that have to be fulfilledimmediately.[324] Inparticular, States have to “provide primary education for all, on anon-discriminatory basis” and ensure that primary education is free ofcharge and compulsory.[325]The CRC urges states to implement measures, where necessary,within the framework of international cooperation.[326]Similarly, the African Charter on the Rights and the Welfare of the Childprovides that “every child has the right to an education” andstipulates that free and compulsory basic education should be achievedprogressively.[327]Under Tanzanian law, primary education is free andcompulsory. The National Education Act requires parents and guardians to enrollevery seven-year-old child in primary education.[328]Protection against Violence and Sexual AbuseThe CRC and other international treaties to which Tanzaniais a party protect children from violence and abuse. Although parents or legalguardians have the primary responsibility for children in their care, stateshave an immediate obligation to protect children from all forms of physical ormental violence, injury and abuse, neglect or negligent treatment,maltreatment, or exploitation, including sexual abuse.[329]Sexual exploitation and abuse of children is prohibited inall forms by the CRC.[330] Childprostitution is prohibited under the Optional Protocol to the CRC on the sale of children, child prostitution and childpornography, and identified as a worst form of child labor under ILO Convention182.[331]Tanzania’s Law of the Child Act stipulates that“[a] child shall not be engaged in any work or trade that exposes thechild to activities of sexual nature, whether paid for or not.”[332]HealthThe right to the highest attainable standard of health isenshrined in international human rights law. The ICESCR, the CRC, the AfricanCharter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and the African Charter on theRights and the Welfare of the Child recognize the right to physical and mentalhealth as well as the right of access to health care services for the sick.[333]Several international and regional legal instruments also require states toprotect children from work that is harmful to their health or physicaldevelopment.[334]The full realization of the right to the highest attainablestandard of health has to be achieved progressively, meaning that states have“an obligation to move as expeditiously and effectively as possibletowards that goal.”[335] Inaddition, states face core obligations that have to be met immediately,including essential primary health care, access to health services on anon-discriminatory basis, and access to an adequate supply of safe and potablewater.[336]Obligations of comparable priority include the provision of reproductive,maternal, and child health care, and of education and access to informationconcerning the main health problems in the community.[337]Occupational HealthThe ICESCR requires that states, in order to realize theright to the highest attainable standard of health, shall take the stepsnecessary for the prevention, treatment and control of occupational and otherdiseases.[338] Italso recognizes “the right of everyone to the enjoyment of just andfavorable conditions of work” including “safe and healthy workingconditions.”[339]The Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR)has noted that the right to health includes an obligation on states to minimize“so far as is reasonably practicable … the causes of health hazardsinherent in the working environment.”[340]Under the Occupational Health Safety Act, Tanzania hasadopted laws to promote a safe working environment and to minimize healthhazards.[341]Environmental HealthSome international treatiesexplicitly recognize environmental threats to the right to health.[342] State parties to the ICESCR are obligated toimprove “all aspects of environmental and industrial hygiene,” forexample through the prevention and reduction of the population’s exposureto harmful substances such as harmful chemicals.[343]The CRC also recognizes that for children to enjoy the highest attainablestandard of health, states should consider the “dangers and risks ofenvironmental pollution” when combating disease and malnutrition.[344]In addition, African regional treaties to which Tanzania isa party have recognized the right to a healthy environment. Under the AfricanCharter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, “allpeoples shall have the right to a general satisfactory environment favorable totheir development.”[345] The Additional Protocol on the Rights of Womenstates that women “shall have the right tolive in a healthy and sustainable environment” and “the right tofully enjoy their right to sustainable development.”[346]International Human Rights Obligations of BusinessesAlthough governments have the primary responsibility forpromoting and ensuring respect for human rights, private entities such ascompanies have human rights responsibilities as well. This basic principle hasachieved wide international recognition and is reflected in internationalnorms, most recently with the adoption of the Guiding Principles on Businessand Human Rights by the UN Human Rights Council in June 2011.[347]The principles place particular emphasis on the concept ofhuman rights due diligence—the idea that companies must have a process toidentify, prevent, mitigate, and account for their impact on human rights.According to the Guiding Principles, corporations should monitor their impacton an ongoing basis and have processes in place that enable the remediation ofthe adverse human rights impacts they cause or to which they contribute.[348]With regard to the issues presented in this report,effective due diligence means that firms buying gold produced in Tanzaniashould be aware of the risk that child labor could be present in their supplychain—and take effective steps to ensure that they do not purchase goldmined or processed through the exploitation of child labor. They should alsohave effective frameworks in place to carry out ongoing monitoring of theirsupply chains and to address any violations that occur in spite of thesesafeguards.Also of relevance to Tanzania and to companies who purchaseTanzanian gold are robust international safeguards that have been put in placeto check the illicit trade in “conflict minerals,” including gold,from the Democratic Republic of Congo.[349]Inthe United States, a provision inserted into a broad financial regulatoryreform bill, known as the Dodd-Frank Act,requires all US-listed companies to carry out due diligence activity to ensurethat their supply chains are free of conflict minerals originating from the DRCor neighboring countries, including Tanzania.[350]A 2011 report by the UnitedNations and other sources found that Tanzania has been a transit route for thesmuggling of conflict gold from the DRC.[351]Following theadoption of the Dodd Frank Act, several voluntary standards have been developedfor the precious metals industry. In 2012, the Organization for EconomicCooperation and Development (OECD) adopted a due diligence guidance for thegold supply chain from conflict-affected and high-risk areas—though itremains unclear what “high-risk” areas are.[352]For these regions, the OECD guidance explicitly seeks to avoid contributing tothe worst forms of child labor. Several industry associations, including theLondon Bullion Market Association and the Dubai Multi Commodities Centre havealso created gold-specific voluntary standards on responsible sourcing.[353]While these standards are largely focused on due diligence for gold fromconflict areas, they do include references to human rights and forced childlabor. The Responsible Jewellery Council, a not-for-profit standards settingand certification organization with more than 440 member companies, hasdeveloped a voluntary standard that addresses child labor outside conflictareas explicitly and in more detail.[354]The Committee on the Rights of the Child has further definedstate responsibility with regards to businesses and child rights. Inparticular, States should require businesses to undertake child rights duediligence. The committee has also highlighted the child rights obligations ofgovernments in the context of businesses’ extra-territorial activitiesand the responsibility of small businesses and of actors in the informaleconomy, where many child rights violations occur.[355]VII. RecommendationsTo the TanzanianGovernmentThe Ministry of Labour and EmploymentEnsure labor officers identify child laborin mining through regular and systematic visits to licensed and unlicensed small-scalemines and rigorous interviews with employees to determine their ages. Theyshould take steps to withdraw, rehabilitate, and integrate children involved inmining and other worst forms of child labor. Labor officers should issuecompliance orders to employers who use child labor and initiate legal action wherenecessary. Government measures must respect human rights and should not lead toretribution or punishments that exceed the penalties outlined in the mining regulations,the Law of the Child Act, and the Employment and Labour Relations Act.Ensure labor officers, in coordination with socialwelfare officers and other relevant ministries, withdraw and rehabilitatechildren who have been commercially sexually exploited in mining areas, andtake steps to ensure the prosecution of perpetrators.As part of annual reports, measure and publishthe number of children withdrawn from mining and other worst forms of childlabor, as well as the number of compliance orders issued to employers for usingchild labor.Work collaboratively with the Ministry ofEnergy and Minerals so that mining officials inform labor officers of largeinformal sites with child labor. Labor officers should also accompany miningofficials to large gold rush sites to inspect for child labor.Increase the number of labor officers andcreate incentives to minimize turnover. Train all inspectors on child laborissues, and ensure they have sufficient resources such as vehicles and fuel tovisit the mines.Implement the National Action Plan for theElimination of Child Labour and track its success.Conduct a new national survey on child laborin Tanzania.Train mining officials, social welfareofficers, community development officers, and other relevant governmentofficials on child labor. Clarify the responsibilities of all divisions anddepartments who have an obligation to act on child labor.Conduct awareness-raising and outreach onthe hazards of child labor in mining, in conjunction with other relevantministries such as the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, the Ministry ofEducation, the Ministry of Gender, Development and Children, and the Ministryof Health and Social Welfare. Outreach should target small-scale miners inlicensed and unlicensed mines, artisanal mining associations, and parents inartisanal mining communities.The Ministry of Energy and MineralsChild Labor in Small-Scale Gold MiningExplicitly address child labor and mercuryexposure in current efforts to promote the development and professionalization ofartisanal mining, including through the government-led ‘Strategy toSupport Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining Development’.Train mining officials to fully enforcecurrent laws prohibiting child labor in mining.If child labor is found on licensed mines,require Primary Mining License (PML) holders to end the use of child labor.Conduct follow-up inspections and impose penalties such as fines, in accordancewith mining regulations, if employers fail to remove child labor.If child labor is found on unlicensedmines—which are not covered by mining regulations—remind employersof child labor laws and encourage them to comply. Inform the Ministry of Labourand Employment for further inspection and penalties.Inform the Ministry of Labour and Employmentabout the location of unlicensed gold rush sites where large numbers ofchildren may be working.Request managers on licensed mines to documentthe ages of all the employees working on the site.Strengthen efforts to formalize theartisanal and small-scale gold mining sector by, for example, investigating andremoving potential obstacles to obtaining a PML, increasing the pace at whichland becomes available to unlicensed miners, and disseminating informationabout land available for small-scale gold mining. However, as part of theseefforts, the government should not engage in a mass clampdown of unlicensed miningactivity.Join the National Intersectoral CoordinationCommittee on Child Labor to highlight issues and propose strategies to addresschild labor in mining.Allow mining officials to focus oninspecting mines for compliance with mining regulations and use other membersof staff to collect revenues from the mines.Revise the mining regulations so thatbrokers and dealers are required to have child labor due diligence proceduresin place.Urge gold traders and companies to eliminatechild labor from their supply chain, to support child labor programs, and tostop buying gold from children.Mercury Use in Small-Scale Gold MiningPrioritize ending the most harmful practicesof mercury use on licensed mines, including the use of mercury by children, burningthe amalgam in residential areas, and burning the amalgam in the open. Conductresearch to identify and address factors contributing to unsafe practices.Enforce current regulations that require theuse of retorts and protective gear. Work to supply retorts to miners that areaffordable, capable of being replaced, and sensitive to miners’preferences.Conduct research and facilitate discussionswith small-scale miners on the use of mercury alternatives.Continue to introduce mercury-free gold extractiontechniques.Replace individual environmental actionplans with a clear checklist of basic environmental practices that allsmall-scale miners should follow.Raise awareness on the most harmful uses ofmercury, in particular the use of mercury by children and pregnant women, amongcommunity members, health officials, and relevant ministries such as theMinistry of Labour and Employment.Draft a national action plan on thereduction of mercury in small-scale mining that prioritizes activities to reducethe risk to the most vulnerable populations, such as children and pregnantwomen living and working in artisanal mining areas. The plan should bedeveloped in close consultation with Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs)working on child labor in artisanal mining, environmental NGOs, experts and UNagencies.The Ministry of EducationInstruct district officials to investigateand eliminate illegal primary school contributions to ensure that they do notthwart access to education in mining areas. Continue to invest in improvingschool infrastructure and facilities to minimize the need for schools to chargeadditional expenses.Increase support to orphans and othervulnerable children so they can enroll in primary and post-primary education.Invest in afterschool activities such assports and games to help encourage attendance and discourage children fromgoing to the mines after class.Increase access to post-primary education inmining areas by providing opportunities to students who fail the Primary SchoolLeaving Examination to retake the test and compete for a place at a secondaryschool and by increasing the number of vocational training opportunitiesavailable to students after primary school.Continue to expand nurseries and other earlylearning and childcare institutions so young children do not have to accompanytheir parents to the mines.The Department of the Environment VicePresident’s OfficeAmend the National Strategic Plan forMercury Management, in consultation with small-scale miners, the Ministry ofHealth and Social Welfare, and civil society, in accordance with the MinamataConvention on Mercury. The plan should include a strong health response withprovisions for periodic data-gathering on mercury levels (possibly inconjunction with other research where blood samples are collected), trainingfor health workers on the health effects of mercury, and using health officialsto carry out awareness-raising activities.Launch and implement the plan as soon aspossible and focus on taking immediate steps to reduce exposure to mercury,particularly among children, and train health officials to recognize symptomsof extreme mercury poisoning.Lead efforts to ratify the MinamataConvention on Mercury.The Ministry of Health and Social WelfareDevelop a comprehensive health sectorresponse to mercury exposure in mining areas with a particular focus on childhealth. This program should seek the input of occupational health and mercuryexperts. In particular:Trainmedical personnel on mercury intoxication;Increasethe health system’s capacity to carry out biomonitoring of mercury levelsin urine in mining areas, and mercury in blood, hair, and breast milk in atleast one reference laboratory;Increasethe health system’s capacity to diagnose mercury poisoning andmercury-related health conditions;Increasethe health system’s capacity to treat the effects of mercury exposure andpoisoning;Raiseawareness of the health risks of mercury use in small-scale mining at childhealth and antenatal clinics;Starta pilot program for testing and, to the extent possible, treatment ofchildren’s mercury levels in a small-scale mining area with the goal ofexpanding it to all affected areas.Improve access to primary healthcare forchildren and reproductive health education and services on HIV/tuberculosis insmall-scale mining areas through, for example, well equipped mobile clinicswith skilled healthcare workers.Ensure that girls who are victims of sexualviolence and commercial sexual exploitation have access to post rapehealthcare, including post exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for HIV.Encourage social welfare officers and other parasocialworkers to identify and protect girls who work in mining from sexualabuse.Implement the new National Costed Plan of Action for MostVulnerable Children, which aims to strengthen the capacity of communitiesand local government actors to protect the most vulnerable children,including children involved in the worst forms of child labor, and ensuretheir access to health, education, and other child protection services.The Ministry ofCommunity Development, Gender and ChildrenTake action to end commercial sexualexploitation and assist the victims, as part of efforts to develop andimplement the National Plan of Action to Prevent and Respond to Violenceagainst Children. In particular, activities should include legal assistance,appropriate health and counseling services, and access to education, vocationaltraining, or other social reintegration measures for victims.The Government Chemist Laboratory Agency, Ministryof Health and Social WelfareTake steps to prevent the illegal trade ofmercury by investigating and acting on the sources of illegal mercury and byenforcing laws that require mercury traders to apply for a permit.Work with donors to conduct periodic surveillanceon mercury exposure and intoxication in artisanal communities with a particularfocus on child health. To minimize the amount of resources used, theseinitiatives may be carried out as part of other research that collects bloodand urine.The Ministry of FinanceAllocate finances for the implementation ofthe National Action Plan for the Elimination of Child Labor, the National StrategicPlan on Mercury Management, the National Costed Action Plan on the Most VulnerableChildren, and the National Plan of Action to Prevent and Respond to Violenceagainst Children.To Local and VillageAuthoritiesAdopt bylaws that provide village officialslegal authority to act when they find child labor in mining.ToArtisanal Miners’ AssociationsDevelop a code of conduct or policy forTanzania’s artisanal gold mining sector, obliging members to undertakemeasures towards the elimination of child labor in artisanal gold mining and totake action on mercury. Monitor the use of child labor and mercury onmembers’ mines.ToLarge-Scale Gold Mining CompaniesDevelop programs to address child labor andmercury use in small-scale mining, in consultation with local government, NGOs,and regional miners’ associations, as part of community engagementstrategies.Consider becoming involved in the Multi-StakeholderPartnership with the government and World Bank. Fund pilot projects to removechildren from small-scale gold mines and reduce mercury exposure through thisinitiative.To the African UnionAs part of the African Union Mining VisionAction Plan, ensure that all artisanal and small-scale mining policies, laws,regulations, standards and codes address child labor and mercury use in small-scalegold mining.The African Committee on the Rights andWelfare of a Child should investigate child labor in small-scale gold mining.To Donor Countries, theWorld Bank, and Relevant UN AgenciesProvide financial, political, and technicalsupport for the above-mentioned measures. In particular, support:The National Action Plan for the Eliminationof Child Labor, including to programs for the strengthening of district levelchild protection systems, and withdrawal of children working in artisanalmines;The third Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAFIII), a social protection scheme that benefits vulnerable children and thatties cash transfers to regular school; Measures to end the use of mercury by childlaborers; Measures to introduce technologies thatreduce exposure to mercury in small-scale gold mining, such as retorts;Initiatives to support the ratification ofthe Minamata Convention on Mercury.The International Labour Organization shouldmake child labor in artisanal mining a priority issue.The World Bank should ensure that allprojects in Tanzania that involve artisanal and small-scale mining, such as theSustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project (SMMRP) and theMulti-Stakeholder Partnership, include initiatives that are designed todecrease child labor in mining, increase access to education for children fromartisanal and small-scale mining families, and reduce the exposure of childrenand adults to mercury. The impact of these initiatives on child labor andmercury exposure should be explicitly measured through the results frameworksof all relevant projects.To Tanzanian and International Companies Trading inTanzanian Artisanal GoldEstablish a thorough due diligence process,including regular monitoring, to eliminate child labor in your supply chains. Monitorsshould be independent and the results of monitoring should be published.Companies should visit artisanal mines to ensure they have accurate informationabout child labor. If there are reports that child labor is being used,companies should specifically investigate these reports. The due diligenceprocess should also include procedures to address adverse human rights impacts.Where necessary, Tanzania’s governmentand international companies should train suppliers on how to identify andaddress child labor.In the event that child labor occurs,companies buying the gold should take action to address the situation. Inparticular the companies should:Immediately inform government authoritiesand urge them in writing to take measures to end the use of child labor insmall-scale gold mining within a specified timeframe, for example, to seekmeasurable improvements within one year through labor inspections and improvedaccess to education;Immediately inform suppliers and urge themto take measures to end the use of child labor in their supply chain within aspecified timeframe, such as two years, in order to facilitate children’stransition out of work.Encourage and support credible and effectivemeasures to end child labor, for example, through projects that improve accessto education and withdraw children from child labor.Develop and publish a code of conduct orpolicy on child labor if they have not done so yet. Implementation of such acode or policy should be independently monitored by a credible third party.Cooperate with associations of gold minersto develop a sector-wide code of conduct on child labor in Tanzania’ssmall-scale mines.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Janine Morna, aresearch fellow in the Children’s Rights Division. Juliane Kippenberg, senior researcher in theChildren’s Rights Division, wrotethe section on The Responsibility of Gold Traders and the Gold Industry. Kippenberg, Zama Coursen-Neff, director of theChildren’s Rights Division, and Neela Ghoshal, senior researcher in the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT)Rights Division, participated in the field research and reviewed the report.Johanna Grotendorst and Sarah Boehm, interns inthe Children’s Rights Division, assisted with desk research. DanielleHaas provided input and guidance on the overall structure of the report.The report was also reviewedby Liesl Gerntholtz, director of the Women’s Rights Division; JosephAmon, director of the Health and Human Rights Division; Chris Albin-Lackey, senior researcher in the Business and Human RightsDivision; Jessica Evans, senior advocate and researcher for InternationalFinancial Institutions in the Business and Human Rights Division; LeslieLefkow, deputy director of the Africa Division; Aisling Reidy, senior legaladvisor; and Babatunde Olugboji, deputy program director of Human Rights Watch.Production assistance wasprovided by Beneva Davies, an associate in the Children’s Rights Division;Grace Choi, publications director; Jessie Graham, senior multimedia producer; andFitzroy Hepkins, administrative manager. This report was translated intoKiswahili by Glory Seruhere and Valentine Karugaba and vetted by OtsienoNamwaya.We would also like to thankmany individuals and organizations who played a critical role in guiding theresearch and, in some cases, providing feedback on the report. This includes,AGENDA for Environment and Responsible Development, Yohana L. Ngulukia, EmmanuelIvo, and Kennedy Mahega from Promoters of Health and Development Association(PHEDEA); Sylvester Mapinduzi and ElizabethMaginga Thobias from Population Services International (PSI); the Tanzania ChildRights Forum, Noreen Toroka and Anthony Rutabanzibwa from the International Labour Organization; Maximillian Kitigwa fromPlan International; Gerald Samwel Ng’ong’a and Daniel Ntimba from Rafiki Social Development Organization; Shihabi;Harry Mushi from Good Hope Foundation; Dr. Jesper Bosse Jønsson, artisanal miningexpert; Dr. Stephan Böse-O’Reilly, pediatrician, Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational Social and Environmental Medicine, University of Munich; and SusanKeane, senior environmental analyst, Natural Resources Defense Council.Most of all we would like to thank the Tanzanian childrenwho bravely shared their stories with us. We are also grateful for thehospitality and support of NGO activists; national, local and villagegovernment authorities; miners; health workers, and others we met during thecourse of our research.[1]United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), “Analysis ofFormalization Approaches in the Artisanal and Small-Scale Gold Mining SectorBased on Experiences in Ecuador, Mongolia, Peru, Tanzania and Uganda,”September 2011, http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/Portals/9/Mercury/Documents/ASGM/Formalization_ARM/Case%20Study%20Tanzania%20June%202012.pdf(accessed February 26, 2013), p. 4; Deborah Fahy Bryceson and Jesper BosseJønsson, “Tanzanian Artisanal Gold Mining: Present andFuture,” (paper presented at the Britain-Tanzania Society Seminar, Schoolof Oriental and African Studies, London, March 15, 2012),http://www.btsociety.org/app/images/events2012/mining_deborah_bryceson.pdf(accessed February 26, 2013), p. 1.[2]UNEP Global Mercury Partnership, “A Practical Guide: ReducingMercury Use in Artisanal and Small-Scale Gold Mining,” June 2012,http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/Portals/9/Mercury/Documents/ASGM/Techdoc/UNEP%20Tech%20Doc%20APRIL%202012_120608b_web.pdf(accessed February 27, 2013), p. 68.[3]Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Tanzania Minerals Audit Agency,“Annual Report,” 2011,http://www.tmaa.go.tz/uploads/TMAA_Annual_Report_2011F.pdf (accessed March 24,2012), p. 16.[4]Revenue Watch Institute, “Resource Governance Index, Tanzania,”2013, http://www.revenuewatch.org/sites/default/files/countrypdfs/tanzaniaRGI2013.pdf(accessed June 24, 2013), p. 1.[5]UNEP, “Analysis of Formalization Approaches,” p. 4.[6]Revenue Watch Institute, “Resource Governance Index,Tanzania,” p. 1.[7]Tanzania Ministry of Energy and Minerals, “Small-Scale GoldStatistics for Human Rights Watch,” October 2012 (on file withHumanRights Watch).[8]See a 2002 International Labour Organization (ILO) report which indicatedthat in just three villages, up to 400 children were involved in small-salemining in the highest season (the school holiday period). ILO-IPEC,“Investigating the Worst Forms of Child Labor No. 15, Tanzania, ChildrenLabour in Mining: A Rapid Assessment,” January 2002,http://www.ilo.org/ipecinfo/product/viewProduct.do?productId=1259 (accessedMarch 25, 2013), p. x.[9]“Tanzania International Human Development Indicators,” UnitedNations Development Program (UNDP), accessed February 28, 2013,http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/TZA.html.[10]“InternationalHuman Development Indicators, MPI: Population living below $1.25 PPP per day(%),” UNDP, accessed February 28, 2013,http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/indicators/38906.html. This statistic is from 2007.[11]Ore is a naturally occurring material from which a metal or othervaluable mineral can be extracted.[12]The Mining (Mineral Rights) Regulations, Government Notice No. 405, 2010,art. 5(1); The Mining Act, No.14 of 2010,http://teiti.or.tz/news_images/news4f632bc701dfb.pdf, arts. 8(2), 55(2), 56.Specific types of companies and partnerships may also meet the criteria toapply for a PML.[13]The Mining (Environmental Protection for Small Scale Mining) Regulations,Government Notice No. 403, 2010, art. 15; Law of the Child Act, No. 21 of 2009,http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---ilo_aids/documents/legaldocument/wcms_151287.pdf(accessed February 9, 2013), art. 82; Employment and Labour Relations Act, No.6 of 2004,http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---ilo_aids/documents/legaldocument/wcms_125591.pdf(accessed February 9, 2013), art. 5(3).[14]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, Mwanza, October 15,2012.[15]UNEP, “Analysis of Formalization Approaches,” p. 3.[16]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with small-scale gold miningexpert, January 23, 2013.[17]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, Kahama town, Kahama district,October 19, 2012.[18]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, Mwanza, October 15,2012, and a mining official, Kahama town, Kahama district, October 19, 2012.[19]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with small-scale gold miningexpert, January 10, 2013, and interview with Fredy A. M. Mahobe, assistant commissionerfor small scale mining development, Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Dar esSalaam, October 24, 2012.[20]Exchange rate April 2013 is US$1 to 1,628.48T Sh. This rate is usedthroughout the report.[21]Stina Møldrup Sørensen, “Informing the people: AnEthnographic Case Study on Information Dissemination and Informal FormalPractices amongst Artisanal and Small-Scale Miners in Makongolosi,Tanzania,” August 2012 Dissertation is submitted to the University ofEdinburgh, pp. 38-39.[22]UNEP,“Analysis of Formalization Approaches,” p. 11.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with Fredy A. M. Mahobe, assistant commissionerfor small scale mining development, Ministry of Energy and Minerals, October24, 2012, and telephone conversation on February 1, 2013.[24]Jesper Bosse Jønsson and Deborah Fahy Bryceson, “Rushing forGold: Mobility and Small-Scale Mining in East Africa,” Journal ofContemporary African Studies, vol. 30 (4) (October 2012), p. 255; Jesper BosseJønsson and Niels Fold, “Mining ‘From Below’: TakingAfrica’s Artisanal Miners Seriously,” Geography Compass,vol. 5 (7) (2011), p. 484; Human Rights Watch interview with Alex Magayane, assistantcommissioner for minerals eastern zone, Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Dar esSalaam, October 9, 2012.[25]Jesper Bosse Jønsson and Niels Fold, “Handling Uncertainty:Policy and Organizational Practices in Tanzania’s Small-Scale Gold MiningSector,” Natural Resources Forum, vol. 33 (2009), p. 217.[26]Human Rights Watch interviews with a miner, Kaseme Ward, Geita district,October 12, 2012, representatives of MWAREMA Mining Association, Geita town,Geita Region, October 11, 2012, and Adam K., 17, Mwabomba Mine, Kahama district,October 17, 2012; Bryceson and Jønsson, “Tanzanian Artisanal GoldMining: Present and Future,” p. 1; Jønsson and Bryceson,“Rushing for Gold,” p. 255.[27]Jønsson and Bryceson, “Rushing for Gold,” p. 255.[28]Ibid.[29]UNEP, “Squeezing Gold from a Stone: Addressing the Toxic HealthRisks and Pollution Caused by Mercury Use in the Small Scale and Artisanal GoldMining Sector,” undated,http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/Portals/9/Mercury/Documents/Publications/UNEP_Squeezing_gold%20april%2010.pdf(accessed March 18, 2013), p. 10; UNEP, Global Mercury Partnership, “APractical Guide,” p. 68.[30]United Nations Industrial Development Agency (UNIDO) et al., “FinalReport for an Assessment of the Environment and Health in the Rwamagasa area,Tanzania,” 2004,http://iwlearn.net/iw-projects/1223/reports/tanzania/final-report-for-an-assessment-of-the-environment-and-health-in-the-rwamagasa-area-tanzania/view(accessed February 15, 2013), executive summary, p. 21; UNEP, “GlobalMercury Assessment 2013. Sources, Emissions, Releases and EnvironmentalTransport,” Geneva 2013, http://www.unep.org/PDF/PressReleases/GlobalMercuryAssessment2013.pdf(accessed March 26, 2013), pp. 19, 22.[31] “GlobalDatabase,” MercuryWatch,http://www.mercurywatch.org/default.aspx?panename=globalDatabase (accessedFebruary 28, 2013); “Home Page, Mean ASM Mercury,” MercuryWatch,http://www.mercurywatch.org/Default.aspx (accessed February 28, 2013). MercuryWatch collects, analyzes, and publishesinformation about mercury use and emissions around the world with a focus onartisanal and small scale gold mining. The globaldatabase is sponsored by theArtisanal Gold Council (AGC) and UNEP. The (AGC) is a not-for-profitorganization, based in Canada, working to sustainably develop artisanal andsmall-scale gold mining.[32]UNEP, “Squeezing Gold from a Stone,” p. 7.[33]Ibid.[34]Human Rights Watch interviews with a representative of MBEREMA MiningAssociation, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 12, 2012; Peter W.U.Appel and Jesper Bosse Jønsson, “Borax – an Alternative toMercury for Gold extraction by Small-Scale Miners: Introducing the Method inTanzania,” Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland Bulletin,vol. 20 (2010), http://www.geus.dk/publications/bull/nr20/nr20_p087-090.pdf(accessed February 12, 2013), p. 88.[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Mkama Nyamwesa, Ministry of Labour andEmployment, Dar es Salaam, October 8, 2012; Occupational Health and Safety,Ministry of Labour and Employment, “Hazardous Child Work inTanzania,” on file with Human Rights Watch.[36]NationalBureau of Statistics, “Child Labour in Tanzania: An Analysis of Findingsof the Integrated Labour Force Survey,” 2006,http://www.ilo.org/ipecinfo/product/viewProduct.do?productId=16320, (accessedFebruary 11, 2013), pp. xv-xvi. Estimates of the number of child laborersdiffer considerably because of the different definitions of child labor.According to the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), about 20percent of children between the ages of 5 and 14 are engaged in child labor;this statistic excludes older children. UNICEF, “United Republic ofTanzania Statistics,”http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/tanzania_statistics.html (accessed March25, 2013). The United States Department of Labor reports that 27.9 percent ofchildren between the ages of 5 and 14 are working. United States Department ofLabor, “Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor,” 2011,http://www.dol.gov/ilab/programs/ocft/2011TDA.pdf (accessed April 1, 2013), p.593. According to a 2006 government survey, about 70 percent of children wereinvolved in economic activities including family farming while about 20 percentwere classified as child laborers. National Bureau of Statistics, “ChildLabour in Tanzania,” pp. xv-xvi.[37]“Hazardous Work,” International Labor Organization (ILO),Programme on Safety and Health at Work and the Environment, http://www.ilo.org/safework/areasofwork/hazardous-work/lang--en/index.htm(accessed February 28, 2013); “Mining: A Hazardous Work,”International Labor Organization (ILO), Programme on Safety and Health at Workand the Environment, http://www.ilo.org/safework/areasofwork/hazardous-work/WCMS_124598/lang--en/index.htm(accessed June 27, 2013).[38]Lawof the Child Act, art. 82; Employment and Labour Relations Act, art.5 (3); TheMining (Environmental Protection for Small Scale Mining) Regulations, art. 15;see e.g. ILO-IPEC, “Tanzania, Children Labour in Mining”; IRINHumanitarian News and Analysis, “Gem Slaves,” video report,September 2006, http://www.irinnews.org/film/4119/ (accessed April 1, 2013).[39]See a 2002 International Labour Organization (ILO) report which indicatedthat in just three villages, up to 400 children were involved in small-salemining in the highest season (the school holiday period). ILO-IPEC,“Tanzania, Children Labour in Mining,” p. x.[40]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative 2 from theInternational Labour Organization in Tanzania, May 9, 2013, emailcorrespondence March 22 and 23, 2013.[41]ILO-IPEC, “Tanzania, Children Labour in Mining,” pp. 31, 41.[42]“Orphans,” UNICEF, accessed July 3, 2013, http://www.unicef.org/media/media_45279.html.UNICEF and global partners define an orphan as a child who has lost one or bothparents. They adopted this definition in the mid-1990s as the AIDS pandemicbegan leading to the death of millions of parents; UNICEF,“Africa’s Orphaned Generations,” 2003,http://www.unicef.org/sowc06/pdfs/africas_orphans.pdf (accessed March 19,2013), pp. 6, 30.[43]“United Republic of Tanzania Statistics,” UNICEF, accessedMarch 2, 2013, http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/tanzania_statistics.html.Statistics are from 2009.[44]UNICEFF, “Africa’s Orphaned Generations,” p. 15; AnnaWhitehouse, “A Situation Analysis of Orphans and Other VulnerableChildren in Mwanza Region, Tanzania,” April 2002, pp. 41-42.[45]See: e.g. David Evans and John Miguel, “Orphans and Schooling inAfrica: A Longitudinal Analysis,” Center for International andDevelopment Economics Research, Working Paper No. CO5-143, March 2005, p. 31;Human Rights Watch, Letting Them Fail: Government Neglect and the Right toEducation for Children Affected by AIDS (New York: Human Rights Watch,2005), http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/10/11/letting-them-fail, p. 39).[46]ILO-IPEC, “Tanzania, Children Labour in Mining,” p. x.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with miner, Nyarugusu Ward, Chunya district,October 19, 2012. According to a Tanzanian NGO, pits can be up to 100 metersdeep. Agenda for Environment and Responsible Development (Agenda), “Studyon Impact of Mercury Use by Artisanal Gold Miners in Tanzania,” April2009, p. 18 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[48]Human Rights Watch interview with Issa M., estimated age 12, MwabombaMine, Kahama district, October 17, 2012.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Jalil H., age 11, Zongomera Ward, Kahama district,October 16, 2012.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Michael H., age 13, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[51]Manfred Walle and Norman Jennings, “Safety & health in small-scalesurface mines - A handbook,” 2001,http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/publication/wcms_162738.pdf(accessed March 19, 2013), p. 11.[52]“Silicosis,” U.S. National Library of Medicine, Medline Plus,accessed May 7, 2013,http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000134.htm.[53]Shou-Chien Chen e. al., “Updated Diagnosis and Treatment ofChildhood Tuberculosis,” World Journal of Pediatrics, vol. 9 (1) February15, 2013; http://www.wjpch.com/UploadFile/13-9.pdf (accessed May 7, 2013), p.9.[54]The Mining (Safety, Occupational Health and Environment Protection)Regulations, Government Notice No. 408, 2010, art. 139 (2).[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Fumo D., age 15, Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district,October 14, 2012.[56]Ibid.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Bakari J., age 16, Mwabomba Mine,Kahama district, October 18, 2012.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Adam K., age 17, Mwabomba Mine, Kahama district,October 17, 2012.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Rahim T., age 13, Matundasi Ward, Chunyadistrict, December 10, 2012.[60]Human Rights Watch interviews with a clinical officer, Nyarugusu Ward,Geita district, October 11, 2012, medical officers, Matundasi Ward, Chunyadistrict, December 10, 2012, and medical officers, Chunya town, Chunyadistrict, December 13, 2012.[61]See ILO, Children in Hazardous Work. What We Know. What We Need to Do,(Geneva: ILO 2011),http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_155428.pdf(accessed February 12, 2013), p. 34; Walle and Jennings, “Safety &health in Small-Scale Surface Mines,” p. 12.[62]The Mining (Safety, Occupational Health and Environment Protection)Regulations, art. 106(1); Human Rights Watch interview with medical officers,Chunya town, Chunya district, December 13, 2012.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Fumo D., age 15, Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district,October 14, 2012.[64]Human Rights Watch interviews with medical officials, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012, and with Taji J. age 14, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with medical officials, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[66]Comment from a miner, Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district, October 11, 2012.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Abasi L., age 20, former child laborer,Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district, October 11, 2012.[68]Human Rights Watch interview with Faraji J., estimated age 8, KasemeWard, Geita district, October 12, 2012.[69]ILO, Children in Hazardous Work.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Akilah O., age 10, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district,December 12, 2012.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Yusuf J., age 17, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district,December 11, 2012.[72]Jesper Bosse Jønsson, Peter W.U. Appel, and Raphael TihelwaChibunda, “A Matter of Approach: the Retort’s Potential to ReduceMercury Consumption within Small-Scale Gold Mining Settlements inTanzania,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol.17 (1) (2009), p.80.[73]See ‘Mercury Exposure and Its Effect on Children’sHealth’ section.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Michael H., age 13, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Erevu B., Matundasi Ward, Chunya district,December 9, 2012.[76]Marcello Veiga and Randy Baker, Global Mercury Project, “Protocols forEnvironmental and Health Assessment of Mercury Released by Artisanal andSmall-Scale Gold Miners,” 2004,http://www.globalmercuryproject.org/documents/non_country%20specific/Protocols_for_Environmental%20_Assessment.pdf(accessed April 3, 2013), pp. 68-74.[77]Human Rights Watch interviews with Zaki S., age 13, and Rahim T., age 14,Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[78]Human Rights Watch interviews with Elimu A., age 15, and Erevu B., age,12, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 9, 2012; with Michael H., age 13,Farid. S., age 15, Faiza J., age 13, Zaki S., age 13, Lumumba J., age 15, andRahim T., age 13, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 10, 2012; and withRashid A., age 17, Yasmin D., age 15, Kheri M., age 17, Yusuf J., age 17,Chokaa Ward, Chunya district, December 11, 2012.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Taji J., age 14, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district,December 10, 2012.[80]UNIDO et al., “Final Report,” executive summary, p. 21.[81]Agenda, “Study on Impact of Mercury Use,” p. 39.[82]Human Rights Watch interviews with Erevu B., age 12, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 9, 2012; with Faiza J., age 13, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012; and with a female miner, Kaseme Ward, Geitadistrict, October 12, 2012.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with female miner, Kaseme Ward, Geita district,October 12, 2012.[84]Among the group of child laborers who were not enrolled in school, sixwere waiting for their primary school exam results. If they pass, they mayenroll in secondary school.[85]Law of the Child Act, art. 79 (1)-(2).[86]Human Rights Watch interview with Asani A., age 17, Kaseme Ward, Geita district,October 12, 2012.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with Musa N., age 15, Mwabomba Mine, Kahama district,October 17, 2012.[88]See ‘Harm to Education’ Section.[89]For example Haki E., a 14-year-old boy, said he worked with a metal detector tofind gold for miners. He had to pay 50 percent of his earnings to the owner ofthe metal detector, 35 percent to the miners who dug out the ore, and kept 15percent for himself. Human Rights Watch interview with Haki E., age 14,Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district, October 14, 2012.[90]All girls under 18 who are engaged in sex work are considered victims ofcommercial sexual exploitation. See “Commercial Sexual Exploitation ofChildren,” International Labour Organization, accessed March 19, 2013,http://www.ilo.org/ipec/areas/CSEC/lang--en/index.htm.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Yasmin D., age 15, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district,December 11, 2012.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Eidi B., age 16, Busulwangili gold rushsite, Kahama district, October 13, 2012.[93]Human Rights Watch group interview with Sala A., age 16, Etana B., age16, and Gasira C., age 14, Mbeya, December 7, 2012.[94]Human Rights Watch group interview with Pili N., age 17, Wanda S., age 14,Ituri K., age 16, and Mimi C., age 18, Chunya town, ChunyadDistrict, December8, 2012.[95]Ibid.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with medical officers, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 13, 2012.[97]Plan International Tanzania, “Final Baseline Survey Report onProgramme for the Eradication of the Worst Forms of Child Labour in 8 MiningWards of Geita district,” March 6, 2013 (on file with Human RightsWatch), p. 55.[98]Human Rights Watch group interview with Raisa M., age 28, Saida B., age 25,Johanna T., age 18, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 9, 2012.[99]Human Rights Watch group interview with Layla I., age 24, Tahla N.,  ageage29, Dada K., age 22, Grace K., age 20, Aesha K., age 20, Matundasi Ward, Chunyadistrict, December 12, 2012.[100]“Tanzania, United Republic of, Statistics,” UNICEF,http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/tanzania_statistics.html (accessed March19, 2013). Statistics are from 2009.[101]S. Clift et. al., “Variations of HIV and STI Prevalences withinCommunities Neighbouring New Goldmines in Tanzania: Importance for InterventionDesign,” Sexually Transmitted Infections, vol. 79 (2003), p. 310.[102]G. Riedner et al., “Baseline Survey of Sexually TransmittedInfections in a Cohort of Female bar Workers in Mbeya Region, Tanzania,”Sexually Transmitted Infections, vol. 79 (2003), p. 385.[103]Human Rights Watch group interview with Pili N., age 17, Wanda S., age14, Ituri K., age 16, and Mimi C., age 18, Chunya town, Chunya District,December 8, 2012.[104]Ibid.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with Lila A., age 12, Mwabomba Mine, KahamaDistrict, October 18, 2012.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Dahlia A., age 10, Chokaa Ward, ChunyaDistrict, December 12, 2012.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with deputy head teacher, Zongomera Ward,Kahama District, October 16, 2012.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher, Mwabomba, Kahama districtOctober 18, 2012.[109]Human Rights Watch interviews with three school teachers, Nyarugusu Ward,Geita district, October 12, 2012, and a teacher, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district,December 10, 2012.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Fumo D., age 15, Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district,October 14, 2012.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with Elimu A., age 15, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 9, 2012.[112]Human Rights Watch interview withteacher, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district,December 10, 2012.[113]Plan International Tanzania, “Final Baseline Survey Report,”p. 55.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with district commissioner Geita town, Geita district,October 11, 2012.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with three school teachers, Nyarugusu Ward,Geita district, October 12, 2012.[116]Veiga and Baker, “Protocols for Environmental and HealthAssessment,” pp. 68-74.[117]Agenda, “Study on Impact of Mercury Use,” p. 26.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with adult miner who processes gold at home,Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 12, 2012.[119]Ibid.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with trader’s employee, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 12, 2012.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Lumumba J., age 15, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[122]Human Rights Watch interviews with Ahmed K., age 13, Faiza J., age 13,and Rahim T., age 13, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with Faiza J., age 13, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[124]Agenda, “Study on Impact of Mercury Use,” p. 26.[125]The Mining (Environmental Protection for Small Scale Mining) Regulations,art. 10(1).[126]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district,December 11, 2012.[127]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative of theEnvironmental Sanitation and Hygiene section of the Ministry of Health andSocial Welfare, April 2, 2013.[128]Ibid.[129]Veiga and Baker, “Protocols for Environmental and HealthAssessment,” p. 33; Kevin H. Telmer and Marcello M. Veiga, “WorldEmissions of Mercury from Artisanal and Small Scale Gold Mining,” 2008,http://www.mercurywatch.org/userfiles/file/Telmer%20and%20Veiga%202009%20Springer.pdf(accessed February 16, 2013), p. 136; Agenda, “Study on Impact of MercuryUse,” p. 37.[130]ILO-IPEC, “Tanzania, Children Labour in Mining,” p. 39.[131]H. Taylor, et. al., “Environmental Assessment of Mercury Contaminationfrom the Rwamagasa Artisanal Gold Mining Centre, Geita district,Tanzania,” Science of the Total Environment, vol. 343 (2005), pp.126-127.[132]Stephan Bose-O'Reilly et al., “Health Assessment of Artisanal GoldMiners in Tanzania,” Science of the Total Environment, vol. 408(2010), pp. 796-797, 802.[133]Jennifer Baeuml et. al. “Human Biomonitoring Data from MercuryExposed Miners in Six Artisanal Small-Scale Gold Mining Areas in Asia andAfrica,” Minerals, vol. 1 (2011), pp. 126-127.[134]Ibid.[135]Ibid.[136]Ibid.[137]Agenda et al., “ASGM sites: Matundasi and Makongolosi mining areasin Tanzania,” January 3, 2013,http://www.ipen.org/hgmonitoring/pdfs/tanzania_mercury_report-hair-rev-en.pdf(accessed February 16, 2013), p. 2.[138]Health Protection Agency, “Inorganic mercury/Elemental mercury,Toxicological Overview.” 2007,http://www.hpa.org.uk/webc/HPAwebFile/HPAweb_C/1194947331729 (accessed June 5,2013), p. 5.[139]Ibid., p. 9.[140]Stephan Bose-O’Reilly et al., “Mercury as Serious HealthHazard for Children in Gold Mining Areas,” Environmental Research,vol. 107 (2008), pp. 89-97.[141]Ibid.[142]Ibid. p. 95.[143]Law of the Child Act, art. 82; Employment and Labour Relations Act, art. 5(3); TheMining (Environmental Protection for Small Scale Mining) Regulations, art. 15.[144]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative 2 from the ILOin Tanzania, May 9, 2013, and email correspondence March 22 and 23, 2013.[145]Ministry of Labour and Employment, “National Action Plan for theElimination of Child Labor,” Dar es Salaam, June 2009.[146]Ibid., p. 17.[147]United States Department of Labor (USDOL), “Findings on the WorstForms of Child Labor,” 2011, http://www.dol.gov/ilab/programs/ocft/2011TDA.pdf(accessed April 1, 2013), p. 595; Human Rights Watch email correspondence withrepresentative 1 from the ILO in Tanzania, May 8, 2013.[148]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with representative 1 from the ILO inTanzania, May 8, 2013.[149]Ibid.[150]United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Labour and Employment, Departmentof Labour, “Annual Labour Administration and Inspection Report2011/2012,”http://www.kazi.go.tz/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/ANNUAL-LABOUR-ADMINISTRATION-AND-INSPECTION-REPORT.pdf(accessed May 10, 2013), p. 10.[151]Law of the Child Act, art. 86(3); The Labour Institutions Act, No. 7 of2004,http://www.kazi.go.tz/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/Labour-Institutions-Act-7-2004.pdf(accessed May 11, 2013), art. 46; Human Rights Watch email correspondence withlabor officer, Mwanza, October 16, 2012; Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith representative 2 from the ILO in Tanzania, May 9, 2013.[152]Law of the Child Act, art. 86(3).[153]The Labour Institutions Act, No. 7 of 2004, http://www.kazi.go.tz/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/Labour-Institutions-Act-7-2004.pdf(accessed May 11, 2013), art. 45(1)(a); Employment and Labour Relations Act,arts. 5(3), 5(7).[154]Employment and Labour Relations Act, art. 102(1)-(2); Human Rights Watchinterview with two labor officers, Mbeya, December 7, 2012.[155]United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Labour and Employment, Departmentof Labour, “Annual Labour Administration and Inspection Report2011/2012,” p. 12.[156]Ibid., p. 22.[157]Jønsson and Bryceson, “Rushing for Gold,” p. 637. (map that identifies the following regions as Tanzania’s main gold miningregions: Kagera, Mwanza, Mara, Shinyanga, Tabora, Singida, Rukwa, Mbeya, Tanga.Note the government has created three new regions in these areas: Geita, Simyu,and Katavi); United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Labour and Employment,Department of Labour, “Annual Labour Administration and Inspection Report2011/2012,” pp. 24-25 (showing Mwanza, Tanga, Shinyanga, Kagera, andTabora as the five main gold mining regions where children were eitherwithdrawn or prevented from entering into child labor).[158]United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Labour and Employment, Departmentof Labour, “Annual Labour Administration and Inspection Report2011/2012,” pp. 24-25.[159] Ibid., p. 10.[160]HumanRights Watch interview with two labor officers, Mbeya, December 7, 2012.[161]Ibid.[162]UnitedRepublic of Tanzania Ministry of Labour and Employment, Department of Labour,“Annual Labour Administration and Inspection Report 2011/2012,”),p. 10; Human Rights Watch interview with labor officer, Mwanza, October 15,2012.[163]Human Rights Watch email correspondence with labor officer, Mwanza,October 16, 2012.[164]Human Rights Watch interview with labor officer, Mwanza, October 15,2012.[165]United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Labour and Employment, Departmentof Labour, “Annual Labour Administration and Inspection Report2011/2012”), p. 19.[166]Fifteen employers were brought before the labor courts between 2011-2012reporting period and only one was convicted. It does not appear that any ofthese employers were prosecuted for violating child labor laws. United Republicof Tanzania Ministry of Labour and Employment, Department of Labour,“Annual Labour Administration and Inspection Report 2011/2012,”),pp. 20-21; Human Rights Watch interview with two labor officers, Mbeya,December 7, 2012; USDOL, “Findings on the Worst Forms of ChildLabor,” pp. 595-596.[167]Human Rights Watch interviews with labor officer, Mwanza, October 15,2012, and email correspondence, October 16, 2012; and with two labor officers,Mbeya, December 7, 2012.[168]The Mining (Environmental Protection for Small Scale Mining) Regulations, arts.18-19(1).[169]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 13, 2012.[170]Ibid.[171]Ibid.[172]Ibid.[173]Ibid.[174]National Action Plan for the Elimination of Child Labor, p. 7.[175]Human Rights Watch interviews with a mining official, Mwanza, October 15,2012, and a mining official, Kahama town, Kahama district, October 19, 2012.[176]USDOL, “Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor,” p. 595.[177]Human Rights Watch interviews with a community development officer, Geitatown, Geita district, October 12, 2013, and a community development officer,Chunya town, Chunya district, December 13, 2012.[178]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher, Mwabomba, Kahama district,October 18, 2012.[179]The Labour Institutions Act, No. 7 of 2004,http://www.kazi.go.tz/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/Labour-Institutions-Act-7-2004.pdf(accessed May 11, 2013), art. 45(1)(a); Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith representative 2 from the ILO in Tanzania, May 9, 2013.[180]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with representative 1 from the ILO, May 3,2013; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative 2 from the ILOin Tanzania, May 9, 2013.[181]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, Kahama town, Kahama district,October 19, 2012, and a mining official Chunya town, Chunya district, December13, 2012.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 13, 2012.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, KahamatTown, Kahama district,October 19, 2012, and a mining official, Dar es Salaam, October 24, 2012.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Fredy A. M. Mahobe, assistant commissionerfor small scale mining development, Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Dar esSalaam, October 24, 2012.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with the ward executive officer, Zongomera ward,Kahama district, October 16, 2012.[186]Human Rights Watch interview with Enos F., 13, Zongomera Ward, Kahama district,October 16, 2012.[187]Human Rights Watch interviews with a mining official, Mwanza, October 15,2012, and two labor officers, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Mbeya,December 7, 2012.[188]Human Rights Watch interview with Rashid A., age 17, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district,December 11, 2012.[189]Human Rights Watch interview with Zaki S., age 13, and Rahim T., age 13,Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[190]Human Rights Watch interview with Taji J., age 14, Matundasi Ward, Chunyadistrict, December 10, 2012.[191]Human Rights Watch interview with Rahim T., age 13, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district,December 10, 2012.[192]UNICEF, “Africa’s Orphaned Generations,” pp. 6, 15, 30;Evans and Miguel, “Orphans and Schooling in Africa: A LongitudinalAnalysis,” p. 31; Human Rights Watch, Letting Them Fail, p. 39;Whitehouse, “A Situation Analysis of Orphans and Other VulnerableChildren in Mwanza Region, Tanzania,” pp. 41-42.[193]Human Rights Watch interview with social welfare officer and a communitydevelopment officer, Kahama town, Kahama district, October 19, 2012.[194]Ibid.[195]This study examined support in the form of: (1) medical support in thelast 12 months which includes medical care, supplies or medicine; (2) emotionalsupport in the last 3 months which includes companionship, counseling from atrained counselor, or spiritual support for which there was no payment; (3)social/material support in the last 3 months which includes help with householdwork, training for a caregiver, legal services, clothing, food, or financialsupport for which there was no payment; (4) and school-related assistance inthe last 12 months which includes allowance, free admission, books, or suppliesfor which there was no payment for ages 5-17 years. Tanzania Commission forAIDS (TACAIDS) et al. “Tanzania HIV/AIDS and Malaria Indicator Survey2007-08,” 2008, http://www.tacaids.go.tz/dmdocuments/THMIS%202007-08.pdf(accessed March 19, 2013), pp. 160-161.[196]Human Rights Watch interviews with social welfare officer and community developmentofficer, Kahama town, Kahama district, October 19, 2012; with Fumo D., 15,Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district, October 14, 2012; withElimu A, 15, and Erevu B., 12, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district,December 9, 2012.; with Taji J., 14, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December10, 2012; and with Dahlia A., age 10, Jane S., age 10, Laura P., age 10, JoanaS., age 15, Raiya S., age 14, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district, December 12, 2012.[197]Human Rights Watch interview with Joana S., age 15, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district,December 12, 2012.[198]See “Social and Economic Policy,” UNICEF, accessed March 23,2013, http://www.unicef.org/socialpolicy/index_socialprotection.html.[199]Ministry of Health Social Welfare and Department of Social Welfare,“National Costed Plan of Action for Most Vulnerable Children (MVC)II,” Dar es Salaam, December 2012 (on file with Human Rights Watch). Thetotal cost of the Plan is US$210.5 million over the five-year period.[200]Ibid., pp. 14-15.[201]World Bank, “Project Information Document, Concept Stage, TanzaniaThird Social Action Fund,” February 16, 2011,http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2011/07/11/000003596_20110711121050/Rendered/PDF/Project0Inform0ument0Concept0Stage.pdf(accessed April 2, 2013), para. 3(b); Human Rights Watch telephone interviewwith social protection specialist, World Bank, April 26, 2013.[202]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with social protection specialist,World Bank, April 26, 2013.[203]Ibid.[204]The National Education Act, No. 25 of 1978,http://polis.parliament.go.tz/PAMS/docs/25-1978.pdf (accessed April 16, 2013),art. 35. (1); Ministry of Education and Culture, “Education Sector DevelopmentProgramme, Primary Education Development Plan (2002-2006),” July 2011,http://www.ed-dpg.or.tz/pdf/PE/Primary%20Education%20Development%20Plan-PEDP%20I_2000-06.pdf(accessed April 16, 2013), p.5 (which highlights that under the 2002=-2006Primary Education Development Plan, the government eliminated primary schoolfees and contributions); United Nations Educational, Scientific and CulturalOrganization (UNESCO), “Tanzania Education Sector Analysis, ExecutiveSummary,” 2011, http://unesco.atlasproject.eu/unesco/details/en/details.html?ci=79498a79-4c1a-4c73-89f9-1e39c989bbf5(accessed February 18, 2013), p. 9.[205]“International Human Development Indicators, MPI: Population livingbelow $1.25 PPP per day (%),”UNDP, accessed February 28, 2013,http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/indicators/38906.html. This figure is from 2007.[206]Frances Vavrus and Goodiel Moshi, “The Cost of a ‘Free’Primary Education in Tanzania Teachers College,” InternationalCritical Childhood Policy Studies, vol.2 (1), (2009), pp. 37-38.[207]Human Rights Watch interviews with teachers at two different schools,Matundasi Ward, Chunya district, December 10, 2012, and with a teacher atChokaa Ward, Chunya district, December 12, 2012. Note one of the schools statedthat it would try to find desks for students who could not afford thecontribution.[208]Human Rights Watch interviews with Haki E., age 14, Nyarugusu Ward, Geitadistrict, October 14, 2012, and with a teacher Chokaa Ward, Chunya district,December 12, 2012. At one of the schools this cost roughly US$ 1.85 per year.[209]Human Rights Watch interview with three school teachers, Nyarugusu Ward,Geita district, October 12, 2012.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with Haki E., age 14, Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district,October 14, 2012.[211]The United Republic of Tanzania, Education Sector Development Committee,“Education Sector Performance Report 2011/2012,” September 2012,http://www.ed-dpg.or.tz/pdf/ESPR%20and%20AM/JESR%202011-12_Education%20Sector%20Performance%20Report.pdf(accessed February 18, 2013), pp. 14-15.[212]Human Rights Watch interview with education official, Dar es Salaam, October22, 2012.[213]The United Republic of Tanzania, Education Sector Development Committee,“Education Sector Performance Report 2011/2012,” p. 29.[214]Human Rights Watch interviews with an education official, Nyarugusu Ward, Geitadistrict, October 14, 2012; with a teacher, Mwabomba, Kahama district, October18, 2012; with two teachers at different schools, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district,December 10, 2012; and with a teacher, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district, December12, 2012.[215]In 2009, the pass rate for the PSLE was 49.4 percent and 43.9 percent ofprimary school students transitioned to secondary school during that period. In2010 the pass rate was 53.5 percent and 52.2 percent of primary school studentstransitioned to secondary school during that period. In 2011 the pass rate was58.3 percent and 53. 6 percent of primary school students transitioned tosecondary school during that period. The United Republic of Tanzania, EducationSector Development Committee, “Education Sector Performance Report2011/2012,” pp. 29, 46.[216]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher at a secondary school, Chokaa Ward,Chunya district, December 11, 2012.[217]Human Rights Watch interview with Kondo K., age 17, Mwabomba, Kahama district,October 17, 2012.[218]Folk and Vocational Educational Training facilities offer 121,348 places andtechnical schools offer 112, 447.The United Republic of Tanzania, EducationSector Development Committee, “Education Sector Performance Report2011/2012,” pp. 15-16.[219]Ibid., p. 15.[220]ILO-IPEC, “Tanzania, Children Labour in Mining,” pp. ix-x.[221]Human Rights Watch interview with teacher, Mwabomba, Kahama district, October18, 2012.[222]Human Rights Watch interview with miner, Kaseme Ward, Geita district,October 12, 2012.[223]Vice President’s Office, Division of the Environment, “NationalStrategic Plan for Mercury Management in Tanzania,” Dar es Salaam, 2009,art. 2.3 (on file with Human Rights Watch); The Mining (EnvironmentalProtection for Small Scale Mining) Regulations.[224]The Environmental Management Act, No. 20 of 2004,http://www.revenuewatch.org/sites/default/files/The%20Environmental%20Management%20Act.pdf(accessed March 21, 2013), art. 135(3).[225]See The Mining (Environmental Protection for Small Scale Mining)Regulations, arts. 3, 10(1), 12, 14, 17 Schedules, Content of EnvironmentalProtection Plan, p.7.[226]Jønsson, Appel, and Chibunda, “A Matter of Approach,”p. 78; UNIDO, “UNIDO Technical Guidelines on Mercury Management inArtisanal and Small-Scale Gold Mining,” April 2008,www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/Portals/9/Mercury/Documents/ASGM/UNIDO%20Guidelines%20on%20Mercury%20Management%20April08.pdf(accessed February 21, 2013).[227]Sørensen, “Informing the People,” p. 21.[228]Human Rights Watch interview with miner, Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district,October 11, 2012.[229]Agenda, “Study on Impact of Mercury Use,” p. 32.[230]The Mining (Environmental Protection for Small Scale Mining) Regulations,art. 19(1).[231]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 13, 2012.[232]Human Rights Watch interview with OSHA inspector, Ministry of Labour andEmployment, Mbeya, December 7, 2012, and an inspector at the Government ChemistLaboratory Agency (GCLA), Mbeya, December 14, 2012.[233]Human Rights Watch interview with OSHA inspector, Ministry of Labour andEmployment, Mbeya, December 7, 2012.[234]Human Rights Watch interview with official from the Department ofEnvironment, Vice President's Office, Dar es Salaam, October 23, 2012.[235]National Strategic Plan for Mercury Management in Tanzania, pp. v-vi and arts.1.2 and 1.3.[236]Ibid., p. v.[237]Ibid., p. vi.[238]See UNEP, “Draft Minamata Convention on Mercury,” UNEP(DTIE)/Hg/INC.5/7,March 14, 2013, http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/Portals/9/Mercury/Documents/INC5/5_7_e_annex_advance.pdf(accessed August 1, 2013), annex C (1)(i). The treaty will be formally adoptedand opened for signature and ratification at a diplomatic conference in Japanin October 2013.[239]Ibid., annex C (1)(b).[240]Ibid., art. 16., annex C(1)(h).[241]Ibid.[242]Human Rights Watch interviews with officials from the GCLA, Dar es Salaam,October 9, 2012, and an official from the GCLA, Geneva, January 17, 2013.[243]Human Rights Watch interview with official from the GCLA, Geneva,Switzerland, January 17, 2013; officials from the GCLA, Dar es Salaam, October9, 2012; and an inspector at GCLA, Mbeya, December 14, 2012.[244]Human Rights Watch interview with officials from the GCLA, Dar es Salaam,October 9, 2012.[245]Human Rights Watch interview with official from the GCLA, Geneva,Switzerland, January 17, 2013.[246]Human Rights Watch interviews with medical officers, Kahama town, Kahama district,October 16, 2012, and medical officers, Chunya town, Chunya district, December13, 2012.[247]Human Rights Watch interview with medical officers, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[248]Human Rights Watch interview with clinical officer, Nyarugusu Ward, Geitadistrict, October 11, 2012.[249]Human Rights Watch interview with medical officers, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 13, 2012.[250]Human Rights Watch interview with official from the GCLA, Geneva,Switzerland, January 17, 2013.[251]Industrial Chemical and Consumer Chemicals (Management and Control) Act,arts. 11-15.[252]Human Rights Watch interview with officials from the GCLA, Dar es Salaam,October 9, 2012.[253]Agenda, “Study on Impact of Mercury Use,” p. 8.[254]National Strategic Plan for Mercury Management in Tanzania, pp. iv-v.[255]Human Rights Watch interview with gold traders, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 11 and 13, 2012.[256]Human Rights Watch interviews with a primary mining license holder, Geita town,Geita district, October 12, 2012; with a trader, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 11, 2012; and with a trader, Chunya town, Chunya district, December13, 2012.[257]Human Rights Watch interview with inspector at the GCLA, Mbeya, December14, 2012. The following countries border Tanzania: Burundi, the DemocraticRepublic of the Congo, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Rwanda, Uganda, and Zambia.[258]“Tanzania,Projects and Operations, Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources,”World Bank, accessed April 3, 2013,http://www.worldbank.org/projects/P096302/sustainable-management-mineral-resources?lang=en.[259]The World Bank, “Implementation Status & Results, Tanzania,Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources,” February 26, 2013, http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/SDN/2013/02/26/090224b0819628cd/1_0/Rendered/PDF/Tanzania000Sus0Report000Sequence007.pdf(accessed May 12, 2013).[260]See Centre for Energy, Environment, Science & Technology (CEEST),“Environmental and Social Management Framework and Initial Scoping Studyfor the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment for the SustainableManagement of Mineral Resources Project (SMMRP),” April 2009,http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2009/04/22/000334955_20090422054705/Rendered/PDF/E21380EA0AFR1E10Box338888B01PUBLIC1.pdf(accessed June 26, 2013), p. 72-84. Under section 1.12 on the‘Identification, Assessment of Impacts and Proposed MitigationMeasures’, the Management Framework fails to identify the impact of childlabor.[261]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Philippe Dongier, World Bank countrydirector for Burundi, Tanzania, and Uganda, June 26, 2013.[262]Ibid.[263]See The World Bank, “Project Appraisal Document on a ProposedCredit in the Amount of SDR 33.5 Million (US$50 Million Equivalent) to theUnited Republic of Tanzania for a Sustainable Management of Mineral ResourcesProject,” March 13, 2009,http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2009/05/20/000333037_20090520044020/Rendered/PDF/479260PAD0P096101Official0Use0Only1.pdf(accessed May 12, 2013), Annex 3, Results Framework and Monitoring; The WorldBank, “Implementation Status & Results, Tanzania, SustainableManagement of Mineral Resources,” February 26, 2013,http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/SDN/2013/02/26/090224b0819628cd/1_0/Rendered/PDF/Tanzania000Sus0Report000Sequence007.pdf(accessed May 12, 2013); The World Bank, “Implementation Status & Results,Tanzania, Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources,” July 24, 2012,http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/SDN/2012/07/24/53B7A9E180799F9085257A45004B7129/1_0/Rendered/PDF/ISR0Disclosabl024201201343137441366.pdf(accessed May 12, 2013); The World Bank, “Implementation Status &Results, Tanzania, Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources,”September 7, 2011,http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/SDN/2011/12/26/B550C0611649000485257972006C65CF/1_0/Rendered/PDF/P0963020ISR0Di026201101324928639433.pdf(accessed May 12, 2013); The World Bank, “Implementation Status &Results, Tanzania, Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources,” August24, 2011, http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/SDN/2011/09/07/46DC028F217970068525790400776F61/1_0/Rendered/PDF/P0963020ISR0Di007201101315431873184.pdf(accessed May 12, 2013) .[264]CEEST, “Environmental and Social Management Framework,” p.78-79.[265]Ibid.[266]The World Bank, “Project Appraisal Document,” para. 31; HumanRights Watch telephone interview with the World Bank task team leader for theSMMRP, April 29, 2013.[267]The World Bank, “Project Appraisal Document,” paras. 31, 48.[268]Ibid., para. 36; Human Rights Watch email correspondence with the WorldBank task team leader for the SMMRP, April 29, 2013.[269]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Philippe Dongier, World Bank countrydirector for Burundi, Tanzania, and Uganda, June 26, 2013.[270]Human Rights Watch telephone interview and email correspondence with the WorldBank task team leader for the SMMRP, April 29, 2013; Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with World Bank mining specialist, May 8, 2013.[271]The World Bank, “Project Appraisal Document,” Annex 3,Results Framework and Monitoring. Note some of the outcomes in the World BankResults Framework rely on indicators that indirectly measure mercury exposure.Specifically, to measure the improved technical and environmental performanceof small-scale and artisanal miners, the World Bank monitors a number offactors including the increase in environmental plans (which require miners todevelop some strategy to manage mercury). It also measures the capacity formanagement of environmental and social issues in mining through the developmentof specific environmental and social policies (which may target mercury).[272]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with the World Bank task team leaderfor the SMMRP, April 29, 2013.[273]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with World Bank mining specialist,May 8, 2013.[274]“Project Status- Africa,” USDOL, accessed April 2, 2013,http://www.dol.gov/ilab/projects/sub-saharan_africa/project-africa.htm; HumanRights Watch interview with Mkama Nyamwesa, Ministry of Labour and Employment,Dar es Salaam, October 8, 2012.[275]ILO, “IPEC Action against Child Labour: Progress and FuturePriorities 2006-2007,” February 2008,http://www.ilo.org/ipecinfo/product/viewProduct.do?productId=7650 (accessedApril 19, 2013), p. 98.[276]ILO, “IPEC Action against Child Labour 2010-2011: Progress and FuturePriorities,” February 2012,http://www.ilo.org/ipecinfo/product/download.do?type=document&id=19735(accessed April 3, 2013), p. 78.[277]Ibid., pp. 82, 88; Human Rights Watch interview with representative 1from the ILO, Dar es Salaam, October 23, 2012 and telephone interview May 3,2013.[278]USDOL, “Project to Support Local Efforts to Combat Child Labor inTanzania,” August 2012, http://www.dol.gov/ilab/grants/SGA12-15.pdf(accessed April 2, 2013). USDOL awarded $10 million to The International RescueCommittee, in partnership with World Vision, the Foundation for Civil Society,Kiota Women's Health Development, the Tanga Youth Development Association andThe Institute for Development Studies at the University of Dar es Salaam towork on child labor in agriculture and domestic service.[279]Plan International is one of the few international non-governmentalorganizations that works specifically on child labor in gold mining in Geitadistrict. Some smaller local NGOs in mining areas also work on child labor inmining, or may touch on this issue through their support for orphans and othervulnerable children.[280]“Sweden Development Cooperation with Tanzania,” Embassy of Sweden,accessed April 2, 2013,http://www.swedenabroad.com/en-GB/Embassies/Dar-es-Salaam/Development-Cooperation/Sweden--Tanzania/;“What We Do: Tanzania,” Department for International Development(DFID), accessed April 2, 2013, http://projects.dfid.gov.uk/Default.aspx?countrySelect=TZ-Tanzania;“Tanzania: Education,” USAID, accessed April 2, 2013,http://www.usaid.gov/tanzania/education; The World Bank, “CountryAssistance Strategy for the United Republic of Tanzania for the Period FY2012-2015,” May 9, 2011, http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/05/14196937/tanzania-country-assistance-strategy-cas-period-fy2012-2015(accessed April 2, 2013); “Tanzania, What UNICEF is Doing,” UNICEF,accessed April 2, 2013, http://www.unicef.org/tanzania/6908_10807.html.[281]Global Mercury Project, “Final Country Report for Tanzania,”November 2007, http://www.globalmercuryproject.org/countries/tanzania/docs/Tanzania%20Final%20Report.pdf(accessed April 3, 2013), p. 5.[282]Ibid., p. 7.[283]Ibid., p. 18.[284]Jesper Bosse Jønsson, Elias Charles, Per Kalvig, “ToxicMercury versus Appropriate Technology: Artisanal Gold Miners’ RetortAversion,” Resources Policy, (2012),http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2012.09.001 (accessed February 21, 2013),pp. 5-6.[285]United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the SpecialRepresentative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights andtransnational corporations and other business enterprises, John Ruggie: GuidingPrinciples on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations“Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,” A/HRC/17/31, March21, 2011, http://www.ohchr.org/documents/issues/business/A.HRC.17.31.pdf(accessed February 28, 2013).[286]Human Rights Watch, The Curse of Gold-Democratic Republic of Congo (NewYork: Human Rights Watch, 2005) http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/drc0505/drc0505.pdf.[287]Letter dated 29 November 2011 from the chair of the Security CouncilCommittee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning theDemocratic Republic of Congo UN Report addressed to the president of theSecurity Council, S 2011/738, December 2, 2011,http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/2011/738 (accessed March 28,2013); Enough, “From Child Miner to Jewelry Store. The Six Steps ofCongo’s Conflict Gold,” October 2012,http://www.enoughproject.org/files/Conflict-Gold.pdf (accessed March 28, 2013).[288] See the LegalFramework Section for details.[289]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Shubi Byabato, assistant commissionerfor mineral economics and trade, Ministry of Energy and Minerals, May 15, 2013.In 2010 and 2011, artisanal gold production was officially at about 2.2 tonsand 1.1. tons respectively. Tanzania Ministry of Energy and Minerals,“Small-scale gold statistics for Human Rights Watch,” October 2012(on file with Human Rights Watch); Ministry of Energy and Minerals, TanzaniaMinerals Audit Agency. “Annual Report,” p. 14. The cost of gold wasbased on an average price of $1669.03 per ounce. “2012 Gold PriceHistory,” USAGold, accessed May 15, 2013, http://www.usagold.com/reference/prices/2012.html.[290]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Dar es Salaam, October 9,2012. One local gold trader in Geita told Human Rights Watch that he receivedbetween 50 grams and 2 kilograms a day, and 200 grams of gold the day HumanRights Watch visited. If this was the average, the trade volume of this onelocal trader would be about 70 kilograms of gold per year. Human Rights Watchinterview with gold trader, Geita, October 12, 2012.[291]Human Rights Watch interview with mining official, Mwanza, October 15,2012; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Dar es Salaam, October 9,2012; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with expert on gold trade, January23, 2013.[292]The Mining Act, 2010, arts. 73-86.[293]Ministry of Energy and Minerals, “Small-Scale Gold Statistics forHuman Rights Watch,” October 2012 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[294]The Mining Act, 2010, art. 18.[295]Jønsson and Ford, Handling Uncertainty[296]Ibid.; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Geita, October 12,2012; Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Chunya, December 13, 2012.[297]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Dar es Salaam, October 9,2012; Human Rights Watch interviews with gold traders, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 11 and 13, 2012; Jønsson and Ford, Handling Uncertainty.[298]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with expert on gold trade, January23, 2013.[299]Ministry of Energy and Minerals, “Small-scale gold statistics forHuman Rights Watch,” October 2012 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[300]Human Rights Watch interview with Alex Magayane, assistant commissionerfor minerals eastern zone, Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Dar es Salaam,October 9, 2012.[301]Human Rights Watch interviews with gold traders, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 11 and 13, 2012; Human Rights Watch interview with mining official,Mwanza, October 15, 2012; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with expert ongold trade, January 23, 2013.[302] See ‘ChildLabor Inspections in Small-Scale Mining: Few and Far Between’ Section[303] Human RightsWatch interview with Michael H., age 13, Matundasi Ward, Chunya district,December 10, 2012.[304] Human RightsWatch interview with Fumo D., age 15, Nyarugusu Ward, Geita district, October14, 2012.[305] Human RightsWatch interview with Joana S., age 15, Chokaa Ward, Chunya district, December12, 2012; Human Rights Watch interview with Lumumba J., age 15, Matundasi Ward,Chunya district, December 10, 2012.[306]Human Rights Watch interviews with gold traders, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 11 and 13, 2012.[307]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 13, 2012.[308]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 11, 2012.[309]Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader, Chunya town, Chunya district,December 13, 2012. A trader in Geita also stated that he bought gold fromlicensed and unlicensed mines. Human Rights Watch interview with gold trader,Geita town, Geita district, October 12, 2012, and a gold trader, NyarugusuWard, Geita district, October 19, 2012.[310]Alliance for Responsible Mining/ Fairtrade LabellingOrganizations International, “Fairtrade and Fairmined Standard for Goldfrom Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining, Including Associated PreciousMetals,” March 15, 2010, http://www.communitymining.org/attachments/034_Gold%20Standard%20Mar%202010%20EN.pdf(accessed March 28, 2013), sec. 4.4.[311]Human Rights Watch interview with project consultant, Dar es Salaam, October 9, 2012.[312]Tanzania has ratified the following international conventions: Conventionon the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25,annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), enteredinto force September 2, 1990, ratified by Tanzania on June 10, 1991;International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), adoptedDecember 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 49,U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 993 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force January 3, 1976,ratified by Tanzania on June 11, 1976; Optional Protocol to the Convention onthe Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and ChildPornography, adopted May 25, 2000, G.A. Res. 54/263, Annex II, 54 U.N. GAORSupp. (No. 49) at 6, U.N. Doc. A/54/49, vol. III (2000), entered into forceJanuary 18, 2002, ratified by Tanzania on April 24, 2003, ILO Convention No.182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of theWorst Forms of Child Labor (Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention), adoptedJune 17, 1999, 38 I.L.M. 1207, entered into force November 19, 2000, ratifiedby Tanzania on September 12, 2001; ILO Convention No. 138 concerning theMinimum Age for Admission and Employment (Minimum Age Convention), adopted June26, 1973, 1015 U.N.T.S. 297, entered into force June 19, 1976, ratified byTanzania on December 16, 1998. At the regional level Tanzania has followingcharters: African [Banjul] Charter on Human’s and Peoples’ Rights(Banjul Charter), adopted June 27, 1981, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21I.L.M. 58 (1982), entered into force October 21, 1986, ratified by Tanzania onFebruary 18, 1984; African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, OAUDoc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990), entered into force November 29, 1999, ratified byTanzania on March 16, 2003.[313]“About Child Labor,” ILO-IPEC, accessed February 28, 2013,http://www.ilo.org/ipec/facts/lang--en/index.htm. See also ILO, Child Labor– A textbook for university students, (Geneva: ILO, 2004), p. 16.[314]Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, art. 3.[315]ILO, R 190, Worst Forms of Child Labor Recommendation, 1999,http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/cgi-lex/convde.pl?R190 (accessed February 28, 2013),para. 3.[316]Law of the Child Act, art. 82; Employment and Labour Relations Act, art.5(3); The Mining (Environmental Protection for Small Scale Mining) Regulations, art.15.[317]Minimum Age Convention, art. 2(3).[318]Ibid., art. 2(4).[319]Ibid., art. 7. Light work is defined as work “which is not likelyto be harmful to their health and development; and not such as to prejudicetheir attendance at school, their participation in vocational orientation ortraining programs […] or their capacity to benefit from the instructionreceived.”[320]Employment and Labour Relations Act, art. 5(1).[321]CRC, art. 28(1)a; ICESCR, art. 13(2)a. The Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention, art. 7, also stipulates that States shall take measures to“ensure access to free basic education.”[322]CRC, art. 28; ICESCR, art. 13.[323]CRC, art. 32.[324]UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), General CommentNo. 3, art. 2, para. 1, The Nature of States Parties Obligations, UN Doc.E/1991/23, annex III at 86 (1990), para. 10.[325]CESCR, General Comment No.13, art. 13, The Right to Education, UN Doc.E/C.12/1999/10 (1999), para. 57.[326]CRC, art. 4.[327]African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, art. 11. TheProtocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on theRights of Women in Africa urges states to “promote the enrollment andretention of girls in schools and other training institutions” (art 12,2(c)), http://www.africa-union.org/root/au/Documents/Treaties/Text/Protocol%20on%20the%20Rights%20of%20Women.pdf(accessed February 28, 2012).[328]The National Education Act, No. 25 of 1978,http://polis.parliament.go.tz/PAMS/docs/25-1978.pdf (accessed April 16, 2013),art. 35. (1); Ministry of Education and Culture, “Education SectorDevelopment Programme, Primary Education Development Plan (2002-2006),”July 2011,http://www.ed-dpg.or.tz/pdf/PE/Primary%20Education%20Development%20Plan-PEDP%20I_2000-06.pdf(accessed April 16, 2013), p. 5 (which highlights that under the 2002 –2006 Primary Education Development Plan, the government eliminated primaryschool fees and contributions).[329]CRC, art. 19(1).[330]CRC, art. 34; African Charter on the Rights and Wellbeing of the Child,art. 16(1), art. 27.[331]Optional Protocol to the CRC on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution andChild Pornography, arts 1, 2(b). 3(1)(b); Worst Forms of Child LaborConvention, art. 3(b).[332]Law of the Child Act, art. 83.(1).[333]ICESCR, art. 12; Banjul Charter, art. 16; CRC, art. 24; African Charter on theRights and the Wellbeing of the Child, art. 14.[334]CRC, art. 32(1); Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, art. 3(d); AfricanCharter on the Rights and the Wellbeing of the Child, art. 15(1).[335]CESCR, General Comment No.3, The Nature of States Parties Obligations, U.N.Doc. E/1991/23 (1991), para. 9.[336]CESCR, General Comment No. 14, para. 43.[337]Ibid., para. 44.[338]ICESCR, art. 12.[339]Ibid., art. 7.[340]CESCR, General Comment No. 14, para. 15.[341]The Occupational Health and Safety Act, No. 4 of 2003,http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---ilo_aids/documents/legaldocument/wcms_151291.pdf(accessed March 19, 2013).[342]Human Rights Council, Report of the Independent Expert on the issue ofhuman rights obligations relating to the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthyand sustainable environment, John H. Knox, Preliminary Report, A/HCR/22/43,December 24, 2012,http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session22/A-HRC-22-43_en.pdf(accessed February 28, 2012), para. 23.[343]CESCR,General Comment No. 14, para. 15.[344]CRC, art. 24(1), 24(2)(c).[345]African [Banjul] Charter on Human’s and Peoples’ Rights(Banjul Charter), art 24.[346]TheProtocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on theRights of Women in Africa, arts. 18-19.[347]United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the SpecialRepresentative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights andtransnational corporations and other business enterprises, John Ruggie: GuidingPrinciples on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations“Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,” A/HRC/17/31, March21, 2011, http://www.ohchr.org/documents/issues/business/A.HRC.17.31.pdf (accessedFebruary 28, 2013), principle 12. There is, however, as yet no sharedunderstanding of the full scope of businesses’ human rightsresponsibilities, whether these are or should be binding under internationallaw, and if so, how they can best be enforced.[348]Ibid., principles 15-24.[349]Human Rights Watch, The Curse of Gold-Democratic Republic of Congo (New York:Human Rights Watch, 2005) http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/drc0505/drc0505.pdf.[350]The law also requires companies to disclose their payments to resource-richgovernments. “Act to Promote the Financial Stability of the UnitedStates”, http://www.sec.gov/about/laws/wallstreetreform-cpa.pdf(accessed May 9, 2013); Security and Exchange Commission, “17 CFR parts240 and 249b,” August 22, 2012,http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2012/34-67716.pdf (accessed March 25, 2013).[351]Letter dated 29 November 2011 from the chair of the Security CouncilCommittee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning theDemocratic Republic of Congo UN Report addressed to the president of theSecurity Council, 2011/738, December 2, 2011,http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/2011/738 (accessed March 28,2013); Enough, “From Child Miner to Jewelry Store. The Six Steps ofCongo’s Conflict Gold,” October 2012,http://www.enoughproject.org/files/Conflict-Gold.pdf (accessed March 28, 2013).[352]OECD, “OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains ofMinerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas. Supplement on Gold,”2012, http://www.oecd.org/daf/inv/mne/GoldSupplement.pdf(accessed April 18, 2013).[353]The World Gold Council, “Conflict Free Gold Standard”, 2012, http://www.gold.org/download/cfgs/Conflict_Free_Gold_Standard_English.pdf(accessed April 18, 2013), The London Bullion Market Association, “LBMAResponsible Gold Guidance,” 2013 http://www.lbma.org.uk/assets/RGG20130118.pdf(accessed April 18, 2013), The Dubai Multi Commodities Centre, “PracticalGuidance for market participants in the Gold and Precious MetalsIndustry,” 2012 http://www.dmcc.ae/jltauthority/gold/files/2013/01/DMCC-Practical-Guidance-for-Responsible-Supply-Chain.pdf(accessed April 18, 2013).[354]Responsible Jewellery Council, “Principles and Codes ofPractice,” 2009,http://www.responsiblejewellery.com/files/RJC_Prin_COP091.pdf (accessed April18, 2013). The code is currently being revised.[355]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No.16, StateObligations Regarding the impact of the Business Sector on Children’sRights, CRC/C/GC/16 (2013).Related ContentAugust 28, 2013News ReleaseTanzania: Hazardous Life of Child Gold MinersGovernment, World Bank, Donors Should Address Child Labor in MinesAugust 28, 2013News ReleaseTanzania: Hazardous Life of Child Gold MinersRegion / CountryAfrica Tanzania and ZanzibarProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch