My So-Called Emancipation: From Foster Care to Homelessness for California Youth | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload this reportMay 12, 2010My So-Called EmancipationFrom Foster Care to Homelessness for California YouthMy So-Called EmancipationFrom Foster Care to Homelessness for California YouthSummaryCalifornia’s FailureFindingsSupport Before and After Age 18 Is NeededKey Recommendations1.  Extend support for youth in foster care beyondage 18.2. Guarantee that youth have useful emancipation plans.3. Create real opportunities for youth to develop skillsfor independence.4. Help youth establish relationships that extend beyondemancipation.The California Foster Care SystemAn OverviewEmancipating from Foster CareSelected Federal and State Laws Governing EmancipationFindings: From Foster Care to HomelessnessNowhere to TurnCalifornia Failed to Prepare these Youth for AdulthoodFoster Youth Need Special AssistanceSupport Beyond Age 18 is NeededLeaving Homelessness BehindDetailed RecommendationsResearch MethodsAcknowledgementsSummaryOnthe day of my so-called emancipation, I didn’t have a high schooldiploma, a place to live, a job, nothing...The day I emancipated—it was ahappy day for me. But I didn’t know what was in store. Now that I’mon the streets, I honestly feel I would have been better off in an abusive homewith a father who beat me; at least he would have taught me how to get a joband pay the bills.—Roberta E., Los AngelesTheday I graduated from high school my foster mom told me, “You’vebeen emancipated. You can’t live here anymore.” My social workershowed up—I was still in my little graduation dress and heels, myflowers, my cap on. My social worker had never talked with me. [She just] toldme, “I’ve called around and found a shelter for you. You have a bedfor four months.”—Karen D., San FranciscoWhen children in foster care turn 18, they are, for the most part,on their own. “Emancipated,” they are legally adults and free fromthe foster care system. Most entered foster care because abuse or neglect at hometriggered the duty of the state to step in and protect them. The state becomesparent; in that role, it must provide specialmeasures of protection. The state must ensure that children in foster care haveadequate food, clothing, shelter, health care, and education. But no lessimportant is the responsibility to provide the guidance and support necessaryfor children to grow into independent adults. When the state fails in itsresponsibility to protect children wholly dependent on it by not providing fortheir developmental needs, there are grim consequences.  Whileexact estimates vary, research suggests that somewhere around 20 percent of the approximately20,000 youth leaving foster care nationally each year will become homeless. For  youth who leavefoster care with no job or income, few educational prospects, and littleemotional support or community connections, emancipation can mean nowhere toturn and no place to go.HumanRights Watch interviewed young people who were removed as childrenfrom their family homes for abuse, neglect, or abandonment and placed in thecustody and care of the state of California. After leaving foster care, theybecame homeless. The 63 young people interviewed had clear conclusionsabout the causes of their homelessness. No one pointed to a single event, nordid any interviewee wholly blame the child welfare system or another person.Instead, they pieced together a mosaic of events that spanned their teen yearsand early adulthood. They described missed opportunities to learn skills, thelack of the ability to support themselves, a shortage of second chances whenthings did not go right, and the fact that no one cared what happened to them.Click to expand ImageFrom Foster Care to HomelessnessForsome youth leaving foster care, homelessness comes the day they emancipate fromthe foster care system; others move from a foster home into a bad housingsituation only to find themselves without shelter shortly thereafter. They mayfeel lucky to crash on a friend’s couch, or they find themselves sleepingin a car, at an emergency shelter, or in the park. Some are without a steadyroof over their heads for days that turn into weeks or even years. Thoseleaving foster care with special needs often face a particularly roughroad:  mental health problems or cognitive limitations can bar entry to atransitional living program. So can being a parent. Youth who are lesbian, gay,bisexual, or transgender often have even fewer community resources and supportto avoid homelessness.Toomany foster children face poverty, early pregnancy, educational failure,criminal victimization, or incarceration in early adulthood. Homelessness, withits attendant dangers—including exposure to predatory crime, drugs,HIV/AIDS, and violence—is probably the worst outcome for a young person.Yet homelessness is a predictable future for many foster youth. Social workersknow it. Many policymakers know it. Research confirms it. California’sown Departmentof Social Services concluded that 65 percent of emancipating youth lack safeand affordable housing at the time of emancipation. Although conclusions as tothe rate vary, homelessness is a certainty for too many youth leaving fostercare.California’s FailureThe route from foster care to homelessness is not onlywell-known to the state, but is, in effect, built into the system. Socialworkers transport some youth directly from foster homes to emergency shelters,fully aware that these shelters will house them for limited periods beforeturning them out onto the streets. Others are sent to transitional livingsituations with no back-up plan in place if things do not work out. Childwelfare agencies release some youth from care when they have nowhere to live.Instead of providing extra protections for especially vulnerable youth,including mentally ill or impaired individuals and pregnant girls, stateregulations often exclude them from transitional programs.InCalifornia, 65,000 children and youth are in the foster care system, far morethan any other single state.  Each year, more than 4,000 emancipate. Between2003 and 2008, over 26,500 youth emancipated from California’s fostercare system. If an estimated 20 percent ended up homeless, 5,300 young peoplewent from state care to homelessness in that period of time.California is failing in an essential duty to children in its care: to preparethem for adulthood and to survive independently. There is no magic switch thatat age 18 delivers the skills, knowledge, and support necessary for survivaland success. Just as the state has a duty to provide appropriate shelter, food,and health care to children in care, it has a duty to address the crucialdevelopmental needs of childhood and adolescence. The consequences are severefor young people who enter adulthood without this guidance and support.FindingsNoRealistic Plan for EmancipationCaliforniastate law requires child welfare agencies to develop, in conjunction withfoster youth, a plan for what they will do when leaving foster care. Most ofthe youth Human Rights Watch spoke with had no plan when they left the system,or if one existed, they did not know about it.Insome cases, state officials fail to develop these plans at all, and in others,they create plans that are unrealistic and unlikely to prevent a youth frombecoming homeless.  For example, Natalie R. had three weeks left in fostercare when we interviewed her. She had not yet finished high school and testsduring the previous year placed her performance at an eighth-grade level. Whenasked if her social worker was putting together a plan with her for emancipation,she said, “Well, we’re talking about college.” There was no planfor where she would live or how she would support herself. Arlena C. toldus, “My social worker never sat down with me to talk about emancipation.The only plan was for me to emancipate. They didn’t talk about where Iwas going to stay after I left foster care or anything like that.”She was 20 years old at thetime of her interview, and had been homeless off and on since leaving care.No Plan for Housing or the Income to Afford ItThevast majority of the young people interviewed by Human Rights Watch had no wayto pay for housing at the time of emancipation: 57 of 63 young people we interviewed,or 90 percent, had no source of income when they left foster care and wereexpected to be on their own. They were also ill-prepared to find and hold ajob: 65 percent of those interviewed had not graduated from high school at thetime of emancipation. In addition, 62 percent had no medical coverage when theyleft the state’s care, despite a legal mandate that every former fosteryouth should have state medical coverage until age 21.Inthe last ten years there has been an increase of funding and an infusion of effortto improve transitional living programs in California. However, the number ofplaces is still far too small to assist all those who need them and the fundingis under constant threat. Most post-emancipation transitional living programs offerreduced rent and can provide a supportive environment in which to learn lifeskills. Services can include case management, assistance with education, job trainingand support, and mentoring.  California’s TransitionalHousing Program-Plus (THP-Plus) was established by state law in 2001. Thenumber of THP-Plus placements has dramatically increased: in 2003 there wereplaces for 50 youth, by 2007 there were 502, and in 2008, 1,234 places. Yet in2008, 4,653 youth emancipated from care.Click to expand ImageBasic Living SkillsTony D. told us: “If you’re going to put kids ingroup homes, in foster care—at least give them what they need to surviveand take care of themselves.” We interviewed him at a homeless shelterwhere he was staying. “[When I aged out of care] I was expected to knowhow to get a job, buy a car, all that stuff, but ... I didn’t have anyidea how to go about doing things. So, I ended up on the street.” Raul H. summed it up,“Kids need to be taught how to cook, how to shop. Simple, everyday lifeskills.” He was 21 years old when we spoke with him, and had beenhomeless but now was in an apartment.Foryouth in care, several things impede what otherwise would be normalopportunities for hands-on learning experiences. Foster parenting tends to begeared to the needs of younger children. Foster parents are not trained orexpected to teach adult life skills to teens. Michele Phannix, an experiencedfoster parent and a mentor to other foster parents, told us, “There needsto be more training on teenage issues for foster parents and how to guide theminto becoming functioning adults. Foster parents are not receiving that kind oftraining.” Dr. Marty Beyer, a psychologist specializing inadolescent development and an expert on child welfare, believes those chargedwith caring for foster children take on a crucial role. “[T]he role thatfoster parents play ought to include what most parents think should be done fortheir children before they go off on their own.” For many of the youngpeople interviewed, however, the state failed to ensure that foster parentsprovided teens in their care the kind of basic living skills that would bepassed on in any typical home.Nordo group homes teach what adolescents need to learn. Interviewees pointed outthat the regimented, institutionalized setting provides even feweropportunities to learn and practice adult skills than a foster family home.Anya F. was homeless for more than two years after leaving care. She spent agood part of her teenage years in group homes, and described her experience:Whilein a group home there were so many things I couldn’t do. I couldn’teven learn how to ride the bus on my own—but I had to go to a class thatsupposedly taught me how to do normal things. It’s a double standard thatdoesn’t make sense. It’s like they’re saying to us “Youmust be independent by age 18,” but then they don’t give us theroom to learn to be independent. Don’t over-shelter us and then tell usto be independent.While some youth in foster care participate incounty-sponsored independent living skills classes, experts question theeffectiveness of teaching life skills in a classroom. In any case, many of theyouth interviewed for this report attended few or none of the classes, or saidthat they were not useful. Roberta attended just one life skills class. Shedescribed it as a last-minute cram session: “It was one week beforeemancipation. They gave us pots and pans, silverware. Taught us how to write acheck. ... They gave us a certificate for taking the class and we had pizza andthat was it.” Others who found the classes useful tended to describehands-on teaching techniques.No One to Turn toOne of the statements weheard most from interviewees was that no one really cared what happened tothem, before or after emancipation. They expressed despair and fear abouthaving no one to turn to after they left foster care; this lack of social supportand guidance leaves young people particularly vulnerable to homelessness. Whilethe state is obligated to aid foster youth in establishing and maintainingconnections with relatives or other important figures, that did not happen forthese young people. 48of 63 youth interviewed told us they did not have an adult they could turn toin a crisis, for example, for a ride to the doctor if they were very sick. Ninesaid “maybe,” there might have been someone they could call, butwere unsure. Just six youth of the 63 young people interviewed told us they hadan adult on whom they could rely. “I feel like the people who weresupposed to help me weren’t there for me—and I think what’sgoing to happen to me?” one young woman said. “Am I going to liveon the streets for the rest of my life?”Support Before and After Age 18 Is NeededAn abrupt end tochildhood does not comport with what is now known about adolescent developmentor the norms in the US. In a healthy family, preparation for adulthood beginsearly in life and, in most US families, youth are not cut off from support atage 18. Instead, intact families continue to provide a wide spectrum ofemotional and financial support as youth move through early adulthood.As Ashley, a former foster youth, said, “[N]obody puts their real kid outat 18. It’s being realistic.” Incontrast, youth who age out of the foster care system must survive on their ownwithout the support available to other young adults. While some are able tomake a smooth transition to adulthood, many face serious challenges. Researchshows that that youth emancipating from foster care are more likely than youngpeople in the general population to have educational deficits and experience mentalhealth problems, economic instability, criminal victimization, and early child bearing.They need support throughout early adulthood even more than the generalpopulation of young adults.Theyoung people interviewed for this report were currently or recently homelessformer foster children. They hailed from all over California, from communitiesurban and rural, north and south. While there were many causes of theirhomelessness, their lives bear witness to the need for dramatic change in howfoster youth are treated. This report is not a comprehensive review of what California’s 58 counties are doing to protect and provide for children and youth incare, nor is it a survey of programs, systems, or laws. Instead, it is a lensnarrowly focused on one of the system’s most striking failings: thelikelihood that youth in foster care will become homeless because foster carehas not prepared them for adulthood.Key Recommendations1.  Extend supportfor youth in foster care beyond age 18.Transition to adulthood should be more gradual than itcurrently is for youth in foster care. Financial support, adult connection,shelter, and other safety nets should be provided in a graduated way into theearly 20s for youth who need it. Youth who choose to leave state care at age 18should have opportunities to return on the basis of need.2. Guarantee that youth haveuseful emancipation plans.Legally-mandated “transitional independent livingplans,” which child welfare agencies are required to develop for eachyouth’s emancipation, should incorporate concrete arrangements forhousing, income, connection to others, and medical coverage.3. Create real opportunities for youth to develop skillsfor independence.Everyday life skills should be taught in foster care at anearlier age and not just in a classroom setting. Youth should be provided opportunitiesthroughout adolescence to practice tasks and skills for adulthood.4. Help youth establish relationships that extendbeyond emancipation.To prepare youth in foster care for adulthood, the stateshould help them establish relationships with people who can offer guidance andsupport through early adulthood.For detailed recommendations, please see page 62.The California Foster Care SystemAn OverviewThe foster care system in the United States serves as asafety net for children whose parents cannot care for them.[1]These children find themselves in foster care through no fault of their own:the state removes them from their own homes because their parents or guardianshave abused, neglected, or abandoned them, or have died. According to the mostrecent count, the foster care population in the United States was approximately496,000 in 2007.[2]California’s foster care population of more than 65,000 children is fargreater than any other single state.[3]Both nationally and in California, half of children in care are over the age of10.[4]Children often come to the child welfare system’sattention through an emergency hotline. If the allegations are deemed serious, theyare investigated. A child can be removed from his or her home on an emergencybasis by a social worker or police officer and kept in protective custody forup to 48 hours, at which time a judge must review the case and the parents orguardian given an opportunity to be heard. The court makes the determination ofwhether to send the child home or keep him or her in protective custody basedon the best interest of the child. If the court ultimately decides that thechild should become a ward of the state, it must review the case every sixmonths. Initially at least, the goal is to reunify the family. Social workersdevelop a case plan and services are offered to parents. Parents may have toprove they have rectified the neglectful or abusive circumstances. For example,a parent may have to show improvement in parenting skills and proof of havingcompleted a parenting class, or that he or she is addressing a drug problemthrough treatment.[5]Nearlyhalf a million referrals for suspected abuse or neglect are made each year in California. In 2008, over 97,000 cases were substantiated after investigation and of those,32,753 children were placed into foster care.[6]The phrase “foster care,” as commonly used,includes an array of living situations. The majority of children in state carereside in foster families, group homes, and institutions.[7]A foster family typically is a family or an individual who is not related tothe child and is licensed to take foster children into their home. Nationally,46 percent of children in state care are in foster family placements, comparedwith 38 percent in California.[8]A grouphome is a facility with a number of children or youth living there. It might bein a single family residence, or it might be in a larger, more institutional-stylebuilding. Group homes are managed by paid staff and can provide more structureand supervision than a foster family or relative home. Nationally, 17 percentof children in state care live in group homes or other institutions, comparedwith just seven percent in California. However, the percentage of youth ages 11through 17 residing in group homes is double that, at close to 14 percent.[9]A significant number of children in state care—34percent in 2008—are placed in the home of a relative. In California this is called “kin care.” This is significantly higher than thenational average of 24 percent; however, it represents a decline in Californiafrom 1998 when 44 percent of foster youth were placed in the homes ofrelatives.[10]Foster care is intended to be temporary, to keep childrensafe and provide them with all necessities until a permanent living situationcan be found. In practice, however, while many children spend just a few daysin foster care, others remain for years, with some spending their entirechildhoods in the foster care system. For these children, the role of the stateis more that of a parent than a temporary guardian.[11]Emancipating from Foster CareChildren leave the foster care system for a variety ofreasons. Some are reunified with their parents; others are adopted or gain alegal guardian who takes custody. But more than half of the children in statecustody leave the system not because the problems that pushed them into statecare are resolved: they leave simply because they become too old. In moststates, the government assumes no responsibility for youth from age 18. Fosterparents are not obligated to house, feed, or guide their foster children beyondthis age, and group homes no longer provide a place to live. In the parlance ofchild welfare, youth who age out of the foster care system are“emancipated.”Nationally, approximately 20,000 youth emancipate from fostercare each year.[12]In California, 4,653 youth emancipated in 2008.[13]Under California law, the state may retain jurisdiction overchildren in foster care up to age 21 but is not required to do so.[14]California law prohibits an automatic emancipation based solely on age, butmost youth who reach age 18 in the system will find their cases terminated.[15]Statewide, 72 percent of those emancipating are 18 years old, with just 13percent older than 18 at the time of emancipation.[16] Althoughthe law in theory permits young people to remain in care for other reasons, theonly enunciated exception is for those who at age 18 have not graduated fromhigh school or passed the General Educational Development (GED) exam but whoare on track to complete an education or vocational program by their 19thbirthdays. These youth may be able to stay in their foster care placementsuntil they turn 19.[17]The sad irony of this exception is that those who have not been able tocomplete high school or other programs preparing them for economicself-sufficiency before turning 19 are likely even less prepared to go out ontheir own than those who are perceived to be able to complete a course of studyprior to age 19.  “Some people need more help than others,”Malachi told us.  But the way the system is set up, those people may getless support. “If you’re not doing good, like in school, or ifyou’re messing up a bit, they don’t want to help you. They want tokick you out.”[18]In fact, California appellate courts have held that thedecision to terminate a child welfare case and emancipate a youth is within thediscretion of the court and that the best interest of the youth must beconsidered in making that determination.  Nevertheless, federal fundingfor state foster care ends at age 18. As a result, the cost of extending fostercare may play a role in determining whether to retain jurisdiction over afoster youth past that age.  A state legislator observed, "Althoughthe juvenile court has the authority to retain jurisdiction over a dependentchild until the age of 21, the reality is that federal funding for foster youthends at the age of 18, and common practice is for the juvenile court toterminate jurisdiction at that time.”[19]Selected Federal and State Laws GoverningEmancipationIn 2008, Congress unanimously passed the FosteringConnections to Success and Increasing Adoptions Act of 2008 (FosteringConnections Act).[20]Some experts called this bill the “most significant foster care reform tocome around in a decade.”[21]The Act gives states the option to extend federal foster carebenefits up to age 21 for youth who are in school, working, in a job trainingprogram, or unable to attend school or work due to a medical condition. It alsoprovides reimbursement to states that amend their laws in accordance withprovisions of the Act. For states that choose to extend foster care,reimbursement will begin in fiscal year 2011. In late 2008 California AssemblyBill 12 was introduced. If passed, it would, among other things, make California’s foster care laws comply with the provisions of the Fostering ConnectionsAct. At the end of 2009, the bill was pending in the state legislature.[22]Both California state and federal laws include specificmeasures to promote preparation for adulthood for children and youth in statecare. The John H. Chafee Foster Care Independence Act (FCIA) was passed by Congressin 1999 in large part due to the growing recognition that foster children werefaring poorly as young adults.[23]FCIA doubled the funding designated to assist adolescents and young adults infoster care. Significantly, FCIA requires that states use a portion of thefunds for foster and former foster youth up to age 21.[24]California law mandates that child welfare agencies developtransition plans for youth called “Transitional Independent LivingPlan” (TILP) to help them prepare for adulthood.[25]The purpose of the transition plan is to identify areas in which a young personneeds to prepare for adulthood, and outline concrete steps and goals to learnthose skills. The plan is initiated by the county welfare agency, and should bedeveloped with the youth and other supportive adults and first implemented whena youth is 15 or 16 years old. It is meant to be regularly changed as goals aremet. Ultimately, it should outline concrete plans and set goals for afteremancipation.For a youth to be emancipated, a hearing is necessary:jurisdiction can only be terminated by court order. State statutes require thecounty child welfare department to take certain steps intended to ensure ayouth is prepared to be on his or her own before a court will sign an order ofemancipation. The county welfare department must ensure that the youth ispresent in court, unless he or she does not want to appear.[26] A law enacted in 2008 requires a judge to ask whether ayouth was given the opportunity to attend, and to postpone the hearing to alater date to allow the youth to attend.[27]For emancipation, the department must also certify that ithas provided certain things, including written information concerning thedependency case, family photos, the location of siblings, important documents, andinformation on how to access documents to which he or she is entitled.[28]The agency must also report to the court that it has assisted the youth inobtaining health insurance; made a referral to transitional housing, ifavailable, or provided assistance in securing other housing; aided in obtainingemployment or other financial support; helped the youth apply to college orother educational institutions. Also required is assistance in maintainingrelationships with relatives, friends, or other important individuals.Findings: From FosterCare to HomelessnessWhen children in foster care turn 18, they are, for the mostpart, on their own, no longer eligible for foster care. They are called“emancipated”—they are adults, and free from the foster caresystem—but this freedom often comes without the most basic necessitiesrequired to survive. With no job, no income, few educational prospects, and littleemotional support or community connections, for some youth emancipation meansnowhere to turn and no place to go. For these youth, emancipation is a directroute to the street.It is unclear just how many young people emancipate fromstate care into homelessness. A California-focused survey of approximately4,355 youth who emancipated from foster care in fiscal year 2000- 2001 foundthat 65 percent were “in need of safe and affordable housing,” adefinition of homelessness used under federal law.[29]Nationally, estimates vary widely, ranging from 13 to 25 percent offormer foster youth becoming homeless.[30]It is estimated that at any point in time there are over 157,277people in California who are homeless, and of those 110,312 are thought to bewithout shelter of any kind, that is, not even admission to a nightly emergencyshelter.[31]For youth who end up homeless, competition for shelter canbe fierce. In Los Angeles, the county with the highest number of emancipatingyouth, an estimated 96,169 people experience homelessness during the course ofa year. There are estimated to be around 42,694 homeless people on any givennight in the greater Los Angeles area and two-thirdsof that number are unsheltered.[32]The rest are on the street or sleeping under freeway overpasses, in vehicles,parks, storage sheds, and other places not meant for human habitation. In 2007,the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority estimated that close to 10,875people ages 18 to 24 were homeless on Los Angeles County’s streets eachyear.[33]Among the over 60 youth Human Rights Watch interviewed whobecame homeless after leaving California’s foster care system, thereasons for homelessness varied—some went straight from state care toliving in a shelter or a car. “My social worker was one of those,‘OK, you’re 18, that’s it, you’reout,’” Alicia M. said. She remembered getting no help from hersocial worker in planning for emancipation: “I had no clue what I wasgoing to do after I turned 18.”[34]Others drifted into homelessness after six months or a year in a temporaryliving situation or a place they could not afford. Some youth tried returningto their birth families, but found the same abuse, neglect, and chaos thatprecipitated their removal in the first place and then became homeless. Onetold of getting into college, but having no place to live during breaks andsummer.The route from foster care to homelessness is not onlywell-known to the state, but is, in effect, built into the system. Socialworkers transport some youth directly from foster homes to emergency shelters,fully aware that these shelters will house them for limited periods beforeturning them out onto the streets. Others are sent to transitional livingsituations with no back-up plan or safety net in place if things do not workout. Child welfare agencies release some youth from care when they have nowhereto live. Instead of providing extra protections for especially vulnerableyouth, including mentally ill or impaired individuals and pregnant girls, stateregulations often exclude them from transitional programs.“Now that I’m on the streets, I honestly feel Iwould have been better off in an abusive home with a father who beatme—at least he would have taught me how to get a job and pay thebills,” Roberta told us. Her conclusion is staggering when put in thecontext of her extremely violent childhood. “My very first memory ... is[of] my father hitting me,” Roberta told us. “He keptsticks—you know the molding that goes around doors? That’s what hewould hit us with.” She described her father’s regular beatings andthe emotional thrashings that were everyday life before foster care. Firstplaced in state care at age seven, she was in and out of the system until 18.Then her social worker told her to pack up and move out. The only help out thedoor was bus fare. “On the day of my so-called emancipation Ididn’t have a high school diploma, a place to live, a job,nothing.” Roberta told us she had slept on the streets, in shelters, on afriend’s couch, and, for a couple of weeks, in a motel room.[35]Nowhere to TurnTemporary ShelterHuman Rights Watch interviewed youth who immediately becamehomeless when they emancipated, going directly from state care to the streetsor a temporary shelter. Some youth described state officials driving them froma foster or group home to an emergency shelter upon their emancipation. Karen’sexperience began on what is supposed to be a carefree day marking a rite ofpassage:The day I graduated from high school my foster mom told me,“You’ve been emancipated. You can’t live here anymore.”My social worker showed up—I was still in my little graduation dress andheels, my flowers, my cap on. My social worker had never talked with me. [Shejust] told me, “I’ve called around and found a shelter for you. Youhave a bed for four months.”[36]We interviewed 18-year-old Lestat at an emergency shelter.His experience was similar to Karen’s: “The same day that Igraduated from high school, my group home social worker told me,‘I’m taking you to a shelter.’ After I got home fromgraduation, I had to pack my stuff and I was packing my graduation cap and mytassel and I thought to myself, ‘God, is this really happening tome?’ And then my group home social worker drove me here to thisshelter.”[37]When Michael Y. turned 18, a probation officer drove him toan adult homeless shelter and dropped him off. We interviewed him at a shelter.As he described his life, he would not make eye contact and spoke so quietlythat, even though he sat inches away, it was hard to hear his words. He had nomoney, he told us. “She gave me five bucks out of her own purse,”he recalled of the person who left him at the shelter.[38]Tiffany T. was taken from her foster home directly to ashelter when she graduated from high school. The shelter only allows people tostay for two months though; when we interviewed her she had been evicted fromthat shelter and was now at an emergency shelter and was number 25 on a waitlist for a transitional living program. She thought it would be more than sixmonths before she could get into the transitional program.[39]The varied ages of those interviewed, including young peoplewho had emancipated only months prior to meeting with Human Rights Watch, andtheir experiences across California suggest that the practice of stateofficials transporting youth to shelters on their emancipation day islongstanding and not limited to specific geographic areas. James M., thedirector of a youth homeless shelter, told us he regularly has emancipatedyouth dropped off at his shelter, even though the shelter is intended for childrenunder age 18.[40]The social workers who drop off emancipated foster youth there probably do sobecause there is no other place to take them in that area, he said. “Theyleave them down the street, a block away, literally leave them by the gate andpoint them in the direction of our shelter,” he explained. [41]At the time of Human Rights Watch’s visit to this shelter, there were atleast five former foster youth staying there.As Tiffany’s experience illustrates, shelters do notkeep young people off the street for long, as there are often limits on howlong someone can stay. Dee H., a former foster youth, was at an emergencyshelter at the time of our interview. Eighteen years old and pregnant, she wassad and subdued during her interview. She told us, “I’ll be kickedout of here tomorrow. A lot of places won’t take me because I’mpregnant. I found [this shelter] in the phone book.”[42]She said she had no idea where she would go after her time at the shelter ranout.Abandoned Buildings, Cars, Couch-Surfing, Parks,and the Streets[43]Some young people interviewed were kicked out of theirfoster or group home without being taken to a shelter. “I was told onWednesday that I had until Saturday to move out of the[group]home where I was staying,” Warren H. explained. “It caught me bysurprise. I tried to tell [the guy running the group home] that I had no placeto go, but he told me I couldn’t stay there.” Warren offered to payrent. “I asked, ‘Couldn’t I stay in the garage?’ Theguy told me, ‘No, you can’t stay here. You don’t make enoughmoney to pay rent—it wouldn’t be worth it to me.’”[44]For the next two years he slept where he could, in his car, shelters, or theoccasional friend’s couch. Aaron T. also said he slept in his car afterturning 18 in a group home. “Sometimes you think it’s better to bein jail or dead. But I tried to think positive about it. My Pontiac wascomfortable.”[45]Staying in a homeless shelter can be more dangerous thanfinding a place to sleep on the streets, some interviewees told us. This isparticularly true for shelters designed for adults. “I feel safer on thestreets than in shelters. Shelters are violent, they’re dirty. Thesecurity is violent; there are a lot of drug addicts,” Roberta told us.“On the streets you can find quieter, safer places.”[46]Click to expand ImageA young man near a homeless shelter. Some youth leave fostercare on their 18th birthday and are driven to a homeless shelter bya social worker. © 2007 Patricia WilliamsYoung people told us of setting up tents in the woods andputting sleeping bags under freeway overpasses. Enrique A. took a Human RightsWatch researcher to his favorite tent site along a wooded riverbank. Stoppingat a flat area a few feet from the river’s edge he said, “Right here was my campfire pit.”[47]He described raking the dirt and leaves at his campsite to make sure there wereno needles left there from heroin users; he worried about stepping on them orhaving them poke through the floor of his tent. He remembered one particularlydangerous evening: “I never knew how many people were in these woodsuntil one night there was a fire and everyone came running out.”[48]Matt H. remembers what it was like with nowhere to go onecold and raining night. “Night comes. It’s cold. I’m hungry.Where am I going to go?”[49]He was arrested for breaking into and sleeping in an empty house.Others described staying at friends’ homes, movingfrom couch to couch.  Dion W. stayed at a number of friends’ houses,and tried to hide the fact that he had nowhere to live. “The whole time Iwas homeless I didn’t tell people what was going on. I couldn’tbelieve myself that this was happening.”[50]Returning to Birth FamiliesA common but often unsustainable option is returning to thebirth family. Tayla G. said she felt her only option was to return to her birthmother: “I was in foster care because my mother was abusive, due toaddiction ... [and] drinking. When I got out of foster care, my only place togo was back to my mom.” The return was equally as rough: “I onlystayed a couple months there. I wasn’t sure when I’d wake up andfind her yelling at me to get out ... It was too hard ... her drinking, hittingon me, talking down to me, calling me names.”[51]Marvin M. also tried returning to the birth family he hadbeen removed from when placed in foster care. At 18 when he was told he had toleave his group home, Marvin moved in with his biological mother. Herlong-standing drug addiction had been the cause of his placement in foster carein the first place.  But at the time he emancipated, she was not usingdrugs, so he tried moving back in with her. “It was hard trustingher,” he said, explaining that she still “didn’t have herselftogether.” Living with her did not last long; she returned to druguse.  Later, Marvin found himself homeless.[52]When Sandy S. left foster care, she had nowhere to go. Sheturned to the only adult she knew: a family member who had sexually abused her.“At that time I didn’t want to be anything, I just wanted to die. Ididn’t care what happened to me.” She lived with him for over twoyears as the abuse escalated, enduring rape, beatings, and emotional torment.When she gathered the courage to leave at age 20, she slept in her car for severalmonths. She later moved in with a boyfriend she did not want to live with, shesaid, only to have a place to stay.[53]Whitney Rhodes is a former foster youth, who, when weinterviewed her, was an emancipation specialist with AmeriCorps, working with highschool students in foster care. Rhodes told Human Rights Watch, “I see alot of young people who have no place to go when they get out. The family youget taken away from is still there—that’s why you go back to themno matter how dysfunctional they are.”[54]Unsafe and Undesirable Alternatives to Living onthe StreetThe pressure of not having a place to live can push youthinto choosing prostitution or abusive relationships in order to get off thestreet. “When I had no place to go at night, I would go home withsomeone,” Jaime N. said of his choosing prostitution over sleeping in apark or building doorway.[55]Jose C., in a transitional living program when we spoke with him, described asimilar situation: “A lot of times I’d go home with somebody so Ididn’t have to be on the streets.”[56]Severalof the interviewees lamented the fact that they entered into romanticrelationships in order to have a place to live. “I got into arelationship just so I could stay [at the person’s home],” said Roberta,reflecting on how her desperation left her feeling trapped in an abusiverelationship.[57]“I see females saying, ‘I’m going to live with my boyfriendbecause I don’t have no place to go.’  I know for a fact someof these are abusive relationships, but they have no other place to go,”observed Dee Melendez, a liaison to former foster youth and financial aidspecialist at a community college.[58]Heather Carmichael is the associate executive director of MyFriend’s Place, a drop-in center for homeless youth in Hollywood. Many ofthe youth My Friend’s Place serves are former foster children. She notesthat young people who are homeless are extremely vulnerable to victimization:We all just want to be loved, and these young people arestarving for that. To get that love they are willing to compromise littlepieces of themselves—and it can end up being big pieces. So many havehistories where they’ve been taught that their bodies are not their own;they have histories of sexual abuse. Some youth learn to use their bodies forsurvival and provide sex for the things they need—it could be food, aplace to stay, a job.[59]A foster parent for many years said that in her experience,youth with cognitive limitations or learning disabilities are especiallyvulnerable in this regard: “They go along with someone who might be badfor them, but they go along because they’ll be loved.”[60]CollegeGoing off to college does not necessarily address housingissues. When Melendez, the Financial Aid Specialist for Victor Valley College,was first appointed by the college chancellor to be a liaison for former fosteryouth, she started tracking the population. “I noticed that their gradesare pretty bad,” she said. But when Melendez looked deeper into the issueshe found, “It’s not that they’re not smart enough, ordon’t apply themselves ... it’s that some of them don’t havea place to live. They’re worried about where [they are] going to sleeptonight.” Some have to quit school. Students tell Melendez,“I’ve just started this semester, but I have to stop. I don’thave a place to live.”[61]Eighteen-year-old Derek P. was attending college whileliving in his truck when we spoke with him. He said he was booted from hisgroup home when he turned 18. “I’m living inside my car,” hetold us, his red Chevy Blazer sitting in the parking lot next to where we met.“It’s a four-door, and I can drop the back seat, so that’s mybed. I got blankets, whatnot.” When he wakes in the morning, he said, heparks his car in a safe place and, because he cannot afford the cost of gas, hetakes the bus to the community college. There he is studying auto repair,French, and music interpretation. “I go buy Top Ramen [instant noodles] ...they got microwaves at the college so ... you know. But it’s alright.It’s alright.”[62]“A lot of students are brushing their teeth and washing their hairin the bathroom (at community college),” said Melendez.[63]Even youth who leave foster care for college and live in adorm may end up scrambling for a place to live when the dorms close for summerand breaks. Melissa B. headed to college after leaving foster care but foundthat each round of breaks brought another housing challenge. “Our[college] had a long winter break—six weeks—and I had nowhere togo,” she said.[64]Gerry Hauser, a foster parent for 35 years, recalled the experience of  oneof her foster sons who went to college after foster care. “At summertime, he came back to us, but we couldn’t help him because we had otherchildren living with us.” She explained that state licensing regulationsprohibited another person in the house. “He slept in his car in thedriveway or in the loft in our garage. It was hard for him.”[65]California Failed to Prepare these Youth forAdulthoodWhen the state removes a child from home for parental neglector abuse, the child becomes wholly dependent on the state for food, shelter,and access to education. But no less important is the guidance and support thata child requires to grow into an independent adult. Young people need to learnskills for adulthood and they need solid plans for income, housing, and supportbefore they are on their own. Existing state law recognizes these tasks asessential, yet for the youth interviewed for this report, the state has failed.Inrelating the stories of their lives in foster care and tracing the reasons fortheir homelessness, young people pointed to missed opportunities to learnskills, the lack of the ability to support themselves, a shortage of secondchances when things did not go right, and to the lack of anyone in their liveswho really cared about what happened to them.No Realistic Plan for EmancipationState law requires child welfare agencies to develop inconjunction with a youth a Transitional Independent Living Plan (TILP).[66]In some cases, state officials fail to develop these plans at all, and inothers they develop plans that are unrealistic and unlikely to prevent a youthfrom becoming homeless.Click to expand ImageA young man on the streets of Los Angeles. California isfailing in an essential duty to children in its care: to prepare them foradulthood and to survive independently. © 2007 Patricia WilliamsMost of the youth Human Rights Watch spoke with had no planin place when they left the system, or if they did, they did not know about it.For example, Arlena C. told us, “My social worker never sat down with meto talk about emancipation. The only plan was for me to emancipate. Theydidn’t talk about where I was going to stay after I left foster care oranything like that.”[67]Phillip O., who also said he did not have a plan when he left foster care, toldus, “I didn’t really see my social workers much—really,I’d be lucky to see a social worker once a year.”[68]Sandy S. got no support in planning for leaving foster care and being on herown. “The social worker said, ‘Figure out what you are going to dowith your life.’ No help, just a statement. When I turned 18, I hadnowhere to go.”[69]Dion also left state carewithout a plan in place. He got in to transitional housing amonth later, but in the interim was homeless.[70]Title IV-B Child and Family Services Plan for fiscal years2005-2009 describes the Transitional Independent Living Plan. It states thatthe plan should focus on “educational and experiential learning neededfor youth to function as healthy, productive and responsible self-sufficientadults.”[71]Recognizing that the TILP process was failing to involve youth, the StateHealth and Human Services Agency, Department of Social Services issued a newform and new instructions for use starting in October 2008. “The purposeof the TILP is to describe the youth’s current level of functioning,identify emancipation goals, services, activities and individuals assisting theyouth in the process of obtaining self-sufficiency,” the letter to allcounties specifies.[72]The new form has space for four goals. In one set of training materialsexamples of goals include learning to do laundry, improving an algebra grade,seeking information from a school counselor on how to work in aveterinarian’s office, and beginning dating by asking another youth to goto a movie.[73]In cases in which youth did have a plan put in place priorto leaving care, they reported that the plans were not realistic or appropriatefor their needs. At the time Natalie R. was interviewed, she had three weeksuntil she would be emancipated from the system. She had not yet finished highschool and the previous year had tested at an eighth-grade level. When asked ifher social worker was putting together a plan with her for when she left, sheanswered, “Well, we’re talking about college.”[74]Atleast in some cases, even judicial review at a youth’s final dependencyhearing does not keep young people from moving on without a plan in place. TinaHughes said she was astonished at her foster daughter’s hearing. Theattorney representing her daughter had never even met the young woman. Hugheswondered if he had reviewed the file. “We went to court. There was anattorney there, he didn’t talk to [my foster daughter,] he didn’teven have her right name. He’d gotten the case Thursday afternoon andFriday morning was court.”[75]Another young woman, Tayana I., recalled her own hearing: “I didn’tspeak to the judge; I didn’t even go into [the courtroom].” Shespeculated on what the judge said about her case: “Basically I think thecourt said, ‘Just let her go.’”[76]Malachi had been allowed by court to stay with his foster mother after age 18because he was working towards a high school diploma.  When he got a job,he needed help figuring out how to get to his workplace from his foster home.His social worker did not help, and Malachi decided to leave and go live with afriend. There was no hearing, or, to Malachi’s knowledge, any judicialreview of his emancipation. A few months later he was out of work and had noplace to live.[77]At 18, Marvin had to leave a group home in Fresno, a differentcounty than his home county. That meant moving back across that state before hegraduated from high school. Back in San Diego, he remembers the judge’sassessment at his emancipation hearing: “You’re doing good, eventhough you didn’t get to graduate.” But in fact, in addition to nodiploma, he had no source of income. He told us that the judge did not ask howhe would support himself. He lived with his unstable biological mother for a while,but later found himself homeless.[78]No Income to Afford HousingIn California, the lack of affordable housing is a problemof crisis proportions in many locations. Housing costs are one reason thathomelessness is an epidemic in California.Compared to their peers, former foster youth have a toughtime meeting basic housing-related expenses. According to a 2007 large scale,longitudinal study of young adults emancipated from foster care, 21-year-oldformer foster youth were more than three times as likely to have been unable topay the rent in the last year as their peers who had not been in foster care.They were also more likely to have had utilities shut off, phone servicedisconnected, and to have faced eviction.[79]The vast majority of those we interviewed who becamehomeless had no source of income at the time of emancipation. Ninety percent of theinterviewees had no source of income at the time of emancipation, andthus, no way to pay for housing.[80]The social workers who managed these cases, the judges whosigned the emancipation orders, the attorneys and others involved should haveknown that without income, homelessness was the likely outcome.Most were poorly equipped to find a job, as well:  65 percent of those interviewedhad not graduated from high school at the time they left foster care. Inaddition, only 62 percent of the interviewees were enrolled in Medi-Cal, thestate health care plan that by law provides medical coverage to all formerfoster children up to age 21.[81]Tony D.’s situation was typical: “I was expected to know how to geta job, buy a car, all that stuff, but ... I didn’t have any idea how togo about doing things. So, I ended up on the street.”[82]Transitional HousingCalifornia’s Transitional Housing Program-Plus (THP-Plus)was established by state law in 2001.[83]It is the state’s primary program for housing former foster children whohave emancipated from the system, providing housing and services for up to 24months for young adults ages 18 to 24.[84] Itsservices directly affect the lives of former foster youth who are homeless: areport published in 2009 found that 39 percent of participants in the THP-Plusprogram had been homeless at some point before entering the program.[85]In recent years there has been a tremendous infusion offunding and effort to improve transitional living programs in California. In 2006,California increased the amount of funding for THP-Plus, and made it easier forcounties to provide the program for former foster youth. The annual budget for THP-Plusin the 2008-09 fiscal year was $40.8 million, although in the fall of 2009,those funds were reduced in response to the state’s budget crisis.At their best, post-emancipation transitional livingprograms can not only subsidize the rental cost of housing, but also provide asupportive environment in which to learn life skills. Services can include casemanagement, assistance in pursuing post-second­ary education, job readinesstraining and support, mentoring, and support for building permanent relationshipswith caring adults.[86]Unfortunately, some existing programs only prolong state custody withoutassisting youth in preparing for their independence.The THP-Plus Statewide Implementation Project was created in2006 as a partnership between state agencies and private organizations.[87]The project provides technical assistance and training to service providers,and has also has begun analyzing the effectiveness of programs, using, amongother things, input from young adult participants. If it accomplishes itsgoals, the amount of transitional housing for former foster youth will increaseand the quality of supportive services will improve.The number of placements has dramatically increased sincethe program’s inception: in 2003 THP-Plus had a moment-in-time capacityof 50 youth, by 2007 the figure was over 500, and during 2009 it rose to 1,300.[88]According to the most recent THP-Plus annual report, 1,548 former foster andprobation youth in 39 counties received affordable housing and services throughTHP-Plus in the 2007-2008 fiscal year.[89]These efforts are perhaps the most promising steps the statehas taken toward supporting emancipated youth. Nevertheless, the placementsavailable to youth fall short of the need. In 2008 alone, over 4,600 youth emancipated.Each year another group of youth emancipate and join the ranks of young adultscompeting for housing and services: The group of 18 to 24 year olds who wouldbe eligible for THP-Plus on the basis of age in 2008 would be those who hademancipated in the years 2003 through 2008, a total of over 26,500 youngpeople.[90]While all youth may not need or want to participate in the THP-Plus, the highrate of homelessness among former foster youth compared to the 1,548 personsserved in 2008 suggests that there are not enough placements for youth leavingcare.[91]The availability of placements varies dramatically fromcounty to county. For example, the THP-Plus Statewide Implementation Projectestimates that Alameda County has the potential to meet between 64 and over 100percent of the need for THP-Plus placements. Los Angeles, however, is thoughtto only meet between four and seven percent of the county’s need.[92]Dee Melendez, Financial Aid Specialist for Victor Valley College, said shetries to get former foster youth into transitional living programs, but toooften “the answer is, ‘sorry, we’re full, we don’t havethe resources, or he’s not in our county.’ I hear that alot.”[93]It is not simply numbers; geography is also challenging. SanBernardino County, for example, is some 215 miles wide and 150 miles from northto south. It is the largest county in the US, with a geographic area greaterthan the nine smallest US states combined. In late 2008, 19-year-old Tanya C., aSan Bernardino resident, told Human Rights Watch she would like to be in theTHP-Plus. However, the only program in her county was far from where Tanya lived.Moving across this county is akin to moving out of state, and sheunderstandably feared it would jeopardize the fragile community of friends andsupporters she had built in recent years. It would also mean that to continuewith her community college classes she would have to drive 45 minutes to twohours each way, depending on traffic. Between work and classes, that type ofcommute would be daunting, and she doubted her old car would survive so muchwear and tear.[94]Finally, as the THP-Plus StatewideImplementation Project recognizes, to be effective, transitional livingprograms need to provide more than just shelter. Most young adults need ongoingsupport as they navigate through the ups and downs of early adulthood. It is atime to learn important life skills, something that is especially true forformer foster youth. “Between 18 and 23 years old is a five-year windowof opportunity to help these kids develop the skills needed to beindependent,” says Polly Williams, president of United Friends of theChildren, a program serving over 2,000 current and former foster youth. Itsprograms include several transitional living programs with concentratedsupportive services for the residents.[95]If transitional programs do not provide those importantservices and opportunities, they offer little more than a sort of holdingpattern for the young people in the program. For many, it will mean scantprogress toward self-sufficiency. Tony was in foster care from age three until thetime he aged out at 18 years old. He was taken to what he describes as ahalfway house with little supervision or guidance. “No one cared where Iwent or what I did,” he told us. Tony was there nine months, and when theprogram ended, he had no new adult skills or connections with people who couldhelp him. He was essentially in the same place he had been nine months earlier,only now he was on the streets, homeless.[96] Those interviewed who foundthemselves homeless after a transitional living program expressed gratitude forfood vouchers and a roof over their head, but felt that much more guidance wasneeded for the programs to be meaningful. James, a homeless shelter director,said, “We sometimes see these programs as a set up for failure.They’re dumped into an apartment without support. Then when thingsdon’t work out, it’s their failure and by that time they are noteligible for additional programs and they’re back with us [at thehomeless emergency shelter.]”[97]Basic Living Skills LackingBeing an adult involves a combination of mature cognitiveability and concrete living skills. Both need practice. Psychologist MartyBeyer specializes in adolescent development and is a national expert on childwelfare and juvenile justice. She explained that while adult-like thinkingcomes with brain maturation, it also improves with practice:Teenagers are limited in their ability to anticipateconsequences of their actions, they are limited in their ability to plan andmake choices—these are skills to be learned, these are adult thoughtprocesses. We can’t really speed up their ability to plan ahead,anticipate the consequences of their actions or make choices, but we can walkthem through the process and help them learn and thereby expose them to theadult thought process, the process of, say, being a good budgeter, a good cook.[98]Tony put it another way: “If you’re going to putkids in group homes, in foster care, at least give them what they need tosurvive and take care of themselves.”[99]Click to expand ImageA young person outside of a homeless youth shelter. Youthinterviewed for this report left the state’s care without the support orskills needed for adulthood. © 2007 Patricia WilliamsNearly every youth interviewed for this report felt that heor she left foster care without knowledge of basic skills for everyday living.Raul H. explained, “Kids need to be taught how to cook, how to shop.Simple, everyday life skills.”[100] When asked aboutthe causes of their homelessness, interviewees tended to spontaneously listskills they wish they had been taught, specifically mentioning how to preparebasic food, apply for a job, shop, budget, understand credit, and know politebehavior for even simple things, such as how to courteously answer the phone.“I need to know how to budget, where to look for work, how to apply forschool financial aid,” one young woman listed. “[How to] washclothes, cook, clean, know what chemicals you can mix and what you can’twhen you’re cleaning—like ammonia and bleach—I learned thatthe hard way when I was cleaning a bathroom.”[101]Aconnection between passing on simple skills and being cared for was linked byseveral interviewees, including Nikki B. who told us: “I wish I couldhave had ... someone to care about me ... like show me how to separate thewhites from the darks [for laundry.] I would have hated it at the time, but Iwish I’d had that. They never even asked me, ‘Is something wrong?Talk to me.’”[102]Sandy’s foster mother made clear that she was a foster parent for themoney, not the experience, Sandy told us. “I’m not into getting toknow you...” her foster mother informed her from the start.“I’m getting a check. Do what you want, but don’t screw up mycheck.” This certainly had emotional effects: “As I got deeper intothe foster care system, I realized I had no love, no family connection in mylife.”But there were other effects, too, when her foster motherrefused to take the time to teach Sandy the same life skills she was teachingher own daughter. Sandy remembered with sadness scenes from her foster home.“I watched my foster mom teaching her daughter how to cook, but she neverbothered with me. They looked like they were having fun ... I don’t knowhow to cook. [Now] I mostly eat out of a can.”[103]For youth in care, several things impede what otherwisewould be normal opportunities for hands-on learning experiences. First, fosterhomes and parenting tend to be geared to the needs of younger children. MichelePhannix, a foster parent with 18 years of experience, a mentor, andparent-partner, told us that specific standards should be set for parents whoare fostering teens. “These are rules that make sense for younger kids.We’re trying to keep them safe,” she explained, but the rules donot reflect older youth’s abilities and needs.[104]For example, regulations about locking up cleaning supplies and leaving afoster youth alone at home should be modified. Phannix also stated, “Thereneeds to be more training on teenage issues for foster parents and how to guidethem into becoming functioning adults. Foster parents are not receiving thatkind of training.”[105]The adults charged with caring for youth in state custody have an importantrole to play in passing on basic skills. Their duties should include thingsthat, says Dr. Beyer, “most parents think should be done for theirchildren before they go off on their own. It’s similar to what we requirefoster parents to do in ... parenting [young children]—feeding, adequateclothing, haircuts—it is just that there are different tasks foradolescents.”[106]Dion, who entered foster care at five years old, believes the system must alsomore carefully choose and monitor foster parents. In one of his placements, thefoster parent never reported him missing even though he had run away and wasgone for two weeks, and he certainly was not being taught adult-living skillswhile there. In a rather understated conclusion about his experience, he said,“[t]he foster care system doesn’t pick people who arequalified.”[107]For many of the young people interviewed, the state failedto ensure that foster parents provided teens in their care the kind of basicliving skills that would be passed on in any typical home. Dr. Beyer noted,“In most homes, parents know it is their responsibility to provide someamount of training in preparation for adulthood—cooking, cleaning, and insome homes, driving a car—these are normal expectations in parentalactivities. Do foster parents think that because there are ILSP classes, theyare off the hook from having to teach basic skills to teenagers? That’s acrazy idea. All of these skills require daily input.”[108]Second, state-run group homes, where a majority of the youthinterviewed had spent time, fail to provide the types of learning thatadolescents need.[109]Interviewees pointed out that the regimented, institutionalized setting giveseven fewer opportunities to learn and practice adult skills than a fosterfamily home. Tony was in foster care from age three until 18, and lived inseveral group homes during his adolescence: “People in group homes arepaid to watch us. You can’t do anything. It felt like being in daycare.You have to ask to do things. They treat you like a baby.”[110]Anya spent a good part of her teenage years in group homes. She was extremelyfrustrated by her experience:While in a group home there were so many things Icouldn’t do. I couldn’t even learn how to ride the bus on myown—but I had to go to a class that supposedly taught me how to do normalthings. It’s a double standard that doesn’t make sense. It’slike they’re saying to us, “You must be independent by age 18,”but then they don’t give us the room to learn to be independent.Don’t over-shelter us and then tell us to be independent.[111]The state attempts to instillproficiency in adult tasks through county-based “Independent LivingSkills” classes, intended to teach subjects such as budgeting,cooking, and applying for jobs. The length, availability, and type of classesvary greatly from county to county.Some of those interviewed said they never attended theclasses nor knew they existed. Others knew of the classes but said they wereunable attend because they lacked transportation or because the classes werefull.[112]The experiences of the others we spoke to who did attend varied widely. Forexample, Darlene H., who attended 18 classes, told us, “they had taughtme some of these things before I left foster care. I knew some stuff before Ileft enough so that I didn’t panic. I would have panickedotherwise.”[113]Another, Roberta, attended just one life skills class, which she described as alast-minute cram session of limited utility: “it was one week beforeemancipation. They gave us pots and pans, silverware. Taught us how to write acheck ... They gave us a certificate for taking the class and we had pizza andthat was it.”[114]Describing a positive experience in a non-classroom setting, anotherinterviewee, Melissa, said she got a lot out of a highly experiential programcalled “Independent City.” “You spend the day at a placewhere they have the phone company, utilities, a bank, a property managementcompany, and you get assigned a roommate, a job, a house and then fill outrental applications, deal with your paycheck coming on a certain date and billsdue ... I learned a lot there.”[115]Malachi echoed the importance of experiential learning. Looking back, he thinksthe classes he took were not very useful. “They say ‘You should dothis. You should do that.’ ... but it’s like they don’t havethe youth involved. It means you’re not really learning how to dosomething.”[116]No One to Turn toOneof the most consistent statements from youth interviewed was that they felt noone really cared what happened to them, before or after emancipation. Intervieweesexpressed despair and fear about having no one to turn to after they wereejected from foster care. Forty-eight of the 63 youthwe interviewed told us they did not have an adult they could turn to in acrisis, for example, for a ride to the doctor when they were very sick.[117]Nine said “maybe;” leaving just six of those interviewed answering“yes.” A young man who asked to be called “Reclusive”told us, “For the longest time I’ve had no one I can goto—it’s just easier to be on the streets.”[118]“I feel like the people who were supposed to help me weren’t therefor me—and I think what’s going to happen to me?” one youngwoman said. “Am I going to live on the streets for the rest of mylife?”[119]There is a growing recognition that becoming a healthy adultrequires connection to and dependence on others. State law requires the countywelfare agency to assist foster children and youth in maintaining relationshipswith individuals who are important to the youth. Efforts to locate familymembers before emancipation are occurring in some counties. For example, recognizingthat where parents are found to be unfit to care for a child, there may beother family members who would be willing to be involved in a child or youngperson’s life, the California Permanency for Youth Project seeks outextended family members. As of April 2008, the program was being used in 20California counties or regions.[120]Using the internet and other methods employed to connect separated familiesfollowing World War II, social workers search for family members who are notpresent in a child’s life. The program focuses on foster youth ages 11and older. “[T]ypically we find between 30 and 80 family members,”explained Bob Malmberg of Orange County’s Social Services Agency.“We engage extended family members from across the country—we givethe youth phone cards so they can call new-found family.” The agencyarranges visits, sets up dinner meetings, and even provides plane tickets foryoung people to meet extended family. The family may have had no idea where thechild was, and the child may not have known he had family. “We are seeingamazing results,” Malmberg concluded, citing several cases in whichchildren’s behavioral problems changed dramatically after being connectedwith family. One example was of a boy who had been told he had no family butapparently did not believe it:[He] ran [away] from a group home to his former group home;it’d been closed down. He broke into the building and when he was caughthe was in the office rifling through the file with his records, looking for thenames of family members. We put him in [our family-finding] pilot project, andwe found 25 extended family members. This boy was having a lot of behavioralproblems, with ... 40 incidents a month that involved things like suicideattempts, assaults on staff, or running away. When we did the family-findingprocess with him, the incidents went down to one a month. We brought in familyfrom out of state and they met with him and told him, “We heard about you[when you were a baby but then] we were told that you’d been adopted andwe couldn’t contact you. But we never forgot you.” Then we foundthat his great-grandparents live in the adjoining county, in Hemet. [We set atime to meet them but] were a little late getting to the house and when wearrived, he was confronted with these octogenarians waiting for him on thedriveway. When he went inside they showed him a wall that had birthday cardsthey had written to him over the years but not sent because they didn’t knowwhere he was. They’d been holding the cards for him and there they were,on the wall collecting dust, waiting for him to show up.[121]There is a particular vulnerability that comes with beingyoung and making decisions for the first time. “When a young person ishomeless, those decisions are left unguided or guided by people in similarcircumstances,” Carmichael explained. “So, instead of coming homeand at the dinner table bringing up something, ‘Hey, I am having a fightwith so-and-so’ and getting adult input, they are talking with others whoare in crisis, on the streets, perhaps using drugs. We know how powerful peerinput can be.”[122]A positive connection with an adult can come in many forms.Enrique was living in a homeless encampment along the Sacramento River until anadult took an interest in him and helped him make the decision to go to ashelter. His experience is an example of how important emotional support can befor a young adult.I’m a ladies’ man. I mean, I like taking girlsout. See that ice cream shop there? One week I brought in a different girlthree days in a row. Later, the guy working there said to me,“You’re slick, aren’t you? I seen you in here with adifferent girl every day...” and we started talking. He said, “Ididn’t know you were homeless.” He was surprised.We’d talk together. He’d ask me questions; hehelped me think about what I want to do in my life. I think I might try to bean EMT [emergency medical technician]. He encouraged me, helped me thinkthrough what it’d take, look at what classes I would need to take to doit ... He helped me think about things. He encouraged me to get off the streetsand go to this shelter.[123]Enrique’s story illustrates how important guidance canbe in early adulthood. Cheryl Alexander, a supervisor in Orange County’sEmancipation Service Program, noted the importance of relationships andemotional support even in the absence of more concrete help regardinghomelessness. “Even if you are couch-hopping, if you just have someoneyou can call it is so significant to have someone to be there when you needthem.”[124]Click to expand ImageA young person sits at a bus stop bench. Many youthemancipating from foster care have no adult they can turn to for guidance orhelp. © 2007 Patricia WilliamsMia S. was 10 years old when her mother died, and 14 whenher father died. By the time she left the foster care system, she had been in12 foster home placements and two group homes. Not one provided an adult whocared about her. She began running away when she was 10. “I’d go toa park and sit on a bench. It wasn’t so much running away as it wasleaving and seeing if anyone cared enough to come find me. I just wantedsomeone to care.” While Mia’s placements never produced such arelationship, as a teen she had the good fortune of entering a creative artsprogram in Los Angeles. There she grew close to a staff member who became herde facto mentor. Ilia Jauregui promisedto stay in her life, and over the years she proved a valuable source of supportfor Mia, even letting her stay in her home when she was homeless. Now 20, Miastill turns to Ilia for advice and guidance. Ilia helped her find atransitional living program, and Mia recently started classes in businessadministration and is working on her high school diploma.  “I feellike a lot of the good choices I’m making are because Ilia is there forme.”[125]Foster Youth Need Special AssistanceThe difficulty of helping any teenager plan for adulthoodshould not be understated. Developmentally, many youth may not be ready tothink about the future, even at age 16 or 17. Miryam Choca, Director ofCalifornia Strategies for Casey Family Programs reflected, “I have a23-year-old daughter. Thinking about talking to a 15-year-old about how‘you’re going to be on your own in a few years,’ it’sjust not the right time. They’re not ready.”[126]Lestat, an 18-year-old who was sleeping in a homeless shelter at the time hewas interviewed, echoed her observation. “My social worker did talk withme [over time] and ask me what I was planning to do when I emancipated. Ididn’t want to think about it. I thought, ‘Jeez, you know, why arewe having these damn conversations? I’m only 16 and it’s so longbefore I turn 18.’ And then, oh ... how did time fly so fast?”[127]Some youth in foster care may be less ready to absorb lifeskills than their peers due to special needs. While some are able to make thetransition to adulthood smoothly, many face serious challenges. Research showsthat that youth emancipating from foster care are more likely to haveeducational deficits, mental health problems, economic instability, criminalvictimization, and early child-bearing.[128]Planning for emancipation and support should account for thesespecial needs. Instead, some transitional programs exclude the youth who needthem the most: youth with mental health problems, juvenile delinquency records,pregnant youth, or youth with children. “The truth of the matter is thatthe kids who qualify for [many transitional programs] are the ones more likelyto succeed anyway,” explains Laura Streimer, the Legal Director for the Alliance for Children’s Rights.[129]Additionally, pre-emancipation programs are not geared toward special needs, either.The Effects of Childhood TraumaChildren and youth in foster care may not be ready to learnindependent living skills and plan for the future at the same time as theirpeers who have not experienced trauma and extreme disruption. The events thatland a child in foster care can later impede planning and acquisition ofskills: childhood trauma can negatively affect both neurological andpsychosocial development.[130]“The history of trauma often impacts development,” explainedHeather Carmichael, who, as the associate director of a drop-in center foryouth who are homeless, works daily with youth who have experienced childhoodtrauma. A history of trauma “can compromise a youth’s readiness orability to plan for the future.”[131]Manyof the young people interviewed for this report had by age 10 lived throughthings most adults cannot fathom. At least two watched a parent kill or causeserious bodily injury to another parent. They experienced rape, beatings byfamily members, and emotional abuse that left them blaming themselves for theirfamilies’ disintegration. For some these ordeals did not stop when theyentered state care. Instead, the experience of sexual abuse,physical harm, and emotional distress continued. Kati R.described being molested in her placement: “Things happened, traumaticthings, and then before I could deal with it, something else wouldhappen.”[132]Lackof Community Connection for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Youth“My family rejected me because I am gay,” BlakeT. told Human Rights Watch. “My Dad was abusive—physically [and]emotionally. I had to go back into this drama [after leaving foster care]. [Itwas] a dangerous situation, but I had no place to go.”[133]Blake’s experience is probably not uncommon.[134]Youth who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT) are at special riskfor homelessness, and may have special needs at emancipation.The proportion of homeless youth who are LGBT is staggering.The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force PolicyInstitute and the NationalCoalition for the Homeless have concluded that between 20 and 40 percent of allhomeless youth identify as LGBT.[135]For LGBT youth in the foster care system, the chances of homelessness may beeven greater than for non-LGBT foster youth. “An LGBT youth emancipatingfrom the child welfare system is apt to have fewer family and communityresources to rely on and so is more likely to end up homeless,” said JodyMarksamer, staff attorney and Youth Project Director at the National Center for Lesbian Rights. “Some LGBT youth enter into foster care in the firstplace because their parents have rejected them for being gay. They facephysical and emotional abuse at home, and sometimes are kicked out of the housebecause of their sexual orientation or gender identity.”[136]Returning to that setting after emancipation is dangerous for some, like Blake.The National Lesbian and Gay Task Force and the NationalCoalition for the Homeless (NLGTF/NCH) recommend a number of steps to addressthe LGBT-specific needs of youth who are homeless. The NLGTF/NCH note thatdrop-in centers, which can be connected to homeless outreach programs, arecrucial to helping LGBT youth who are homeless. They provide peer-bonding,recreation, safety, public health, and youth development. The NLGTF/NCH alsorecommend that all agencies receiving government funding to serve homelessyouth have nondiscrimination polices and be “culturally competent”in LGBT youth issues. Individual health and social service providers, too,should be trained to address the special issues facing youth, including comingout as LGBT, health and sex education, and community integration.[137]The effect of a program geared to address his needs is evident to Marvin, whois 21 and living in transitional living program sponsored in part by the SanDiego LGBT Community Center. The housing program is for youth who have beenhomeless, but has a special focus on LGBT youth. “I feel like people careabout me here,” he said.[138]Without a safe place to turn, though, LGBT youth who have emancipated fromfoster care are at high risk for homelessness. “These kids are often theones who become homeless because they have no place they arecomfortable,” saidShaun Zigler, Foster Youth Services Program manager for SanBernardino County Superintendent of Schools Office.[139]Multiple Moves“I can’t even count how many [foster]homes or placements I was in,” said Phillip, who had been in foster caresince he was seven years old. “I think it was between 20 and 25. Ageseven to 13 was really rough,” he told us.[140]Problems in children’s lives can be compounded when children are movedfrom one foster care setting to another. Moving from one foster placement toanother can mean the loss not only of connections with the foster family but alsoneighborhood friends, school mates, and teachers. For a child or youth whoselife has already included separation from parents, losing contact with othersis particularly harmful. Research has found that multiple placements areharmful to children. According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, “theemotional consequences of multiple placements or disruptions are likely to beharmful at any age.... [M]ultiple moves while in foster care (with theattendant disruption and uncertainty) can be deleterious to the youngchild’s brain growth, mental development, and psychological adjustment.”[141]Repeatedly the young people interviewed for this report described shutting downemotionally because of the trauma of moving from place to place[142]“I was little when I realized, these aren’t my people ... they saythey love you, but it’s all talk,” Matt H. said, describing hislife in 10 group homes and multiple foster family placements before that.“It’s all for the money. As soon as I did something bad, I was outof there.” The experience has colored his ability to form relationships:“To this day I don’t trust people,” he said.[143]Lestat S. was in three foster homes and seven group homes. He told us,“I’ve had more than my fair share of broken hearts ... gettingclose ... and then being ripped away. You cry your eyes out at night becauseyou miss them so much.”[144]By age 18, it had taken an emotional toll.Rhodes,the former foster youth who later worked as an emancipation worker, noted thatyouth in care are emotionally occupied both with the trauma they have sufferedand fear over the future. “[You’re] in survival mode. You neverknow what’s going to happen, what’s going to be pulled out fromunder you next. You’re thinking about where you are going to sleep, whetheryou’re going to be moved again,” she said.[145]As a result, by the time former foster youth reach early adulthood, they may bebehind other teens in their readiness to live independently.Mental Health Problems, Disabilities, and ParentingYouth in care are more likely to perform poorly in schooland have physical and mental health problems. They are at greater risk forbehavioral problems, drug and alcohol use, and delinquency.[146]By age 19, nearly half of young women in foster care have been pregnant,compared to a fifth of their peers not in foster care.[147]Foster youth with these additional challenges may be especially likely toneed extra help in navigating life on their own.Significant numbers of children in foster care have mentalhealth problems: researchers estimate that this is the case for between 40 and80 percent of children who enter foster care. [148]Preparation of  foster youth for adulthood must take into account a widerange of mental health needs. Many of the youth interviewed for this reportreferenced mental health problems, learning disabilities, and addictions. Theyspoke of depression and described suicide attempts. One admitted he was high onmeth at the time of the interview; another described kicking a meth habit.Kathy Cramer of Berkeley Mental Health and the Mental Health Program Supervisorfor the city of Berkeley noted that the 16- to 25-year-old age group needsspecial consideration in terms of how mental health needs are met:The lack of attention for this age group, it’s beenkind of hidden, in a way. It’s easy to miss if people are not makingthemselves known and adolescents and young adults don’t really make theirneeds known. In the past we’ve assumed to some degree that this age groupcan be served by the adult system. In fact, they need more of an out-reachapproach. They’re just not going to make appointments.[149]For youth with disabling mental health problems, preparationfor adulthood must include learning how to navigate the systems that servepeople with disabilities and how to live on a limited income. Some young adultswith serious mental health problems need step-by-step assistance with the mostbasic of tasks. Karen Grace-Kaho, the California State Foster Care Ombudsman,told us of a former foster youth who desperately needed assistance but was notable to get it until she intervened. The young man was sleeping under a freewayoverpass in Los Angeles.He’d had some contact with [an independent livingprogram (ILP)]—in fact he had a laptop computer given to him as a part ofthat program—and he was sleeping with it there under the freeway. Icalled up the ILP coordinator and explained the situation, gave them his nameand all, and the response was, “Oh yeah, we know him. He’s gotmental health problems.” The ILP worker told me, “If he can comeinto the office with a signed rental agreement, we may be able to give himfirst and last month’s rent.” I said, “Maybe you didn’thear me. He’s homeless. He’s sleeping under a freeway overpass.He’s dirty. He smells. No one is going to let him sign a rental agreement.”Eventually Grace-Kaho was able to secure the help of acaseworker who took the young man to a motel to clean up, went with him to buya simple set of clothes, and explored transitional living program options.[150]Learning and other disabilities must be taken in to accountif skill building and planning for life as a young adult are to be effective. Along-time foster parent told us that in her observation, living skills classesdid not meet the needs of the most vulnerable youth: “It’s really forkids who are going to college, [and they’re] going to make it anyway ... what’sneeded is some vocational training for the others.”[151]Another foster parent said, “[The programs don’t] help those who ...can’t learn to read, to write. [The programs] may look just fine, but[these kids] are the ones who end up under the bridge. They fall right throughthe cracks.”[152]Additionally, for youth with disabilities, “[m]eeting those goals is onlypart of the picture ... additional social, academic, health, and environmentalbarriers must also be addressed.”[153]Mental health problems or disabilities are not the onlyspecial circumstances that need to be taken into account: pregnancy candisqualify a young person from a program. When Patrice M. was 20, she found outshe was pregnant and received a two-day notice to leave the transitional homewhere she lived. The home did not allow pregnant residents. Sitting in acaseworker’s office, Patrice overheard her worker talking about her onthe phone, saying, “She’s not going to find anyplace.”Patrice ended up couch-surfing and staying in a motel.[154]Support Beyond Age 18 is NeededThecurrent system of state care for foster youth, ending asit does at age 18, results far too often and predictably inhomelessness.  In order to prevent these outcomes, the extension of careinto the early adult years is critically necessary.  As described above,the population of youthin state care, far more than children growing up in intactfamilies, requires special assistance on the path to adulthood.  Eventypically developing youth raised in families commonly continue to receivefamily support into their 20s; this fully corresponds to what is now knownabout adolescent development. Moreover, abrupt termination at 18 of what isoften inadequate care can necessitate costly interventions later.  Statesthat have established routine extension of care beyond 18 have realized notonly gains in well-being, but in their balance sheets as well.  Finally,California must extend care to foster youth beyond the age of 18 because toavoid doing so would perpetuate a status quo that violates these youths’civil and economic rights under international law.  Only by creating avaried set of options for assistance before and after eventual emancipation canthe state rectify these violations.Young Adults Need Support and GuidanceAn abrupt end to childhood does not comport with what is nowknown about adolescent development or the norms in the US. In a healthy family, preparation for adulthood begins early in life and, in most US families, youthare not cut off entirely at age 18.Instead families continue to provideemotional and financial support as young people move through early adulthood.Click to expand ImageTwo young people outside of youth shelter. © 2007Natalie LeimkuhlerThe number of 20- and 30-year-olds in the US who arecompletely financially independent has decreased significantly over the lastcentury and especially since 1960.[155]A shift has taken place: it takes more to become financially independent thanit did a generation ago.The University of Michigan Institute for Social Researchfound that just 41 percent of 26-year-olds are financially autonomous, with alltheir financial resources supplied by either themselves or by a spouse.[156]In the average US family, financial assistance often continues into the early30s. Although there are substantial differences in the amount of materialsupport that young adults receive from families, on average parents provideroughly $2,200 each year to children from ages 18 to 34 (on average more in thelate teens and 20’s and less in the early 30’s), for an averagetotal amount of more than $35,000.[157]The assistance may come in the form of housing, food, educational expenses, ordirect cash assistance.[158]In California, 45 percent of males and 43 percent of females ages 18 to 24 livewith their parents.[159]Ashley, a former foster youth spoke on a panel sponsored by UCLA’s School of Public Affairs about aging out. In response to a question asking for her thoughtson a bill to extend foster care past age 18 she said, “I think it’sreally great because nobody puts their real kid out at 18. It’s beingrealistic.”[160]“Out at 18” is a Costly State PolicyState policies and practices that eject young people fromstate care without the tools they need to survive are not only devastating tothe individual, they are also costly to society. Some US states alreadyrecognize this and extend support to foster youth beyond age 18. A Universityof Chicago study examining the effect of extending foster care to age 21 foundthat in Illinois, where the median age of exit from foster care is 21, thebenefits of more time and more help are tremendous. Compared to outcomes foryouth in states that do not extend care past age 18, the researchers concludedthat youth remaining in care until age 21 were three times more likely toenroll in college, 65 percent less likely to be arrested, and 38 percent lesslikely to get pregnant as teenagers.[161]The long-term affect for the state is significant. A report released in early2009 found that in California, supporting former foster youth up to age 21 waslikely to increase their lifetime earning potential by at least $92,000.[162]Other, perhaps less obvious, costs can fall to the statewhen young people who are not ready to care for themselves end up on thestreet. In particular, the cost of not addressing the special needs of formerfoster youth may be high. For example, Ombudsman Grace-Keho’s descriptionof a young man living beneath the freeway underpass included: “This kidwas asthmatic, and during this time he had a bad asthma attack and ended uphospitalized. Now how healthy is it for someone with asthma sleeping under afreeway pass in Los Angeles [and exposed to intense pollution]? And how longcould have the state paid for his room and board with the money it spent on anemergency room visit and a week-long stay in the hospital?”[163]The Rights of Current and Former Foster Childrenunder International LawFoster Children Have a Right to Special Measures of State ProtectionEvery child in California is guaranteed special measures ofprotection and care by international law. Protections are heightened forchildren who have been removed from their homes and placed in state care. Thestate has special duties toward these children, among which is to help themprepare for adulthood.[164]It is no exaggeration to say that all of childhood and youth is dedicated tolearning to be independent. The role of the parent in this process isessential. When the state becomes the parent, it must take measures to preparechildren for adulthood or it is breeching its duty to protect.International law recognizes that children need greaterprotection than adults.[165]The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) states that“[e]very child shall have ... the right to such measures of protection asare required by his status as a minor, on the part of his family, society andthe State.”[166]To understand the scope of this provision, the ICCPR should be read inconjunction with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, a treaty that the United States has signed but not ratified.[167]Reflecting an almost universal consensus on children’s human rights, theconvention requires states to protect children from “all forms ofphysical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment,maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care ofparent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of thechild.”[168]The best interests of the child must be a primary consideration in all actionsconcerning children.[169]The specific measures of protection are left somewhat toeach state’s discretion. The UN Human Rights Committee, which interpretsthe ICCPR, and to which each signatory country must regularly make reports onadherence to its provisions, articulates that each state must “determine[its measures of protection] in light of the protection needs of children ... withinits jurisdiction.”[170]Despite this wide latitude, it is clear that protection of children means morethan just safety, more than adequate food. The preamble of the Convention onthe Rights of the Child speaks directly to the importance of preparation foradulthood, stating that “the child should be fully prepared to live an individuallife in society.”[171]The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child also notes “withconcern” that states “have not given sufficient attention to thespecific concerns of adolescents as rights holders and to promoting theirhealth and development.”[172]The Committee describes states’ obligations to include ensuring thatadolescents have “access to information that is essential for theirhealth and development” and “creat[ing] a safe and supportiveenvironment for adolescents including within their family, in schools, in alltypes of institutions in which they may live, within their workplace and/or inthe society at large.”[173]Children outside of their family environment are among thosesingled out as entitled to special care and protection from the state. The Conventionon the Rights of the Child provides that:A child temporarily or permanently deprived of his or herfamily environment, or in whose own best interests cannot be allowed to remainin that environment, shall be entitled to special protection and assistanceprovided by the State.[174]The Human Rights Committee lays out the expectation thatstates’ reports “should provide information on the special measuresof protection adopted to protect children who are abandoned or deprived oftheir family environment in order to enable them to develop inconditions that most closely resemble those characterizing the familyenvironment.”[175]All People Have a Right to Adequate HousingMany international treaties and documents enunciate a rightto adequate housing for all people.[176]The first was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR):[E]veryone has the right to a standard of living adequatefor the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food,clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the rightto security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, oldage or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.[177]The International Covenant on Economic, Social and CulturalRights (ICESCR), which the US has signed but not ratified, codifies the rightand requires ratifying states to strive to ensure that all their residents haveadequate housing, recognizing “the right of everyone to an adequatestandard of living for himself and his family, including adequate food,clothing and housing, and to the continuous improvement of livingconditions."[178]The ICESCR also requires states parties to take "appropriate steps toensure the realization of this right."[179]If the right to housing means anything, it means that oneshould not have to be homeless. It also means, at a minimum, that governmentsshould avoid policies and practices that predictably increase homelessness.[180]Rajindar Sachar, the U.N. special rapporteur on the right to adequate housing,has noted that governments infringe that right if they adopt policies that"result in homelessness, greater levels of inadequate housing, [or] theinability of persons to pay for housing[.]"[181]The government’s failure to prepare children in care for adulthooddirectly increases the incidence of homelessness among emancipated youth.A Variety of Post-Emancipation Options is NeededFoster youth, just like their peers in typical homes, need avarietyof options as they transition into adults. Some need moretime at home before moving out on their own: Tayana said she was not ready toleave her foster home when she turned 18 and probably would have chosen to staywith her foster mother.[182]Others need periodic stays: Melissa said she needed a place she could go onbreaks from college. Warren had a job when he was kicked out of his group home,and said he could have paid a small amount of rent. Ayana had a daughter andneeded a place that was child-friendly. Oceania said she needed a safe place tostay while she applied for SSI disability coverage, and someone to help herlearn to balance navigating that disability benefits system, dealing with hermental health issues, and starting community college. Michael needed a programthat included drug treatment. The many youth who return to their birth familieswhen they age out need help finding family members and determining who theymight turn to.Click to expand ImageHomeless youth sleep on cots at the Youth EmergencyAssistance Hostel, a shelter open during the winter months in Berkeley. © 2007 Natalie LeimkuhlerThe question is not just what happens when young people turn18. Some want nothing more than to leave the foster care system behind on their18th birthday, but need the option of returning to some type ofsupportive setting in a crisis. Young people need back up plans as theynavigate through early adulthood and face the inevitable mistakes that are apart of learning. Murray L. said he passed up a chance to enter into atransitional living program when he left care: “I regret [that decision,but] I wanted to be with my family. I thought they wanted me with them but Igot kicked out.”[183]Anya entered a transitional living home, but was kicked out for breaking therules and had nowhere to go. Junior J. had a part-time job at a Safeway grocerystore when he emancipated, but four months later he had lost it and had noincome.[184]Each of them needed a safety net to catch them and keep them from becominghomeless when things did not go as planned.Transitionalliving programs are the best option for some. However, requirements forprograms need to be adapted to special needs. For example, a programrequirement that an applicant hold a job may unfairly exclude those who areunable to do so. While maintaining a job is an obvious objective for mostadults, some of those interviewed appeared to have significant learningdisabilities or to be experiencing mental health problems to such a degree thatimmediate entry into the work world and steady employment seemed improbable.One young woman interviewed appeared, at minimum, to be quite socially immatureand depressed. She had never held a job before emancipating. She told theresearcher that she did not even apply to a local transitional living programbecause she thought she would not be able to get a job.[185]Another young woman was obviously and significantly cognitively impaired: indescribing her graduation day for the researcher, she could not count thenumber of hours between her high school graduation and the time that sameafternoon that her social worker came to drive her to a temporary shelter.[186]At the time of the interview, she was living in a homeless shelter, hoping toget into a transitional living program. She did not have the requisite job foradmittance, however, and could not articulate a plan to get a job. CherylAlexander, supervisor of the Emancipation Services Program of Orange CountySocial Services Agency said: “Our kids want to go to school, they want todo right in our communities. But when you’re worried about whereyou’re going to lay your head every night ... you can’t doeverything.”[187]Leaving HomelessnessBehindWarren’s SuccessClick to expand ImageWhen heturned 18, adulthood came as an abrupt announcement for Warren.[188] “The guy at [my] group hometold me on a Wednesday that I needed to get out by Saturday.” Withthat, 18-year-old Warren was tossed out of foster care. “I tried totell him that I had no place to go, but he told me that I couldn’t staythere ... I asked, ‘Couldn’t I [just] stay in thegarage?’” The answer was no. Warren packed his possessions intohis car and left.He was homeless for two years. “I’dpark [my car] different places and sleep. Sometimes I would stay atfriends’ houses,” he said. Remarkably, he continued to worktoward his high school diploma and regularly attended classes. “Ididn’t want to give up. My motivation was to be better. I was trying toshow people that I could do things that they didn’t think I coulddo.” He worked in a restaurant and used the money to pay for his car. It’sa time that he doesn’t like to think about: “I got to a pointwhere I was so depressed, so frustrated, I felt like killing myself.”The chancefor a place to live and the emotional support to make it as a young adultcame when he was twenty. “I was so desperate. I don’t know how Iheard about [a transitional living program] ... but I did, and somehow I gotan application and brought it over to their office. I thought I would neverhear back from them.” He did, and after a rigorous acceptance process,he was off the streets and into an apartment with a roommate.Theprogram was not an easy ride—at one point he lost his job and did nothave enough money to pay both rent and his car payment. He chose the car.“I thought to myself, I gotta keep this car. If everything goes wrong,I can sleep in my car.” Not being able to pay rent jeopardized hisplacement in the program, but instead of booting him, a counselor worked withhim to re-focus priorities and find another job.Those kindof second chances are part of what helped him become the successfulindependent adult he is today. Warren also points to the relationships builtin the program. “The [staff at the transitional living program] let meknow they were here for me, they let me know that they knew I was trying todo something in my life and they supported me in it. It seems like theyreally care about what happens to you. And, whenbad things happened—like when I lost that job, they would make surethat I was out there looking for another job. They always have some ideasabout work.” He spent 18 months at the program.Living onhis own in Long Beach, Warren said he was working and going to school. For the two years before up untilwe spoke with him, he had worked with a company that maintained a number ofapartment buildings across the county. With shy pride he clicked off theskills he is mastering, “I’ve learned carpentry, plumbing, andelectrical work.” Walking through an apartment unit, he showed theinterviewer perfectly mitered crown molding, expert drywall work andprofessional painting he’d done himself. “See that airconditioning unit? I installed it.”Warren’sboss, Tony Suarez, said he thought highly of him: “In the beginning Iwas kind of surprised about what he’s been through, the problemshe’s had ... But he’s been great. He likes to be there forpeople.” The relationship has been a meaningful one for both. Mr.Suarez described a call he got from Warren last Christmas. “[He said]thank you for everything I’d done for him. He told me that I was like abig brother to him—he really meant it. No one had ever told mesomething like that—It made me feel so great. I’m on my own too,but I have parents—it’s just different when you don’t haveanyone.”[189]Inaddition to working full-time, Warren was attending community college.“Right now I am taking care of my general education requirements. Ihope that by the middle of this year I’ll be able to go full-time.I’d like to work with kids. I’m thinking about becoming a teacheror a child psychologist. I’m focusing on finding something that I knowI’ll be good at.”On theweekends he played volleyball and was also a member of a car club.“It’s a Mustang owners’ club. We meet for barbeques andstuff. I do some mechanical work on cars, I help people out with their carsand fix things.”Friendswould tell him it is time to start a family. He disagreed. “I havethings I want to do before I have kids. I’d like to travel, go todifferent places in the world. But when I do have kids, I think I’lladopt. I think about how there are so many kids out there without a mom or adad.”It washard to imagine this young man living in a car. His journey from homelessnessto a stable life of work, school, and weekends playing volleyball happenedbecause simple needs were met: A place to live, emotional support, secondchances, and relationships with people who care. Those factors gave him whathe needed. Warren said he was not stopping. He dreamed about traveling, plansfor future careers, and family options. He summed up his life, “I wantto see how far I can go.”Photo: Warren. © 2007 Patricia WilliamsClick to expand ImageAnya’s SuccessPlowingthrough eight placements in less than five years, Anya thought leaving fostercare was like the end of a bad dream.[190] Instead, what came next was a realnightmare. “I was homeless for two and a half years, living in motelsand in my car ... At one point I was living in my car ... in the winter. Iwas freezing with my baby there with me ... She’d sleep sitting up inher car seat. “Anya recalls one desperate nighttrying to get to a homeless shelter in Orange County. Driving along I-5, shetensely watched the gas gauge move to empty. “I didn’t think wewould make it to the shelter.” In the back seat her three-year-olddaughter squealed with joy as they passed Disneyland’s fireworkslighting the sky next to the freeway. They made it to the shelter, but it wasovercrowded, with sleeping mats jammed together on the floor inside, and eventhe yard filled with people sleeping outside. Anya felt safer parking the carin the alley and staying there with her child. Sitting behind the steeringwheel, she said, she cried all night. She thought, “I can’t dothis anymore.”She hadtried a number of programs but with no luck. Even reaching them wasdifficult. “Most places you call don’t answer thephone—it’s just a message or no one picks up.” The next dayshe had some luck. “When an actual person picked up the phone, Icouldn’t talk, I just cried into the phone.” Ultimately she wasaccepted into a transitional living program. “I remember [the callsaying that] I got in [to the program] ... my heart raced. I said, ‘Areyou kidding? Are you kidding?!’”“December9th [was] my move-in day. They asked if I needed help moving mystuff, and [laughing] well, no, I didn’t; it all fit in my car ... Igot there, and they took me to my apartment and I went in and I just sat onthe bed. I was so happy to have a room ... I was so happy I couldn’tmove for an hour. I just sat there. Finally, after everything, I had a placeI could stay.”Anya threwherself in to working and going to school. She got a job with a mortgagecompany and worked from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m., then drove over an hour to acommunity college and took night classes until 10. “I was never athome, I never saw [my daughter], because I was so scared about being homelessagain. I missed out on the program here [at the transitional livingprogram.]” Her counselor called her in for a heart-to-heart. “She said, ‘You’re disappointing me,’and let me know I needed to participate in the program. I didn’trealize she didn’t want me to just work; she wanted me to leave [theprogram] with connections, with a family, because that is what I wasmissing.” The counselor also helped Anya focus on her priorities.“She told me, ‘You know you are taking time away from yourdaughter.’ I told her, ‘No, I am doing all of this forher!’ She told me that I am missing special time with her and Iwon’t be able to make it up later—and I realized she was right, Icouldn’t keep working and going to school the way I was.” Anyaquit work but with the help of program staff was able to secure a payinginternship. “I work in the Motion Picture Development Finance Department atParamount.” There she gained a mentor who introduced her to accounting.When wespoke with her, Anya attended school full-time and worked two days a week.There were dance classes for her daughter on Saturdays. “It’s thebest situation ever,” she says. “My hope is to go to a four-yearcollege this year or the following year. I’m thinking about USC, UCLA,or Cal State Northridge. But wherever I go, I’m going togo—I’m going to a four-year college to get my degree. I’mreally focused [on getting] through school.” Others have recognized herefforts and how far she has come: she was awarded a scholarship.You do nothave to spend much time with Anya to get a sense of her determination. She isenergetic, exudes confidence and laughs easily. She is the picture ofoptimistic young adulthood. What separates her from the young person who washomeless for two-and-a-half years? Anya’s answer is the guidance andsupportive relationships she has at her transitional living program. Shegives a clear example: “I used to always run out of gas. Here, at thisprogram they don’t yell at you, and they don’t just give youmoney for gas. The counselor helps me figure out how to budget, so next timeI’ll have the money for gas and not run out. It makes me feel like herethere are people who really care about me.”When shethinks about the future, she’s clear. “My dream for where I willbe in 10 years? I’ll be an accountant. I’ll have my own office;my name will be on the door. I’ll have an intern and I’ll behelping that person. Most importantly I will be helping others. People tellme now, ‘You’re going to be successful, you’re going to bedoing something big.’ I hear that and I think, ‘Yes, Iam.’”Photo: Anya. © 2007 Patricia WilliamsDetailed Recommendations1. Extend support for youth in foster care beyondage 18.Transition to adulthood should be more gradual than itcurrently is for youth in foster care. Few 18-year-olds are ready to becompletely independent. Financial support, adult connection, shelter, and othersafety nets should be provided in a graduated way into the early 20s for youthwho need it. Youth who choose to leave state care at age 18 should haveopportunities to return on the basis of need. We recommend:To the Governor and Members of the StateLegislatureSupport state legislation that createsmultiple options of support past age 18 for youth, including:allowing all former foster youth to stay in a current fostercare placement for a period of time past age 18, regardless of their highschool graduation or other status;creating a diverse spectrum of other options for housing,support, and guidance; anddeveloping transitional housing and other programs that meet theneeds of a wider spectrum of young adults, including those with mental healthneeds, learning disabilities, and pregnant and parenting youth.Increase the availability across the stateof transitional living programs so that every youth leaving state care whoneeds housing will have it.Provide the right to return to state carefor youth who chose to leave at age 18 but who later find that they needsupport and help in early adulthood.To Judges, Attorneys, and Child AdvocatesUse existinglaws to extend jurisdiction after age 18 in appropriate cases.Create andoffer youth alternatives to traditional foster care in extendedjurisdiction.To County Child Welfare Agencies and Social WorkersPrioritize resources for proven transitionalliving programs that provide meaningful life skills acquisition, guidance toyouth traversing early adulthood, and strong bonds with competent, caringadults.Set standards for and regulate adherence bytransitional living programs and foster placements in the provision of on-goingguidance, emotional support, and the opportunity to learn living skills.To the Federal GovernmentThe USDepartment of Health and Human Services should promulgate regulations forthe Fostering Connections to Success and Increasing Adoptions Act of 2008that permit for the widest possible spectrum of independent livingprograms.The US Department of Health andHuman Services should revise the eligibility requirements under the FosteringConnections to Success and Increasing Adoptions Act of 2008 to broadlyinterpret the eligibility of youth who have mental or emotional problemsfor medical waivers that would permit them to enter transitional livingprograms when they cannot meet program requirements for employment orschool.2. Guarantee that youth have useful emancipationplans.Legally-mandated “transitional independent livingplans,” which child welfare agencies are required to develop for eachyouth’s emancipation, should incorporate concrete arrangements forhousing, income, connection to others, and medical coverage. We recommend:To the Governor and State LegislatureEnsure that existing lawsrequiringtransitional living plans are being implemented and are effective.To Judges, Attorneys, and Child AdvocatesInquire andfollow up at regular intervals on the status of plans for a youth’semancipation.Identify children and youth infoster care who have special needs, ensure that their post-emancipationplans address those needs, and take steps to ensure their needs are met.To County Child Welfare Agencies and Social WorkersEnsure thatevery youth emancipating has a place to live, a source of income, andhealth coverage prior to emancipation.Guaranteethat every youth leaving care has an independent living coordinator andknows how to reach that person.Evaluatesystems and procedures to ensure that the perspectives of children andyouth are incorporated in planning and assist them in identifying theirgoals.Work closelywith youth to complete the Independent Living Plan, beginning in earlyadolescence and continuing until the youth leaves care; involve people whocare about the youth and can assist him or her in developing the plan; andallow sufficient time to discuss and take action on the youth’sgoals.Provide more information aboutservices, programs, and support that exist post-emancipation.3. Create real opportunities to develop skills forindependence.Everyday life skills should be taught in foster care at anearlier age and not just in a classroom setting. Youth should be providedopportunities throughout adolescence to practice tasks and skills foradulthood.To the Governor and State LegislatureReview statelaws and regulations, and support regulatory changes, or if necessary,legislation so that youth in foster care are not living in overlyrestrictive and institutionalized settings that limit opportunities forexperiential learning.Support regulatory or legislativechanges so that foster parents, group home workers, and others caring foradolescents must create opportunities to learn adult living skills in thehome.To Judges, Attorneys, and Child AdvocatesInpreparation for and during court hearings, ask specifically about thetypes of opportunities individual youth in state care will receive forlearning adult living skills, and follow up with court investigations ororders to ensure youth are getting the opportunities needed.To County Child Welfare Agencies and Social WorkersAssesscurrent skill-building programs and preparation for transition to adulthoodpolicies and outcomes for youth. Assessments should rely on, among otherthings, information from the National Youth in Transition Database andinput from former foster youth and other experts.Train fosterparents, group home workers, and others caring for adolescents onadolescent development and the basic skills needed for youth to preparefor adulthood; set standards for foster parents, group home workers, andothers caring for adolescents holding caretakers responsible in part forpassing on adult living skills and providing in-home skills acquisition.Prioritize in training andstandards experiential learning of adult skills and opportunities tolearn.To Foster Parents, Group Home Workers, Guardians,and Others Caring for Children in Foster CareEnsure that youngpeople have ongoing opportunities to participate in activities thatpromote adult skills.Prepareadolescents for adulthood and ask for support from the county welfareagency.Seek training in adolescentdevelopment and creative ways to impart living skills.4. Help establish relationships that extend beyondemancipation.To prepare youth in foster care for adulthood, the stateshould help them establish relationships with people who can offer guidance andsupport through early adulthood. We recommend:To the Governor and State LegislatureEnsure that existing lawssupporting long-term relationships for children and youth in foster care,such as family-finding, long-term mentoring, and adoption of older youth,are being implemented.To Judges, Attorneys, and Child AdvocatesEnsure through court orders andfollow-up that every child and youth has connections with adults who arelikely be in his or her life after leaving foster care.To County Child Welfare Agencies and Social WorkersPrioritizeresources to ensure that every child in state care establishes connectionswith adults who will be available to him or her after emancipation fromcare.Create systems to contact andmaintain connection with extended family and non-family members who maynot be able to house a child but could commit to be in a child’slife in ways that build emotional support and ties to the community.To Foster Parents, Group Home Workers, Guardians,and Others Caring for Children in Foster CarePrioritize thecreation of opportunities for children and youth to establish long-term,caring relationships.Change group home policies andprocedures so that children and youth have more access to people in thecommunity and opportunities to pursue typical adolescent activities thatbuild connections to adults and other youth outside of the system.Research MethodsThis research is based primarily on 63 interviews of youngpeople between the ages of 17 and 24 who were former foster children. Interviewstook place in 2006 through 2010. Most of the interviewees were homeless at thetime of the interview; others had been recently homeless. The definition of“homeless” used here is the one given in the McKinney-VentoHomeless Assistance Act:The term “homeless children andyouth”(A) means individuals who lack a fixed, regular, andadequate nighttime residence (within the meaning of section 103(a)(1)); and(B) includes—(i) children and youth who aresharing the housing of other persons due to loss of housing, economic hardship,or a similar reason; are living in motels, hotels, trailer parks, or campinggrounds due to the lack of alternative adequate accommodations; are living inemergency or transitional shelters; are abandoned in hospitals; or are awaitingfoster care placement;(ii) children and youth who havea primary nighttime residence that is a public or private place not designedfor or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings(within the meaning of section 103(a)(2)(C));(iii) children and youth who areliving in cars, parks, public spaces, abandoned buildings, substandard housing,bus or train stations, or similar settings; and(iv) migratory children.[191]Youth interviewed for this report said they slept in cars,on the streets, in parks, under bridges, in abandoned buildings, temporarily inmotels, in homeless shelters, in the homes of friends (“couchsurfing”), living temporarily with people they did not trust, with peoplepaying them for sex, and in tents.The interviewees came from geographically diverse locationsacross California. While not specifically asked to list where they had grownup, interviewees sometimes referred to towns and cities where they lived infoster care. These included Anaheim, Apple Valley, Bakersfield, Berkeley,Cabrillo, Carson, Citrus Grove, Compton, Covelo-Round Valley, Eureka, Fresno,Fort Bragg, Hayworth, Hollywood, Lancaster, Long Beach, Los Angeles, Oakland,Ontario, Orland, Palm Desert, Palm Springs, Palo Verdes, Paris, Pasadena,Pomona, Rancho Cucamonga, Rosemead, Sacramento, San Bernardino, San Diego, SanFrancisco, the San Fernando Valley, Santa Rosa, Tujunga, Ukiah, Upland,Victorville, Whittier, and Yucaipa. This is not a full list. Some intervieweesdid not say where they had lived; others gave the names of group homes insteadof towns. It was not uncommon for an interviewee to state that he or she couldnot remember all the places he or she had lived in foster care.  All youthinterviewees had been in foster care; some had also been in the juvenilejustice systems and under the jurisdiction of the probation department.Interviewees were found through several methods. In somecases, the researcher made an announcement at a location where homeless youthwere gathered, such as in a dayroom of a drop-in center or at a meeting forresidents at a shelter. Individuals would come forward and sign up to beinterviewed. In other cases staff at a shelter suggested specific individualsto be interviewed because they were known to have been in foster care and werecurrently homeless. In one case a person who was allowing a homeless youth tosleep on her floor at home called Human Rights Watch. A few contacted ouroffices after seeing a request posted on the California Youth Connectionlistserv.Nearly all interviews of youth were face-to-face. Interviewswere held in a private location such as an office, or a place where otherscould not hear the conversation. Interviews took place in homeless shelters,drop-in centers, transitional living houses, on the streets of Hollywood, and in a homeless encampment along a river about a mile from the State capitolbuilding.Interviews lasted from around 30 minutes to three hours andwere conducted in a narrative style. The researcher described the focus of theresearch and explained the measures that would be used to maintainconfidentiality. General, open-ended questions were asked. The researcher tookcareful notes. In some cases the researcher read back quotes to the intervieweeto ensure exact wording.Interviewees were given the option to have their interviewsused directly or indirectly, with the latter meaning that their exact quoteswould not be used so that their identity would be completely shielded. Allinterviewees chose to have their information used directly. Pseudonyms wereused because of the personal nature of youths’ experiences, their youngage at the time of the interview, and the fact that many were in crisis at thetime and may not have been in a position to adequately analyze the consequencesof revealing private information to a wide audience. Some interviewees chosetheir own pseudonyms; for others, the researcher chose a pseudonym. In somecases, in addition to the use of pseudonyms, other identifying factors such asgender, geography, age, the existence of children, siblings or the specificfacts of an incident are left out in order to further conceal theindividual’s identity. This was done when the facts of a situation wereparticularly personal or potentially endangering. For example, particular carehas been taken to shield the identity of an interviewee who described havingbeen raped as a child.Four Indicators of Minimal Readiness for IndependenceWhile the interviews were generally narrative in nature, theresearcher asked four specific questions of each individual. These questionswere chosen as indicators of the most minimal preparation for adulthood andreadiness for independence. The four questions were:When you left foster care did you have a source of income?When you left foster care did you have medical coverage?When you left foster care did you have a high schooldiploma?When you left foster care did you have an adult you couldturn to if you were in some kind of crisis, for example, needing a ride tothe doctor if you were very sick?All interviews were deeply personal. Interviewees were askedto talk about experiences of trauma, betrayal, and abandonment by family andthe system. The fact of their homelessness was an obvious source of shame formany, and some even blamed themselves for being in foster care, such as,“I was a stubborn child, that’s why no one wanted me.”Many interviewees expressed that even though the topics weredifficult to discuss, they wanted to talk about their experiences because they wantedto help change things for children who come up in the system after them. MasonB. put it this way: “I’m down for any cause to help improve things.Even if I’m not going to see help for me, maybe it will help otherscoming along.”[192]AcknowledgementsThis report was written and researched by Elizabeth Calvin, senioradvocate, Children’s Rights Division of Human Rights Watch. Kennji Kizukaand Kyle Knight, associates for Children’s Rights Division, providedsignificant research, administrative, and other help. Ruchika Budhraja, anintern with Human Rights Watch in Los Angeles, provided substantial help inresearch and other support for the report.We thank the many young people who shared their experiencesfor this report.We are grateful for the help of Heather Carmichael, associateexecutive director for My Friend’s Place; Sharon Hawkins -Leyden, directorof the Youth Emergency Assistance Hostel; Jody Stein, J.D.; Patty Williams, photographer;Polly Williams, president of United Friends of the Children; and Shaun Zigler fosteryouth services program manager for San Bernardino County Superintendent ofSchools and Los Angeles Human Rights Watch interns Christine Back, ChristineTalbo, and Christina Yang.  The California Human Rights Watch staff, includingHava Manasse, Libby Marsh, Caitlin McAdam, and Tiffany Siart, provided otherinvaluable help.In addition, Heather Carmichael; Camille Joseph, of the LosAngeles Human Rights Watch office; Miriam Krinsky, lecturer, UCLA School ofPublic Affairs and member, ABA Youth at Risk Advisory Council; NatalieLeimkuhler; Amy Lemley, policy director for the John Burton Foundation; SabinaMayo-Smith, MSW; Professor Wendy Smith Meyer; and Jennifer Rodriguez, staffattorney at the Youth Law Center all reviewed and commented on the manuscript.Zama Coursen-Neff, deputy director, and Lois Whitman, director of the Children’s Rights Division of Human Rights Watch edited thereport. David Fathi, director of the US Program and Scott Long, director of theLesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights Program of Human Rights Watchreviewed the report.  Cassandra Cavanaugh, consultant to the Programoffice, Andrew Mawson, deputy program director, and Aisling Reidy, senior legaladvisor, provided legal and program review.Production assistance was provided by Kyle Knight; AnnaLopriore, creative manager; Grace Choi, publications director and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager.[1] TheChildren’s Rights Division of Human Rights Watch uses the word“children” to mean people under the age of 18. The words“teenager” and “teen” refer to individuals who are 13to 19 years old. The word “youth” and term “youngpeople” are used in this report to mean people in adolescence throughearly adulthood, or approximately ages 12 through 24.[2] AFCARS Data,Children's Bureau, Administration for Children and Families, US Department ofHealth and Human Services, “Trends in Foster Care and Adoption –FY2006—FY 2007,”http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/stats_research/afcars/trends.htm (accessedAugust 7, 2009).  An individual child is included in the count for eachyear for which he or she is in foster care on the last day. Note that thisnumber is an estimated count of all the children in foster care on the last dayof the year, and that in fact, many more children pass through the foster caresystem in a year. The estimated count of all children who were in the publicfoster care system during the year was 783,000 for FY 2006-FY 2007. That numberis the sum of two mutually exclusive groups of children: the children who arealready in care on the first day of the fiscal year (October 1) and thechildren who enter foster care during the year. An individual child is countedonly once for each year.[3] Barbara Needell etal., University of California at Berkeley Center for Social Services Research,Child Welfare Services Reports for California, CWS/CMS 2009 Quarter 1Extract,  “Child Population (0-17), Number in Care, and PrevalenceRates,” July 1, 2008, http://cssr.berkeley.edu/ucb_childwelfare/InCareRates.aspx(accessed October 7, 2009). California’s system dwarfs all others in thenation. For example, Texas and New York’s foster care populations, thesecond and third largest in the nation, are significantly smaller, each witharound 30,000 children and youth in their state systems. United StatesDepartment of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children andFamilies, “Foster Care FY2002 - FY2006 Entries, Exits, and Numbers ofChildren In Care on the Last Day of Each Federal Fiscal Year,” reflectingstate data submitted to the Children's Bureau as of June 2008,http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/stats_research/afcars/statistics/entryexit2006.htm(accessed March 4, 2009). New York had, at the time of the 2000 census, closeto 4.7 million residents under the age of 18. In that year, some 5.9 millionchildren and youth under the age of 18 resided in Texas. California’spopulation of children and youth was about 9.2 million. United States Census,“Age: 2000,” October 2001, http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/c2kbr01-12.pdf(accessed August 4, 2009).[4]Barbara Needell et al., University of California at Berkeley Center for SocialServices Research, Child Welfare Services Reports for California, CWS/CMS 2009Quarter 1 Extract, “Children in Foster Care, Agency Type=Child Welfare,”April 2009, http://cssr.berkeley.edu/ucb_childwelfare/PIT.aspx (accessed October7, 2009).[5]Diane Reed and Kate. Karpilow, California Center for Research on Women and Families,“Understanding the Child Welfare System in California: A Primer forService Providers and Policymakers,” 2nd Ed., June 2009, http://www.ccrwf.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/03/final_web_pdf.pdf(accessed September 14, 2009), pp. 11-14. In the last 10 years, child welfaresystems have gone through significant changes. In 1997, the federal Adoption andSafe Families Act (ASFA) (PL 105-89) was enacted. In order to receive federalfunding, states are required to collect data on outcome measures and go througha federal review process. California’s first review was in 2002, and it wasfound to be out of substantial conformity in seven of seven outcome measures. Thestate created an improvement plan, and was in 2005 found to have met all butone of its improvememt goals based on the second review. A second review was conductedin 2008, and at this writing the state was waiting for the finalization of itsimprovement plan from the federal Department of Health and Human Services.Ibid., p. 5.[6]Barbara Needell et al., University of California at Berkeley Center for SocialServices Research, Child Welfare Services Reports for California, CWS/CMS 2009Quarter 1 Extract, “California Child Population (0-17) and Children withChild Maltreatment Allegations, Substantiations, and Entries,” January 1,2008 to December 31, 2008,  http://cssr.berkeley.edu/ucb_childwelfare/RefRates.aspx(accessed October 7, 2009). In California in 2008, 486,866 children werereferred one or more times. Of those referrals, 97,220 children’s caseswere substantiated. 37,753 children entered foster care that year. Some casesare substantiated as involving abuse or neglect but it is determined that thechild can safely return home if the parents or guardians are provided services.[7]The majority of those not residing with foster families, in group homes, orinstitutions have been placed by the court in the home of a relative (seediscussion below). The remaining children and youth have been placed inguardianships, pre-adoption settings, “trial home visits,” or haverun away.[8]National data is from US Department of Health and Human Services,Administration for Children and Families, Administration on Children, Youth andFamilies, Children's Bureau, “The AFCARS Report: Preliminary FY 2006Estimates as of January 2008 (14),” http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/stats_research/afcars/tar/report14.htm(accessed February 26, 2009). Note that the national data is for the year 2006.State data is from Barbara Needell et al., University of California at BerkeleyCenter for Social Services Research, Child Welfare Services Reports forCalifornia, CWS/CMS 2009 Quarter 1 Extract, Extract,  “Children inFoster Care, Agency Type=Child Welfare,” April 2009,http://cssr.berkeley.edu/ucb_childwelfare/PIT.aspx (accessed October 7, 2009).[9]Ibid.  In California, 13.65 percent of 11-to 17-year-olds in state carereside in group homes.[10]Barbara Needell et al., University of California at Berkeley Center for SocialServices Research, Child Welfare Services Reports for California, CWS/CMS 2009Quarter 1 Extract, “Children in Child Welfare Supervised Foster Care asof January 1, 2008 and January  1, 1998(Age 0-20), by PlacementType,” http://cssr.berkeley.edu/ucb_childwelfare/PIT.aspx (accessed October7, 2009). The year 1998 was chosen because it was the earliest year for whichdata was readily available.[11]For an overview of California’s child welfare system, see Diane Reed andKate Karpilow, California Center for Research on Women and Families, “Understandingthe Child Welfare System in California: A Primer for Service Providers andPolicymakers,” 2nd Ed., June 2009, http://www.ccrwf.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/03/final_web_pdf.pdf(accessed September 14, 2009) and Lisa K. Foster, California Research Bureau,California State Library, “Foster Care Fundamentals: An Overview of California’sFoster Care System,” December 2001,http://www.library.ca.gov/crb/01/08/01-008.pdf (accessed August 11, 2009).[12]USGovernment Accountability Office, “Child Welfare: HHS Actions Would HelpStates Prepare Youth in the Foster Care System for Independent Living,” Testimony:Statement of Cornelia M. Ashby, Director, Education, Workforce, and IncomeSecurity Issues, July 12, 2007, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d071097t.pdf(accessed August 1, 2009), p. 2.[13]Barbara Needell et al., University of California at Berkeley Center for SocialServices Research, Child Welfare Services Reports for California, CWS/CMS 2009Quarter 1 Extract, “Exits From Foster Care, Agency Type=Child Welfare,January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2008”http://cssr.berkeley.edu/ucb_childwelfare/Exits.aspx (accessed October 7,2009). In 2007, 4,566 youth emancipated and in 2006, 4,417. Just five countiesaccount for nearly 55 percent of all youth emancipating in the state: LosAngeles (29 percent of the state’s emancipating youth), Riverside (6.5percent), Sacramento (6 percent), San Bernardino (6.5 percent), and San Diego(7 percent).[14]California Welfare & Institutions Code §303. See also California Rulesof Court, rule 1466; California Juvenile Court and Procedure §2.31; andCalifornia Juvenile Court and Procedure §2.180[5], which provide thattermination of jurisdiction may occur when the youth in foster care reaches 18years old.[15]See In re Tamika C., 131 Cal. App. 4th 1153, 1161 (2005); In re HollyH.,104 Cal. App. 4th 1324 (2002); and In re Robert L., 68Cal. App. 4th 789 (1998).[16]BarbaraNeedell et al., University of California at Berkeley Center for Social ServicesResearch, “Youth Emancipating from Foster Care in California: FindingsUsing Linked Administrative Data,” May 2002,http://cssr.berkeley.edu/pdfs/ffy_entire.pdf(accessed August 1, 2009), p. 21. Data provided by the University of Californiaat Berkeley Center for Social Services Research do not disaggregateemancipation rates for youth between the ages of 18 to 20; however, analysisconducted in 2002 of youth who entered the child welfare system between 1991and 1997 determined that 72 percent of youth emancipated at age 18, 13 percentwere older than 18 at emancipation, and 15 percent emancipated younger than age18.[17]California Welfare & Institutions Code §11403.[18]Human Rights Watch interviews with Malachi M., age 20, Inglewood, March 10,2010.[19]Dion Aroner, California State Assembly Member, quoted in California StateAssembly  Committee on Judiciary,  “Analysis of AssemblyBill No. 686, “ April 27, 1999, http://www.sen.ca.gov/leginfo/BILL-6-DEC-1998/CURRENT/AB/FROM0600/AB0686/AAFLOOR.TXT(accessed November 2, 2009),  p. 3.[20]Public Law No. 110-351[21]Miriam Krinsky, statement to the Los Angeles County Bar Association JuvenileCourts Task Force, March 3, 2009. Krinksy is the former Executive Director ofthe Children’s law Center and now a lecturer at University of Californiaat Los Angeles and Loyola law schools.[22]California State Legislature, bill status, http://www.legislature.ca.gov/cgi-bin/port-postquery?bill_number=ab_12&sess=CUR&house=B&author=beall(accessed August 4, 2009).[23]John H. Chafee Foster Care Independence Act of 1999, 42 USC §677 (1999).[24]US Government Accountability Office (agency name changed in July 2004),“HHS Actions Would Help States Prepare Youth in the Foster Care Systemfor Independent Living,” July 2007, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d071097t.pdf(accessed August 22, 2007), p. 2.The amount is divided among the 50 states, theDistrict of Columbia, and Puerto Rico and totaled $140 million per year, with1.5 percent reserved for evaluation, technical assistance, performancemeasurement, and data collection. To receive the funds, states must provide amatching contribution of 20 percent in cash or in-kind contributions.[25]California Welfare & Institutions Code §391.[26]The social worker is permitted to document efforts by the county welfaredepartment to locate the youth when the youth is “not available”for the hearing. California Welfare & Institutions Code §391(a)(1).[27]California Welfare & Institutions Code §349.[28]The law specifies that the department must report to the court that it hasprovided certain documents such as a Social Security card, birth certificate,health and education information, driver's license or identification card, aletter prepared by the county welfare department stating the youth's name anddate of birth, dates he or she was in foster care, and if applicable, the deathcertificate of the parent(s) and proof of the child's citizenship or legal residence.[29]California Department of Social Services Independent Living Program PolicyUnit, Child and Youth Permanency Branch, “Report on the Survey of theHousing Needs of Emancipated Foster/Probation Youth,” June 2002,http://www.dss.cahwnet.gov/cfsweb/res/PDF/RptontheHousingNeeds.pdf (accessedSeptember 14, 2009), p. 6.[30]For example, the following studies found the percentage of former foster youthwho became homeless to be:  Nearly 20 percent, Anne Havalchak, CatherineRoller, and Kirk O’Brien, Casey Family Programs, “Casey Young AdultSurvey: Findings Over Three Years,” March 2008,http://www.casey.org/Resources/Publications/pdf/CaseyYoungAdultSurveyThreeYears.pdf(accessed August 10, 2009), p. 4; eighteen percent, Mark Courtney et al.,“Midwest Evaluation of the Adult Functioning of Former Foster Youth:Outcomes at Age 21,”December 2007,http://www.chapinhall.org/sites/default/files/ChapinHallDocument_2.pdf(accessed October 10, 2009), p. 15; over 22 percent , Peter J. Pecora etal., Casey Family Programs, “Improving Family Foster Care: Findings fromthe Northwest Foster Care Alumni Study,” April 2005,http://www.casey.org/Resources/Publications/ImprovingFamilyFosterCare.htm(accessed October 10, 2009), p. 37; twenty-two percent , Jung Min Park et al.,“Public Shelter Admissions among Young Adults with Child Welfare ServiceHistories by Type of Service History and Type of Exit from ChildWelfare,” Social Service Review, vol. 78 (June 2004), pp. 284-303;thirteen percent, Diana English et al., Children’s AdministrationResearch, Washington Department of Social and Health Services, “FosterYouth Transition to Independence Study,” 2004,http://www.dshs.wa.gov/pdf/ca/FYTfinal2004.pdf (accessed October 10, 2009), p.4; approximately 25 percent, County of Monterey, Department of Social Services,Applied Survey Research, “Homeless Census and Homeless Youth/Foster TeenStudy: Monterey County,” 2002;  Approximately 25 percent, Ronna Cooket al., Westat, Inc.: Administration for Children, Youth, and Families (DHHS),“A National Evaluation of Title IV-E Foster Care Independent LivingPrograms for Youth, Phase 2, Final Report,”vols. 1-2, 1991, pp.4-11. See also Richard P. Barth, “On Their Own: the Experiences of Youthafter Foster Care,” Child and Adolescent Social Work, vol. 7, no.5 (October 1990), pp. 419-420.[31]US Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Community Planning andDevelopment, “The Fourth Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress,”July, 2009, http://www.hudhre.info/documents/4thHomelessAssessmentReport.pdf(accessed March 12, 2010), Appendix C2: Point-In-Time Estimates from January2008 of Homeless Population by State, p. c-4.  According to that samedocument, California’s total population was 36,756,666 and the rate ofhomelessness for the state .43 percent. See also, Department of Housing andCommunity Development, Division of Housing Policy Development, “California’sDeepening Housing Crisis,” September 25, 2008, http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hc092508.pdf(accessed March 4, 2009), p. 4.[32]Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority, “2009 Greater Los AngelesHomeless Count”, http://www.lahsa.org/docs/HC09/Homeless-Count-2009-Report.pdf(accessed March 12, 2010), p. 1. Note that the 2009 homeless count concludedthat there was a more than 35 percent drop in the number of homeless persons inthe greater Los Angeles area between 2007 and 2009.[33]LosAngeles Homeless Services Authority, “2007 Greater Los Angeles HomelessCount, Los Angeles Continuum of Care Subpopulations Census Results:Point-in-Time and Annual Projections,” conducted by Applied SurveyResearch, 2007,http://www.lahsa.org/docs/homelesscount/2007/Los%20Angeles%20Continuum%20of%20Care.pdf(accessed March 14, 2010), pp. 119, 120.  In fact, the annual number ofhomeless youth may be significantly higher than this estimate, according to theauthors of the Homeless Count report who note that counting homeless youth isvery difficult. See also Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority flier“Homeless Youth in the Los Angeles Continuum of Care,” unpublisheddocument.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with AliciaM., age 21, Whittier, California, April 23, 2006.[35]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberta E., age 24, Hollywood, May 24, 2006.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with Karen D., age 22, San Francisco, July 11,2006.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with Lestat S., age 18, Sacramento, November 17,2006.[38]Human Rights Watch interview with Michael Y., age 22, Berkeley, April 4, 2006.[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany T., age 18, Sacramento, August 15,2008.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with James M., the director of a small emergencyshelter for youth under the age of 18, 2006. The shelter is located inCalifornia, and the interview was in person. Neither the shelter name nor thename of the director is used here to protect the identity of the shelter. Thefact that the shelter takes in youth over the age of 18 may jeopardize itsfunding and licensing.[41]James speculated that the social workers may fear being turned away from theshelter with an overage youth.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Dee H., age 18, San Francisco, July 11, 2006.[43]Generally couch surfing means staying at one friend’s house for a verylimited time (perhaps a few, or even just one night)  and then moving onto someone else’s living room so as to not wear out one’s welcomeor to hide the fact of homelessness.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with WarrenH., age 24, Whittier, December 27, 2006.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with Aaron T.,age 20, Victorville, November 7, 2008.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberta E., age 24, Hollywood, May 24, 2006.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with Enrique A., age 18, Sacramento, November 17,2006.[48]Ibid.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with Matt H.,age 21, Victorville, November 6, 2008.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with Dion W.,age 19, Los Angeles, February 24, 2010.[51]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tayla G., age 21, Hayward, January4, 2007.[52]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Marvin M., age 23, San Diego,February 12, 2009.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with Sandy N., age22, 2008. The city and exact date are not given to further protect heridentity.[54]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Whitney Rhodes, age 20, Sacramento,January 5, 2007.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with Jaime N., age 19, San Francisco, July 26,2006.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Jose C., age 18, San Francisco, July 26,2006.[57]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberta E., age 24, Hollywood, May 24, 2006.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with Dee Melendez, Financial Aid Specialist forVictor Valley College, November 6, 2008.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Heather Carmichael, associate executivedirector of My Friends Place, Hollywood, November 6, 2006.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Pat Ambers, Oakland, November 16, 2006.[61]Human Rights Watch interview with Dee Melendez, Financial Aid Specialist forVictor Valley College, November 6, 2008.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with Derek P., age 18, November 15, 2008.[63]Human Rights Watch interview with Dee Melendez, Financial Aid Specialist forVictor Valley College, November 6, 2008.[64]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Melissa B., age 20, Sacramento,January 5, 2007.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Gerry Hauser, Oakland, November 16, 2006.[66]Described more fully on page 14 of this report.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with Arlena C., age 20, Sacramento, November 17,2006.[68]Human Rights Watch interview with PhillipO., Whittier, age 22, April 24, 2006.[69]Human Rights Watch interview with Sandy N.,age 22, 2008. The city and exact date are not given to further protect heridentity.[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Dion W.,age 19, Los Angeles, February 24, 2010.[71]California Department of Social Services, “California’s Title IV-BChild and Family Services Plan Federal Fiscal Year 2005-2009,” June 30,2004, revised September 1, 2004,http://www.dss.cahwnet.gov/cfsweb/res/pdf/IV-BPlan.pdf (accessed February 18,2009), p. 139.[72]Memorandum from Gregory Rose, Acting Deputy Director, Children and FamilyServices Division, to All County Welfare Directors, All County Chief ProbationOfficers, All Child Welfare Services Program Managers, All Independent LivingProgram Managers, All Independent Living Program Coordinators, All CountyTransitional Housing Coordinators, “New Transitional Independent LivingPlan (TILP) Agreement for Foster Youth,” July 18, 2008, http://calswec.berkeley.edu/calswec/02_TILP_CWW_ACL_08_31.pdf(accessed August 1, 2009[73]California Social Work Education Center, “Training Resource onTransitional Independent Living Plan,” Supplemental Handout 5. http://calswec.berkeley.edu/calswec/OtherTraining_i.html(accessed August 1, 2009).[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalie R., age 19, Oakland, November 16,2006.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Tina Hughes, Oakland, November 16, 2006.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with Tayana I., age 19, Sacramento, November 17,2006.[77]Human Rights Watch interviews with Malachi M., age 20, Inglewood, March 10,2010.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Marvin M., age 23, San Diego, February 12,2009.[79]MarkCourtney et al., “Midwest Evaluation of the Adult Functioning of FormerFoster Youth: Outcomes at Age 21,”December 2007,http://www.chapinhall.org/sites/default/files/ChapinHallDocument_2.pdf (accessed October 7, 2009),p. 37. The report describes survey data collected from young people inWisconsin, Iowa, and Illinois, first at age 17 or 18 and then again at age 19.This third report is based on interviews conducted with the young people whenthey were 21 years old. This important data may in fact understate the problemsfaced by former foster youth. For example, former foster youth in Californiaface a significantly higher cost of living than in Midwest states. In addition,youth with developmental disabilities or severe mental illness that made it impossiblefor them to participate in the initial interviews and youth who wereincarcerated or in a psychiatric hospital were excluded from participation inthe survey. Data on economic hardships were not collected from 6 percent of theparticipants who had been incarcerated for at least three months at the time oftheir interview.[80]Of the nine who had a source of income, two had Supplemental Security Income, afederal government benefit conferred upon the death of a parent. The monthlypayments extend to age 21. One interviewee’s income derived from GeneralAssistance, a state benefit for individuals who are disabled; and one describedher income as “part-time.”[81]42 USC, §§ 677, 1396a(a); California Welfare & Institutions Code§14005.28; California Department of Health Services, “All CountyWelfare Director’s Letters,” 00-41, August 14, 2000, and 00-61,November 22, 2000,http://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/medi-cal/eligibility/Pages/2000ACWDLs.aspx (accessedAugust 4, 2009). It is unclear why this would be true unless there wasenrollment paperwork that was not completed.  Thirty-fiveinterviewees  did not have Medi-Cal when they left the state’s care,and two of the interviewees stated that they did not know if they had it ornot.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with Tony D.,Berkeley, age 20, April 03, 2006.[83]California Welfare & Institutions Code §16522.[84]Another program that exists in law but is rarely used is the SupportiveTransitional Emancipation Program, (STEP), which allows counties to providesupport to eligible youth up to age 21 who are pursuing educational or otheractivities consistent with their transitional independent living plan. CaliforniaWelfare & Institutions Code §11403.1. Amy Lemley, the policy directorfor the John Burton Foundation, told us, “At this point, STEP is not usedat all. The main reason is that STEP is an entitlement and if a county facedfinancial difficulty, it does not have the legal option of discontinuing theprogram.” Email communication from Amy Lemley to Human Rights Watch,September 21, 2007.[85]Sara Kimberlin, Amy Lemley, and Michele Byrnes, John Burton Foundation forChildren without Homes, “Needs and Demographics of Former Foster YouthEntering California’s THP-Plus Program: Findings from the StatewideParticipant-Tracking System,” July 2009,http://thpplus.org/pdfs/JBF_Policy_Brief.pdf (accessed August 4, 2009), p. 7.[86]SaraKimberlin, Amy Lemley, and Michele Byrnes, John Burton Foundation for Childrenwithout Homes, “Needs and Demographics of Former Foster Youth EnteringCalifornia’s THP-Plus Program: Findings from the StatewideParticipant-Tracking System,” July 2009, http://thpplus.org/pdfs/JBF_Policy_Brief.pdf(accessed August 4, 2009), p. 2.[87]The THP-Plus Statewide Implementation Project is a collaboration of the JohnBurton Foundation for Children Without Homes, the California Department ofSocial Services, and the Corporation for Supportive Housing. Theorganization’s website is http://thpplus.org.[88]SaraKimberlin, Amy Lemley, and Michele Byrnes, John Burton Foundation for Childrenwithout Homes, “Needs and Demographics of Former Foster Youth EnteringCalifornia’s THP-Plus Program: Findings from the StatewideParticipant-Tracking System,” July 2009,http://thpplus.org/pdfs/JBF_Policy_Brief.pdf (accessed August 4, 2009), p. 2.[89]John Burton Foundation, “THP-Plus Annual Report Fiscal Year 2007-2008,”October 2008, http://thpplus.org/pdfs/THP-Plus%20Annual%20Report%20FY%202007-08.pdf(accessed August 4, 2009), p. 2.[90]Barbara Needell et al., University of California at Berkeley Center for SocialServices Research, Child Welfare Services Reports for California, CWS/CMS 2009Quarter 1 Extract, “Exits From Foster Care, Agency Type=Child Welfare,January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2008”http://cssr.berkeley.edu/ucb_childwelfare/Exits.aspx (accessed October 7,2009). It is the entire population of 18- to 24-year-old former foster youth thatis eligible for THP-Plus, not just those who have emancipate in the currentyear. In 2008, 4,653 youth emancipated, and the majority was 18 years old.However, also eligible for THP-Plus would be other emancipated foster youth whowere under the age of 24 in 2008. That would include 4,566 youth who hademancipated in 2007; the 4,417 who left in 2006; the 4,327 in 2005; 4,430 in2004; and 4,216 in 2003. In 2008 there were 26,609 emancipated youth who metthe age requirements for THP-Plus.[91]The THP-Plus Statewide Implementation Project estimates that statewide THP-Plusis serving between 22 to 37 percent of demand for the program. This estimaterelies on two possible homelessness rates, 13 to 22 percent, and compares theserates to actual placements available in each county. Email from Amy Lemley, policydirector for the John Burton Foundation, to Human Rights Watch, October 8,2009. Since not all youth entering THP-Plus placement have been homeless, theneed is larger than youth who have experienced homelessness.[92]The impact is disparate as well. Based on the number of emancipating fosteryouth for years 2001 through 2008, Los Angeles’ population ofemancipating youth who would be eligible for a placement was 11,065. No othercounty comes close in terms of sheer numbers. The county with the next highestpopulation is Sacramento, with 2,150 eligible youth. THP-Plus StatewideImplementation Project, “Capacity by County 8-09”, received byemail attachment, from Amy Lemley to Human Rights Watch, October 8, 2009.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with Dee Melendez, November 6, 2008.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Tanya C., age 21, Victorville, November 7, 2008.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Polly Williams, Los Angeles, November 13,2006.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with Tony D., age20, Berkeley, April 4, 2006.[97]Human Rights Watch interview with James M., the director of a small emergencyshelter for youth under the age of 18, 2006.[98]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withMarty Beyer, Ph.D., Eugene, Oregon, November 21, 2006. Among other things, Dr.Beyer is a member of the Katie A. case panel examining child welfarereform in Los Angeles County. She has been an expert, consultant, and evaluatorin numerous cases and efforts across the country including in Alaska, Alabama,Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Florida,Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Mexico, New York, Oklahoma,Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Washington, and West Virginia.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Tony D.,Berkeley, age 20, April 03, 2006.[100]HumanRights Watch interview with Raul H., age 20, Berkeley, April 3, 2006.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Oceania V., age 18, Sacramento, November 17,2006.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Nikki B., age 18, Sacramento, August 15,2008.[103]Human Rights Watch interview with Sandy N.,age 22, 2008. The city and exact date are not given to further protect heridentity.[104]Foster parents described regulations that keep them from teaching independence.For example, foster homes are required to lock up cleaning supplies. But lockedup cleaning supplies means that an older child or youth cannot use the washingmachine or clean the kitchen without supervision. A waiver of the rule ispermitted, but it has to be entered in to a child’s specific case planand many foster families may not know about that option. “When CCL comesout [and inspects your house], if you [don’t] have a waiver and thecleaning supplies [are] not locked up, you get cited. The thing is, most fosterparents don’t know about the waiver.” Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Michele Phannix, Riverside, October 6, 2006. Foster parents haveconcerns about similar regulations that forbid their leaving foster childrenhome alone, even if they are teenagers. Tina Hughes, a foster parent for manyyears and the President of the Alameda Foster Parents’ Association, said,“[When my biological children were teenagers,] if I had to go the store,they could either come with me or stay here, [they didn’t] have to bewith me 24/7. But foster kids, if you leave them just 15 minutes, you getwritten up.” Pat Ambers, a foster parent for over 30 years asked,“How can you teach someone independence if you can’t leave themalone in the house even if they are 16 years old?” Foster parents alsocomplained about not being able to require children in care to do chores theway their biological children are required to. Human Rights Watch interviewswith Pat Ambers, Gerry Hauser, and Tina Hughes, Oakland, November 16, 2006.[105]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Michele Phannix, Riverside, October6, 2006.[106]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withMarty Beyer, Ph.D., Eugene, Oregon, November 21, 2006.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with Dion W.,age 19, Los Angeles, February 24, 2010.[108]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withMarty Beyer, Ph.D., Eugene, Oregon, November 21, 2006.[109]Of the 63 youth interviewed for this report, 48 had spent time in group homes, and15 had only been in foster home settings. Generally in California, only 6.8 percentof all foster children and youth reside in group homes. See Barbara Needell etal., University of California at Berkeley Center for Social Services Research, ChildWelfare Services Reports for California, CWS/CMS 2009 Quarter 1 Extract,  “Childrenin Foster Care, Agency Type=Child Welfare,” April 2009,http://cssr.berkeley.edu/ucb_childwelfare/PIT.aspx (accessed October 7, 2009).[110]Human Rights Watch interview with Tony D., age20, Berkeley, April 3, 2006.[111]Human Rights Watch interviews with Anya F.,age 21, Whittier, April 23, 2006, and December 27, 2007.[112]This is despite the fact that social workers are required to ensure that youthhave transportation to independent living program services. See CaliforniaDepartment of Social Services Manual of Policies and Procedures, Child WelfareServices §31-236(g)(5).One youth never attended classes because, she said, “[t]he group homestaff would complain and say that they’re not getting enough money totake me to the classes.” Human RightsWatch interview with Oceania V., age 18, Sacramento, November 17, 2006.Grace-Kaho, the state Ombudsman, reported that some county classes areover-enrolled and there are waiting lists to get in the courses.[113]Human Rights Watch telephone interview withDarlene H., age 21, Sacramento, January 2, 2007.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with RobertaE., age 24, Hollywood, May 24, 2006.[115]She added, “Also what was cool is that they recognized that I was in aserious relationship with my boyfriend and would probably move in with him atsome point, so they let him come to the Independent City, too. They met mewhere I was.” Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Melissa B., age20, Sacramento, January 5, 2007.[116]Human Rights Watch interviews with Malachi M., age 20, Inglewood, March 10,2010.[117]In order to explain what we meant by “crisis,” the researcheradded: “For example, if you had become very sick and needed to get to thedoctor but had no way to get there, would you have had an adult you could callto give you a ride?”[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Reclusive S., age23, Berkeley, April 3, 2006. In some cases,youth interviewed by Human Rights Watch chose their own pseudonyms. In othercases, the Human Rights Watch researcher selected the pseudonyms.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberta E., Hollywood, age 24, May 24, 2006.California law requires every youth who emancipates to be assigned a caseworkerwho assists them. The youth interviewed for this report stated that did nothave a worker, did not know how to reach the worker, or found the services ofthe worker to be minimal. When asked if she had a caseworker, Nikki B., who was18 years old at the time of her interview and living in a tent, said, “Ithink I do but I have no idea who it is.”Human Rights Watchinterview with Nikki B., Sacramento, August 15, 2008.[120]The website of the California Permanency for Youth Project is http://www.cpyp.org.In January 2010, the organization’s funding ended and it merged withSeneca Center for Family Finding and Youth Connectedness.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Bob Malmberg, program manager, Orange CountySocial Services Agency, Santa Ana, November 15, 2006.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Heather Carmichael, associate executivedirector, My Friend’s Place, Hollywood, November 6, 2006.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with Enrique A., age 18, Sacramento, November 17,2006.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Cheryl Alexander, MSW, supervisor,Emancipation Services Program Orange County Social Services Agency, Santa Ana,November 15, 2006.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with Mia S., age 20, Los Angeles, February 25,2010. Ilia  Jauregui isthe executive director of  Fostering Imagination, a  Los Angeles-based program serving foster youth through creative arts and social developmentprograms. She told us, “[Mia] has become like a daughter to me.”Human Rights Watch telephone conversation with Ilia Jauregui, March 1, 2010.[126]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Miryam Choca, San Diego, December8, 2006.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with Lestat S., age 18, Sacramento, November 17,2006.[128]Mark Courtney et al., “Midwest Evaluation of the Adult Functioning ofFormer Foster Youth: Outcomes at Age 21,”December 2007,http://www.chapinhall.org/sites/default/files/ChapinHallDocument_2.pdf(accessed October 7, 2009), p.37; Peter J. Pecora et al., Casey FamilyPrograms, “Improving Family Foster Care: Findings From the NorthwestFoster Care Alumni Study,” April 2005, http://www.casey.org/Resources/Publications/ImprovingFamilyFosterCare.htm(accessed October 7, 2009).[129]Human Rights Watch interview with Laura Streimer, legal director, The Alliancefor Children’s Rights, Los Angeles, January 22, 2007.[130]Alicia F. Lieberman and Patricia Van Horn, "Assessment and treatment ofyoung children exposed to traumatic events," in Joy D. Osofsky, ed., YoungChildren and Trauma: Intervention and Treatment (New York: Guilford Press,2004) pp. 111-138; Frank W. Putnam, “The Impact of Trauma on ChildDevelopment,” Juvenile and Family Court Journal, vol. 57, no. 1 (January2006), pp. 1-11. Abuse, especially of young children over a prolonged period,has been shown to affect brain development—including regions important inplanning and exercising judgment—and is also associated with poor academicperformance, low self-esteem, and behavioral problems.[131]Written communication from Heather Carmichael, associate executive director ofMy Friends Place, Hollywood, to Human Rights Watch, November 15, 2007.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with Kati R., age 19, Victorville, November 7,2008.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Blake T., age 21, San Francisco, July 26,2006.[134]See Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, “Youth in the Margins, AReport on the Unmet Needs of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and TransgenderAdolescents in Foster Care,” 2001, http://www.lambdalegal.org/our-work/publications/youth-in-the-margins.html(accessed September 16, 2009).[135]Nicholas Ray, National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexualand Transgender Youth: An Epidemic of Homelessness, (New York: National Gayand Lesbian Task Force PolicyInstitute and the National Coalition forthe Homeless, 2006), http://www.thetaskforce.org/downloads/HomelessYouth.pdf (accessedNovember 17, 2009), pp. 11-16. The report relies on US Department of Health andHuman Services estimates that there are between 575,000 to 1.6 million homelessand runaway youth each year. Ibid., p. 1, citing Marjorie J. Robertson and PaulA. Toro, Homeless Youth: Research, Intervention, and Policy,(Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Health and Human Services, 1998).http://aspe.hhs.gov/pic/reports/aspe/6817.pdf#page=75 (accessed August 3,2009).[136]Human Rights Watch interview with Jody Marksamer, staff attorney and youth projectdirector at the National Center for Lesbian Rights, Los Angeles, September 21,2007.[137]Nicholas Ray, National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexualand Transgender Youth: An Epidemic of Homelessness, (New York: National Gayand Lesbian Task Force PolicyInstitute and the National Coalition forthe Homeless, 2006), http://www.thetaskforce.org/downloads/HomelessYouth.pdf(accessed November 17, 2009), pp. 154-161.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with Marvin M., age 23, San Diego, February 12,2009.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with Shaun Zigler, foster youth services program managerfor San Bernardino County Superintendent of Schools Office, Hesperia, September14, 2007.[140]Human Rights Watch interview with PhillipO., Whittier, age 22, April 24, 2006. At 14 years old, things changed:“Then … I got into a home where they really cared about me. Istayed there until I was 18.” But when foster care ended, he was on hisown. “When I was eighteen…there was no place for me to go. I leftfoster care with nothing—maybe I had a week’s set of clothes.”On top of that, the foster family that he felt close to moved out of state,leaving him with no emotional support. He was homeless for about six months,“I slept on friends’ couches and in garages.”[141]American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Early Childhood, Adoption andDependent Care, “Developmental Issues for Young Children in FosterCare,” Pediatrics, vol. 106, no. 5 (November 2000),http://aappolicy.aappublications.org/cgi/reprint/pediatrics;106/5/1145.pdf(accessed October 7, 2009), pp. 1146, 1148. See also Children and FamilyResearch Center, School of Social Work, University of Illinois atUrbana-Champaign, “Multiple Placements in Foster Care: Literature Reviewof Correlates and Predictors,” February 2004,http://www.cfrc.illinois.edu/LRpdfs/PlacementStability.LR.pdf (accessed August4, 2009).[142]The literature review conducted by the Children and Family Research Center(ibid.) lists research finding a variety of negative affects of placementinstability, including the following: for children who initially did notexhibit behavior problems but then had placement instability, later behavioralproblems were associated with the number of placements; infants who experiencedmultiple placements experienced problems with attachment and bonding; and multipleplacements before age 14 were associated with higher rates of delinquencyfilings after age 14.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with Matt H., age 21, Victorville, November 7,2008.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with Lestat S., age 18, Sacramento, November 17,2006.[145]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Whitney Rhodes, age 20, Sacramento,January 5, 2007.[146]Katherine Kortenkamp and Jennifer Ehrle Macomber, Urban Institute, “TheWell-Being of Children Involved with the Child Welfare System: A NationalOverview,” Number B-43 in Series, New Federalism: National Survey ofAmerica's Families, January 15, 2002,http://www.urban.org/publications/310413.html (accessed March 4, 2009).[147]Lucy Bilaver and Mark Courtney, National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy,“Science Says: Foster Care Youth,” no. 27, August 2006, http://www.chapinhall.org/research/report/science-says(accessedMarch 3, 2009).[148]Mark Simms, Howard Dubowitz, and Moira Szilagyi, “Health care needs ofchildren in the foster care system,” Pediatrics, 106(4 suppl.) (2000),pp. 909-918. For a summary of review of numerous studies, see Peter Pecora etal., “Mental Health Services for Children Placed in Foster Care: AnOverview of Current Challenges,” Child Welfare Journal, vol. 88, no. 1 (2009).[149]Human Rights Watch interview with Kathy Cramer of Berkeley Mental Health,Berkeley, April 3, 2006.[150]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Karen Grace-Kaho, California stateombudsman for foster care, Sacramento, November 11, 2006, and January 4, 2007.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with Tina Hughes, Oakland, November 16, 2006.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with Pat Ambers, Oakland, November 16, 2006[153]Katharine Hill and Pam Stenhjem, “Youth with Disabilities Aging Out ofFoster Care: Issues and Support Strategies,” Impact , Published by theInstitute on Community Integration, vol. 18, no. 1 (Fall/Winter 2005/2006),http://ici.umn.edu/products/impact/191/over16.html (accessed September 16,2009), p. 18.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with Patrice M., age 20, Los Angeles, October 11,2006.[155]Elizabeth Fussell and Frank Furstenberg, “The Transition to Adulthood inthe Twentieth Century: Race, Nativity, and Gender,” in RichardSettersten, Jr., Frank Furstenburg, Jr., and Ruben Rumbaut eds., On theFrontier of Adulthood (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005) p. 29; MarilynGardner, “Adult children back in the nest,” The ChristianScience Monitor, February 24, 2009.[156]ISR Update, University of Michigan Institute for Social Research, “FromAdolescence to Adulthood, Many Flourish but a Few Flounder,” Fall 2002,p. 2.[157]Robert Schoeni and Karen Ross, “Material Assistance from Families Duringthe Transition to Adulthood,” in Richard Settersten, Jr., FrankFurstenburg, Jr., and Ruben Rumbaut eds., On the Frontier of Adulthood (Chicago:University of Chicago Press, 2005) pp. 396-411.The authors note that childrenin the top quarter in terms of family income received three times more materialassistance than children in the bottom quarter. Ibid., p. 115.[158]According to Shoeni and Ross, the actual annual assistance diminishes with age.Ibid.[159]Annie E. Casey Foundation, Child Trends, Kids Count and Population ReferenceBureau, “The Transition to Adulthood: Characteristics of Young AdultsAges 18 to 24 in America,” May 2005, p. 32. Source of data is thePopulation Reference Bureau analysis of Census 2000 5-Percent Public UseMicrodata Sample (PUMS).[160]“WeNeed Support: Selected comments of Los Angeles youth who spoke on a panel abouttransitioning to adulthood,” LA Youth, March-April 2009, http://layouth.com/modules.php?op=modload&name=Issue&action=IssueArticle&aid=2429&nid=84(accessed August 5, 2009).[161]Mark Courtney, Amy Dworsky, and Harold Pollack, Chapin Hall Center for Childrenat the University of Chicago,“When Should the State CeaseParenting? Evidence from the Midwest Study,” December 2007, http://www.chapinhall.org/research/brief/when-should-state-cease-parenting(accessed October 7, 2009).[162]Mark Courtney, Amy Dworsky, and Clark Peters, Partners for Our Children,University of Washington,“California’s FosteringConnections to Success Act and the Costs and Benefits of Extending Foster Careto 21,” March 2, 2009,  http://www.cafosteringconnections.org/pdfs/Courtney,%20Dworsky,%20&%20Peters%20(2009)%20FC%20to%2021.pdf(accessed March 26, 2009), p. 12.   See also Clark Peters et al,Chapin Hall Center for Children at the University of Chicago, “ExtendingFoster Care to Age 21: Weighing the Costs to Government Against Benefits toYouth,” June 2009, http://www.chapinhall.org/sites/default/files/publications/Issue_Brief%2006_23_09.pdf(accessed September 16, 2009).[163]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Karen Grace-Kaho, California stateombudsman for foster care, Sacramento, November 11, 2006, and January 4, 2007.[164]Note that when used in the context of international law “state”refers to nations.[165]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 17, Rights of the Child, (Thirty-fifthsession, 1989), UN Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev. 7 (2004), p. 144, para. 2.[166]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December16, 1966, 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified by theUnited States on June 8, 1992, art. 24.[167]Because the United States has not ratified the Convention on the Rights of theChild, it is not generally bound by the terms of the treaty. Nevertheless, ithas the obligation to refrain from actions that would defeat the convention’sobject and purpose. See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, concluded May23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331, entered into force January 27, 1980. Although theUnited States has not ratified the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, itregards this convention as “the authoritative guide to current treaty lawand practice.” S. Exec. Doc. L., 92nd Cong., 1stsess. (1971).[168]CRC, art. 19. Somalia and the United Sates are the only countries in the worldto not have ratified the CRC.[169]CRC, art. 3.[170]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 17, Rights of the Child,(Thirty-fifth session, 1989), Compilation of General Recommendations Adopted byHuman Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev. 7 (2004), p. 144, para. 3.[171]Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res.44/25, U.N. Doc. A/RES/44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N.Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2, 1990, signed by the UnitedStates on February 16, 1995, preamble.[172]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 4, Adolescent healthand development in the context of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,(Thirty-third session, 2003), para 3.[173]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 4, Adolescent healthand development in the context of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,(Thirty-third session, 2003)), paras. 39(b), (a).[174]CRC, art. 20.[175]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 17, Rights of the Child,(Thirty-fifth session, 1989), U.N. Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev. 7 (2004), p. 144, para. 6(emphasis added).[176]Among others, see, article 5(e)(iii) of the International Convention on theElimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), 660 U.N.T.S. 195,U.N. Doc. A/32/18 (entered into force January 4, 1969); article 14(2) of theConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women(CEDAW), 1249 U.N.T.S. 13, U.N. Doc. A/34/46 (entered into force September 3,1981); article 27 (3) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), G.A.Res. 44/25, U.N. Doc. A/44/49, (entered into force September 2, 1990). See, alsoDeclaration on Social Progress and Development, G.A.R. 2542 (XXIV), U.N. Doc.A/RES/41/146 (December 11, 1969), Part II, Art. 10(f); Resolutions on the realizationof the right to adequate housing, G.A. Res. 41/146, U.N. Doc. A/RES/41/146(December 4, 1986); G.A. Res. 42/146, U.N. Doc. A/RES/42/146 (December 7,1987); Economic and Social Council Res. 1987/62 (May 29, 1987); Commission onHuman Rights Res. 1986/36 (March 12, 1986); Commission on Human Rights Res.1987/22 (March 10, 1987); Commission on Human Rights Res. 1988/24 (March 7,1988); Resolutions on Forced Evictions: Commission on Human Rights Res. 1993/77(March 10, 1993); Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protectionof Minorities Res. 1991/12 (August 26, 1991); Resolution on the human right toadequate housing: Commission on Human Settlements Res. 14/6 (May 5, 1993);Resolution on promoting the realization of the right to adequate housing:Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of MinoritiesRes. 1991/26 (August 29, 1991).[177]Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), adopted December 10, 1948, G.A.Res.217A(III), U.N. Doc. A/810 at 71 (1948).[178]International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), 993U.N.T.S. 3, art. 11(1), U.N. Doc. A/6316 (entered into force January 3, 1976).[179]Ibid. Although the United States has not ratified the ICESCR and istherefore  not a state party, as a signatory to the ICESCR, it is bound tonot undertake policies or practices that would defeat the covenant's object andpurpose.[180]The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the UN body that is theauthoritative interpreter of the Covenant, has elaborated the article 2requirement that states parties take steps "to the maximum of itsavailable resources" with a view towards "achieving"progressively" the Covenant's rights. In explaining what"progressive realization" entails, the Committee has said, "a minimumcore obligation to ensure the satisfaction of, at the very least, minimumessential levels of each of the rights is incumbent upon every State party.Thus, for example, a State party in which any significant number of individualsis deprived of essential foodstuffs, of essential primary health care, of basicshelter and housing, or of the most basic forms of education is, primafacie, failing to discharge its obligations under the Covenant." Committeeon Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 3, para. 10(emphasis added). "Progressive realization" also means, at minimumthat "any deliberately retrogressive measures in that regard would requirethe most careful consideration and would need to be fully justified by referenceto the totality of the rights provided for in the Covenant and in the contextof the full use of the maximum available resources." Committee onEconomic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 4, para. 9.[181]Rajindar Sachar, 1993 Special Rapporteur's Report, UN Doc.E/CN.4/Sub.2/1993/15, para. 144.[182]Tayana is probably not in the minority.  In an examination of the fostercare population of Illinois, a state in which youth are permitted to say incare up to age 21, researchers found that, “[c]ontrary to some anecdotal reportsthat only a minority of foster youth would choose to remain in care past age 18if given the opportunity, more than two-thirds of the Midwest Study’s Illinoissample were still in care after their twentieth birthday, and more than half didnot leave care until age 21.”Mark Courtney, Amy Dworsky, and HaroldPollack, Chapin Hall Center for Children at the University of Chicago, “WhenShould the State Cease Parenting? Evidence from the Midwest Study,”December 2007, http://www.chapinhall.org/sites/default/files/publications/ChapinHallDocument_1.pdf(accessed October 7, 2009), p. 3.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Murray L., age 24, Hollywood, May 22, 2006.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Junior J., age 19, Sacramento, August 15,2008. Junior had a part-time job, but perhaps more to the point, he did nothave a place to live when he emancipated. He slept behind the store and used ahose to wash off in the morning.[185]Human Rights Watch interview with NatalieR., age 19, Oakland, November 16, 2006.[186]Human Rights Watch interview with Tiffany T., age 18, Sacramento August 15,2008. Tiffany graduated from high school with a special education certificate.[187]Human Rights Watch interview with Cheryl Alexander, MSW, supervisor, EmancipationServices Program Orange County Social Services Agency, Santa Ana, November 15,2006.[188]All of Warren’s quotes are based on a HumanRights Watch interview with Warren H., age 24, Whittier, December 27, 2006.[189]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Tony Suarez, Los Angeles, December30, 2006.[190]All of Anya F.’s quotes are based on Human Rights Watch interviews with herat age 21, in Whittier, California, April 23, 2006, and December 27, 2006.[191]The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, 42 U.S.C. §11431 et seq., reauthorizedJanuary 2002.[192]Human Rights Watch interview with Mason B., age 24, Hollywood, May 22, 2006.Region / CountryUnited States US Poverty and Economic InequalityProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch