Against All Odds: Prison Conditions for Youth Offenders Serving Life without Parole Sentences in the United States | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportJanuary 3, 2012Against All OddsPrison Conditions for Youth Offenders Serving Life without ParoleSentences in the United StatesAgainst All OddsPrison Conditions for Youth Offenders Serving Life withoutParole Sentences in the United StatesSummaryRecommendationsTo thePresident of the United StatesTo theUnited States CongressTo State andFederal Officials who Fund and Administer Corrections ProgramsTo Judgesand Parole BoardsMethodologyI.IntroductionPotentialfor RehabilitationII. PhysicalHarm and Mistreatment in Adult PrisonsRape andSexual AssaultViolence andAssaultProtectiveand Punitive IsolationProtectionthat HarmsPunishmentwith a Permanent ImpactHuman RightsStandards on Physical HarmIII. LimitedAccess to Education and RehabilitationCategorizedas the Least DeservingIntake ToolsDeny Youth Access to ProgramsPlacementLimits ProgramsLength ofSentence Denies Youth Access to ProgramsLimitedAccess to EducationLimitedVocational TrainingHuman RightsStandards on Access to Education and Rehabilitation ProgramsIV.Psychological HarmFear,Anxiety, and DepressionSuicideThoughts and AttemptsIsolationfrom Family and CommunityHuman RightsStandards on Psychological HarmV.ConclusionAcknowledgmentsSummaryThe penalty [of life without parole] forswears altogetherthe rehabilitative ideal…. For juvenile offenders, who are most in needof and receptive to rehabilitation, the absence of rehabilitative opportunitiesor treatment makes the disproportionality of the sentence all the more evident.—Graham v. Florida, United States Supreme Court,2010 (130 S. Ct. 2011, 2030 (2010))Approximately 2,570 youthoffenders are currently sentenced to die in prison in the UnitedStates—held without the possibility of parole for crimes committed whilethey were children.[1] Most have been convicted of homicide offenses. Manyof the crimes carried the ultimate price for victims and the perpetratorsshould be held accountable. The loss and suffering their victims have endured,however, does not lessen the need for society to hold youth accountable in amanner appropriate to their age and capacity for growth and change.Youth offenders sentenced to life without parole enterprison while they are still growing up and deserve an opportunity to change. Brainscience shows that youth are different from adults, their neurological systemsstill developing. Human rights law mandates that youth offenders be treateddifferently from adults and, to our knowledge,not a single youth offender is serving this sentence anywhere else in theworld. Unfortunately, federal and state legislators in the United Statescontinue to turn their backs on the science and remain out of step withpractice elsewhere, forcing youth offenders serving life without parole toforfeit whatever their future might have held in store for them.This report—drawing on in-person interviews andcorrespondence with more than 500 youth offenders serving life without parolesentences in 11 states—describes the conditions that define the beginning,middle, and end of the lives of such youth offenders. In the different waysdetailed here, those conditions can and often do constitute serious humanrights violations.Youth offenders—persons convicted of crimes committedwhile they were below the age of 18—enter adult jails and prisons whilestill children or, depending on how long their trials and court proceedingslast, as the youngest of adults. Our research has found that youth offendersare among the inmates most susceptible to physical and sexual assault duringtheir incarceration. Many are placed in isolated segregation to protect them orto punish them, some spending years without any but the most fleeting humancontact. Because of their sentence, youth offenders serving life without paroleface the additional burden of being classified in ways that deprive them ofmeaningful opportunities while in prison: many are denied access to educationaland vocational programs available to other inmates. Finally, facing violence,stultifying conditions, and the prospect of lifelong separation from family andfriends, many youth offenders experience depression and intense loneliness.Failed by prison mental health services, many contemplate and attempt suicide;some succeed.Teens and young adults have developmental needs that must bemet in order in order for them to fully mature into adulthood. For a youthoffender in the middle of this essential developmental phase, denial of theseopportunities for growth is devastating. Systematic failure to provide suchopportunities and widespread violence and abuse in prison turns a life withoutparole sentence into a punishment of excessive cruelty. Despite this cruelty, manyyouth offenders serving life without parole persevere in their struggles toobtain rehabilitative opportunities and do, in fact, find ways to mature intoadults capable of contributing to society if ever given the chance.For years, Human Rights Watch has been calling for theabolition of juvenile life without parole sentences in the United States. In2012 the US Supreme Court will consider the constitutionality of the sentencefor homicide offenses. We believe that even in homicide cases the sentence iscruel and unusual, disproportionate, and violates international law. As thisreport shows, the many collateral consequences of prison conditions for youthoffenders further stack the deck—making a life of humanity and dignitypossible only against all odds.RecommendationsTo the President of theUnited StatesSubmit the Convention on theRights of the Child to the US Senate for its consent to ratification ofthe treaty without reservation.To the United StatesCongressPass legislation expanding themandate of the Department of Justice Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention to include a requirement that it monitor theconditions of confinement for youth offenders, including those who are nowyoung adults, in the adult criminal justice system.Require the Department of Justice Bureau of JusticeStatistics to develop and publish annual statistics on youth offenders inthe adult criminal justice system, including admissions numbers,conditions of confinement, and their actual access to developmentallyappropriate educational, vocational, and other services.To State and FederalOfficials who Fund and Administer Corrections ProgramsEnsure that state and federal standards for thecare and treatment of children in detention and correctionalinstitutions—both state-run and private—comply withinternational human rights standards.Provide all youth offenders in state and federaldetention and correctional institutions access to educational, vocational,and other rehabilitative programming that takes into account the needs andcapacities of persons of their age and status.Provide all youth offenders in state and federaldetention and correctional institutions access to all programs regardlessof the severity of their crimes or the length of their sentence.Take all stepsnecessary to prevent, detect, respond to, and monitor incidents ofphysical assault and sexual violence against youth offenders in state andfederal detention and correction institutions. Including, at a minimum:training staff; modifying facility design and management, includingclassification, assignment, and staffing; developing specialized protocolsand guidelines regarding investigation, internal monitoring and review,and outside reporting and oversight; and providing medical and psychologicaltreatment for survivors.End the placementof youth offenders under the age of 21 in protective or punitive solitaryconfinement in state and federal detentionand correctional institutions. Decisions about where to confineyouth under the age of 21 should take into account children’s mentaland physical maturity and should be reviewed on a regular basis.End prolongedsolitary confinement of all youth offenders in state and federal detention and correctional institutions.Protective solitary confinement for adult inmates should be a last resortand an interim measure only. Punitive solitary confinement of adultsshould be for the shortest period of time possible and should not beextended due to minor rule violations.Provide all youthoffenders in state and federal detentionand correctional institutions with the care, protection, and allnecessary assistance—social, psychological, medical, andphysical—that they may require in view of their age, gender, andpersonality.Ensure that allyouth offenders in state and federal detentionand correctional institutions have a meaningful opportunity tochallenge their conditions of confinement, including classification,housing, and access to programs.To Judges and Parole BoardsIf levels of rehabilitationobtained by a youth offender previously sentenced to life withoutpossibility of parole are being assessed (in a parole hearing,resentencing hearing, or other sentencing review mechanism), take intoconsideration the obstacles to obtaining rehabilitative opportunities thatsuch youth offenders have faced and surmounted.While this report and itsrecommendations are tailored to address conditions of confinement for youthoffenders serving life without possibility of parole in adult prisons, werecognize that many of the harmful conditions described confront many otheryouth and adult offenders, regardless of their sentence, confined in such facilities.Moreover, while this reportdoes not address the illegality of the life without parole sentence itselfunder international human rights standards (a topic we have covered at lengthelsewhere),[2] Human Rights Watch renews its longstandingrecommendations that state and federal governments abolish the life withoutparole sentence for all youth offenders and abolish the automatic trial ofyouth in adult criminal courts and their mandatory incarceration in adultprisons.MethodologyThis report draws from extensive research conducted by HumanRights Watch from 2004 to 2011 on youth offenders serving life without parolesentences in the United States. This includes in-person interviews conducted inprisons and correspondence with 335 youth offenders serving life without parolesentences nationwide between 2004 and 2005, as well as interviews andcorrespondence with approximately 225 individuals serving life without parolefor crimes committed as children in California between 2006 and 2011. This alsoincludes responses from a 2007 survey of 145 individuals sentenced to lifewithout parole for crimes they committed as children in California. In all,testimony is drawn from youth offenders in Arkansas, Colorado, California,Florida, Iowa, Illinois, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, andPennsylvania.In addition to in-person interviews and correspondence withprisoners, between 2004 and 2011 we interviewed parents and other closerelatives and spoke with the attorneys for many of the youth offenders weinterviewed. We also interviewed family members of the victims of crimes forwhich convicted youth offenders were serving life without parole.Finally, Human Rights Watch interviewed judges, defenseattorneys, prosecutors, social workers, psychologists, correctionalauthorities, and prison educational specialists in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas,California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Illinois, Iowa, Kentucky,Louisiana, Massachusetts, Nebraska, New Jersey, North Carolina, North Dakota,Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin,and Wyoming.Prisoners were variously contacted through an advertisementin the newsletter Prison Legal News, by mail, through contacts withsocial workers, defense attorneys, and family members, and through informationreceived directly from state departments of corrections and as a result ofrecords requests. In many cases, we were able to consult press accounts andcourt documents to corroborate or obtain additional details on theprisoners’ stories. We recognize that some accounts may have beenembellished or altered in the telling and have limited the accounts includedhere to those we judged to be credible and typical, but we have not been ableto verify each of the specific allegations made. Nevertheless, the survey responses,letters, and interviews are eloquent testimony to the stunting and desperationfelt by youth serving life without parole sentences.Where prisoners’letters or survey responses are quoted, we have left in place spelling andgrammatical errors. As is consistent with our practice when reporting on prisonconditions, we use pseudonyms for offenders to protect against the possibilityof intimidation or retaliation.I. IntroductionA young person who knowsthat he or she has no chance to leave prison before life’s end has littleincentive to become a responsible individual. In some prisons, moreover, thesystem itself becomes complicit in the lack of development.—Graham v. Florida, UnitedStates Supreme Court, 2010 (130 S. Ct. 2011, 2032-33 (2010))Each year the criminal justice system treats tens ofthousands of children as adults for the purposes of trial and punishment.[3]Human Rights Watch estimates that there are currently about 2,570 youthoffenders (persons who were below age 18 at the time of offense) serving lifewithout parole in the United States.[4] ThoughHuman Rights Watch does not have data on how old each of these youth offenderswere when they entered prison, the data we have collected suggests that asignificant percentage entered prison while they were still children.[5]Indeed, children are a small but persistent population in US prisons; the mostrecent data released by the Department of Justice indicates that in 2009, 43state prison systems held 2,778 inmates who were under 18.[6]Of course, much larger numbers of youth offenders enter US prison havingalready passed their eighteenth birthdays, although sometimes just by months ordays.Although some statistical surveys show that many adultprisons in the United States house inmates under 18 as well as very youngadults, the particular conditions they face in adult prison, as well as thestatus of certain prisoners as youth offenders, are often hidden. No state orfederal government agency is charged with the task of monitoring conditions foryouth offenders in adult prisons, although agencies with specialized expertise,such as the federal Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, doexist.Prisons in the United States are tense, bleak places inwhich all inmates struggle to maintain their equilibrium despite violence,exploitation, lack of privacy, stringent limitations on family and communitycontacts, and a paucity of opportunities for meaningful education, work, orother productive activities.But prison life is particularly challenging for youthfuloffenders who come to prison as children or as very young adults. They oftenlack the physical and mental coping mechanisms that older adult prisoners useto maintain their mental health and self-respect. Because of this and due totheir unique vulnerabilities, rape, assault, and assignment to various forms ofisolated segregation are common, as are depression and suicidal thoughts andattempts. Sadly, the suicide rate for inmates under 25 is many times higherthan for any other age bracket in prison, a contrast that is not replicatedamong people out of prison.[7]Adult prison is also a difficult place for young people togain the life experiences and education necessary for healthy mental andphysical development. This is especially true for those serving life withoutparole sentences as many states deny them access to the vocational training andrehabilitative services available to other inmates.Youth offenders serving life without parole face a furtherdaunting challenge—they must come to terms with the fact that they willlive in prison for the rest of their lives. Although the US Supreme Court hasdeclared juvenile life without parole unconstitutional for non-homicideoffenses, the United States still imposes the sentence on those convicted ofhomicide crimes—regardless of their role in the crimes—before theireighteenth birthdays. Homicide crimes may include intentional homicide,manslaughter, and so-called “felony murder” (in which a personparticipates in a felony such as a robbery, during which another assailantcommits homicide).Yet as international human rights law recognizes, children aredifferent from adults and penal sanctions should take into account theirpotential for development and rehabilitation. Even youth offenders convictedfor the most serious offenses who are serving life without parole have theability to grow and change. Some manage to do just that, even in the face ofabusive and degrading prison conditions.Potential forRehabilitationLife without parole is an especiallyharsh punishment for a juvenile. The US Supreme Court has noted that ayouth offender “will on average serve … a greater percentage of hislife in prison than an adult offender.”[8] For a fullyformed adult, the goal of rehabilitative services is to prepare an individualto contribute to society, either inside prison or upon release. Teens and youngadults, however, have developmental needs for education and other servicessimply in order to be able to fully mature into adulthood. For a teen or young adult inthe middle of this essential developmental phase, denial of these opportunitiesfor growth is devastating. It turns a life without parole sentence into adeprivation of human dignity.Samantha L. came to prison at age 17 and was interviewed byHuman Rights Watch 20 years later, when she was 37. She said:You know what’s the worst part of being young andbeing in prison? It’s like you never get to the place where other peopleare at. It’s like you’re always looking for guidance, youcan’t trust other people, and even as you get old, you still feel likeyou are 17. I mean sometimes I see myself in the mirror and I see that my body,my skin, is getting older but inside I feel like I’m still seventeen.[9]No parent or teacher needs a scientist to confirm thisfundamental fact about teenagers: adolescents are still developing into theadults they will become. Recent developmentsin neuroscience have confirmed just that. Adolescent brains are less developedthan adults. Youth are still changing, growing, and maturing in waysfundamental to adulthood.There is dramatic structural growth in the brain during theteen years and early twenties. Research has shown that the most dramaticdifference between the brains of teens and adults is the development of thefrontal lobe.[10] Thefrontal lobe is responsible for cognitive processing, such as planning,strategizing, and organizing thoughts and actions. Researchers have determinedthat one area of the frontal lobe—the dorsolateral prefrontalcortex—is among the latest brain regions to mature, not reaching adultdimensions until a person is in his or her twenties.[11]This part of the brain is linked to “the ability to inhibit impulses,weigh consequences of decisions, prioritize, and strategize.”[12]The decision-making process leading to teen criminal acts isshaped by impulsivity, immaturity, and an under-developed ability to appreciateconsequences and resist environmental pressures—attributes characteristicof children and adolescents.[13] Thesefindings put into sharp focus factors contributing to adolescent criminalbehavior, but they also make clear that for a youth offender, criminal behaviorwill not necessarily define the individual as an adult. “For most teens,these [risky or illegal] behaviors are fleeting; they cease with maturity asindividual identity becomes settled. Only a relatively small proportion of adolescentswho experiment in risky or illegal activities develop entrenched patterns ofproblem behavior that persist into adulthood.”[14]US law has reflected the advancement in scientificknowledge. In 2005 the US Supreme Court stated in Roper v. Simmons that“from a moral standpoint, it would be misguided to equate the failings ofa minor with those of an adult, for a greater possibility exists that aminor’s character deficiencies will be reformed.”[15]Young people have great potential to respond to education, vocational training,and other rehabilitative services. Opportunities forintellectual, emotional, and social growth are essential for young people whoare incarcerated when they are still developing into the adults they willbecome.International law prohibitsthe use of life without parole sentences for youth in part because the finalityof such a sentence does not account for theunique ability ofyoung people to change. As the US Supreme Court noted in Graham v. Florida,“[a] life without parole sentence improperly denies the juvenile offendera chance to demonstrate growth and maturity.” [16] Incarceration without developmentally necessaryopportunities for growth and learning can deny youth offenders a chance to achievegrowth and maturity. Human rights law requires that incarceration of youngpeople be conducted “in a manner which takes into account the needs ofpersons of his or her age.”[17] Teens and young adults have educational needs thatare different than those of adults; they are in a developmental period thatrequires learning on many levels. Changes that occur during the teen and earlyadult years tend to be significantly more dramatic than changes during lateradult years because of the marked mental, physical, psychological, andemotional growth associated with this period. [18] A prison sentence depriving a youth or young adult ofadequate opportunities for growth has implications far beyond the years spentin a prison cell. It can be, in essence, a sentence to be deprived of thepotential to become or achieve anything more.Despite the enormous promise ofevery young person to grow and change, young offenders sentenced to lifewithout parole frequently struggle without hope and within a prison system thatdenies them opportunities for development. As a result, some child offendersserving life without parole remain poorly educated, even illiterate. They maybe angry and violent. They may use drugs and join prison gangs. Some may beunable or unwilling to come to terms with their crimes or exhibit any signs ofremorse. Nevertheless, there are many youth offenders serving life withoutparole who withstand these negative forces and have a strong desire torehabilitate themselves.For example, Troy L., who was 15when he murdered his abusive father, was interviewed at age 24. He wrote in asubsequent letter:I would be ever grateful, in fact, for the chance to spendmy life now for some good reason. I would go to the most dangerous parts ofAfghanistan or Israel, or jump on the first manned mission to Mars…. [I]fthe state were to offer me some opportunity to end my life doing some good,rather than a slow-wasting plague to the world, it would be a great mercy tome.[19]Other offenders we spoke with held similar hopes ofredemption. Nelson H. came to prison at age 18 for murdering an elderly woman,and he was 27 when he was interviewed by Human Rights Watch. Nelson spokeconstantly and in great detail about his passion to become a “search andrescue” worker. He studied books on rescue techniques, physicalconditioning, and first aid. He also trained and tested himself against thestandards applied in rescue workers exams. He wanted to fight forest fires orrescue people caught in other natural disasters because he believed that if hecould save at least one life that would somehow compensate for the one he took.[20]Another youth offender stated:To mature in prison is to commit trial and error until youfind who you really are in the midst of all the chaos and madness thatsurrounds you every day, and built on that personality…. It’s sadto say or to admit that it might have taken this time … to find who Ireally am in the midst of pouring through my angry past. It’s takenyears of reflection but I know who I am and what I want in life now, andalthough its taken this experience and this long, I’m satisfied with[the] man I’ve found within myself and thankful to all of my loved oneswho’ve always stood by me and have never given up on me.[21]II. Physical Harm andMistreatment in Adult PrisonsViolence is endemic in US prisons. Youth offenders who enteradult prison while they are still below the age of 18 are “twice aslikely to be beaten by staff and fifty percent more likely to be attacked witha weapon than minors in juvenile facilities.”[22]Statistics on sexual violencein US prisons also reveal a serious problem for youth offenders, especiallysince sexual violence is so severely underreported. [23] In a 12-month period between 2008 and 2009, anestimated 88,500 inmates age 18 and older—64,500 in prison and 24,000 injails—reported experiencing one or more incidents of sexual victimizationby another inmate or facility staff. The youngest adults (those in the agegroup 18 to 19) and those in the lowest weight quartile (60 to 168 pounds formen and 65 to 144 pounds for women) reported the highest rates of sexualvictimization, particularly when perpetrated by facility staff. [24]Department of Justice data suggest that between one-third and one-half of thevictims of inmate-to-inmate sexual abuse in prisons in the United States areunder 25.[25]Studies also suggest thatyouth under 20 experience the highest rates of sexual abuse by staff of anyprison age demographic.[26] These chilling statistics testify to the inability ofcorrectional authorities to provide safe correctional environments for allprisoners—an inability that is itself a reflection of prisonovercrowding, staff shortages, and inadequate prison programs.Human Rights Watch hasidentified three specific categories of harm and mistreatment that youthoffenders commonly suffer. First, youth offenders serving life without paroleare victims of rape and sexual assault at alarming rates. Second, they arecommonly victims of physical assault. Both of these are often inflicted byother inmates as well as corrections officers. Finally, youth offenders arefrequently placed in protective and punitive isolation in prisons.Rape and Sexual AssaultHuman Rights Watch has previously documented the extensiveincidence of rape in U.S. prisons.[27] Almostevery one of the hundreds of youth offenders contacted by Human Rights Watchraised the issue of sexual assault. They reported being the victims of abuse,harassment, and rape.Small physique and the status of being newly incarceratedheighten the risk of sexual abuse. At 17, when Billy G. was convicted, he wastiny: “At trial, I was 5’5” and 119, 120 pounds.” Uponfirst entering adult prison, he said, “I was scared, confused, andintimidated,” and he explained that he had been physically assaulted,although he did not elaborate as to whether the assault was sexual in nature.[28]Formany, violence becomes a daily reality. Fifty-nine percent of youth whoresponded to a Human Rights Watch survey in California and who answeredquestions about victimization in prison reported that they had been physicallyor sexually assaulted.[29]Brian B. wrote about what happened soon after he enteredprison in Pennsylvania at the age of 17 with a life without parole sentence:Almost every male inmate weinterviewed described having been approached by other Sheriffs took me to theWestern Penitentiary. They lied to the warden telling him I were 18, which Ihad not yet become. I were housed in an open poorly supervised unit, and thatevening a group of large adult men rushed into my cell, holding me down theybegan pulling my clothes off while another took a syringe over to a spoon thatanother inmate were holding a lighter under. He drew up whatever was in thespoon. I were then injected with whatever it were. And then raped. Once foundby the officers I were taken to a holding area, cleaned up, and placed on a vanto another prison at around 3:00 am.[30]Almost every male inmate we interviewed described havingbeen approached by other prisoners for sexual favors, or having to fight toprotect themselves from rape. Warren P. wrote that when he first came toprison, at the age of 15:I was the target of covert sexual predators. Adults wouldpretend to be your best friend to get close to you, then they would tryyou…. Officers would be hard on me more so than the adults for theybelieve that the younger inmates need rougher treatment.[31]Tyler Y., who came to prison at age 18 for a crime committedat age 16, wrote:[W]hen I first when to jail / prison, when I was young, itwas disorienting and scary, like a fish thrown in water not knowing how toswim. Everyone seemed big and dangerous and threatening, I was challenged andintimidated a lot. Canines [sexual predators] stalked me, and at all times Iexpected to be attacked.[32]Eric R., who came to prison at age 16, wrote:When I first came to prison attempts were made to lure meinto out of the way places so that I could be sexually assaulted, fortunately Iwas so scared and wary that I managed to avoid being victimized. I was verysmall when I came to prison.[33]The problem of sexual violence lessens as youth offendersgrow older in prison. Addison R., who entered prison at age 16 and wrote toHuman Rights Watch at age 36, explained:I’ve gotten older, a little bit more mature, a littlebit bigger in physical size, and the older prisoners have stopped preying on mefor sex…. [Before] I’ve had to stab other prisoners for preying onme for sex.[34]As Human Rights Watch has reported elsewhere, female inmatesare also particularly vulnerable to violent or otherwise coercive sexualrelationships with corrections personnel. Abusing the power imbalance inherentin their positions, male corrections employees sometimes allegedly engage inabusive “sexual contact with female prisoners absent the use or threat offorce or any material exchange.”[35]However, they also at times use force or bribery to obtain sex from inmates.The practice of assigning male staff to guard women in prisons and jails in theUnited States is itself contrary to international standards.[36]Carolyn K. entered prison with a life without parolesentence at age 17. She wrote, “[O]ne official put me in a situation tohave sex with him and I did.”[37]Cheryl J., who began serving her life without parolesentence at age 18, spoke about how common sexual contacts with male guardswere:A lot of them [femaleinmates] do favors for the guards. The ones who work at sally port [a securitygate between a prison’s interior and public areas]. To get tobacco, theygive guards head … it’s beginning to be more male guards instead offemale guards [here] and they’re taking advantage of it. They think allfemales wanna be touched and watched by them but that’s not true![38]Sexual abuse and rape inprisons, when committed by or tolerated by authorities, constitute serioushuman rights violations. The fact that youth offenders’ particularsusceptibility to sexual abuse and rape is well known heightens the responsibilityof adult prison authorities across the country to take actions targeting youngprisoners to prevent its occurrence.[39]Violence and AssaultFor many youth offenders serving life without parole in USprisons, violence becomes a daily reality. Almost all youth offenders servinglife without parole interviewed or surveyed by Human Rights Watch sufferedphysical violence at the hands of other inmates.Nearly every respondent to a 2007 Human Rights Watch surveyin California reported witnessing violent acts.[40]Their descriptions make clear that the violence they encounter in prison is notsimple fistfights: nearly half reported witnessing stabbings; some describedwitnessing murders, rapes, strangulations, and severe beatings.[41]“Someone tried to cut my throat with a razor knife,” Gary J. toldus.[42]“I've seen more death in here than I did when I was living in the innercity,” Rudy L. said.[43]Bilal R. wrote, “I have seen stabbings, rapes, robberies, and many otherthings. I’ve been stabbed more than once.”[44]Youth offenders rarely reported the assaults because of theharm it would do to their reputations in prison, and because they assumed correctionalauthorities would do little to rectify the problem. For example, Michael S. was17 when he entered prison. He wrote:On several occasions I havebeen physically assaulted. I reported the first assault, but from that pointforward I deduced that it was best to remain silent as I cannot afford to belabeled [an informant] in my current circumstances.[45]Sometimes guards are allegedly to blame for assaults onyoung inmates. Joe L., who was 19 when he entered prison, told Human RightsWatch that “a few times” he was “slammed pretty hard by theguards here.”[46] Anotheryoung man who was 14 at the time of his offense and 18 when he entered prisonsaid, “I was having problems from other inmates that were violent to meand the staff wouldn’t move me, they left me there on purpose to beabused by the other inmates.”[47]Nearly every youth offender described getting injured due toviolence in prison. Gregory C., who entered prison at the age of 16, was atypical example. He said, “I’ve been in fights with prisoners onmany occasions. Luckily, I received nothing more than a few black eyes, fatlips, chipped tooth and swollen knuckles.”[48]Others had more serious injuries, requiring hospitalization.Jackson W., who entered prison at age 17, said that he was hospitalized inprison in Arkansas because, “I got stabbed a couple times…. I gotmy head busted by locks. That’s a small weapon, but they stillhurt.”[49] AndrewH., who was 16 at the time of his crime of murder and entered prison that sameyear, explained that he was hospitalized after being “stabbed in the leftshoulder helping a guy that I knew when others tried to rape him.”[50]Patricia L. was 16 years old when she was sentenced to lifewithout parole. She entered prison at age 20. Patricia L. wrote:People here who are in and out prey on the young and use usfor things. It’s scary to wake up every morning and not know what willhappen (get beat up or tested)…. I’ve gotten beaten up by women whojust don’t like me for whatever their reasons.[51]Richard I. began serving his prison sentence at age 16. Hisstory was typical of those inmates who had spent time in the ArkansasDepartment of Corrections’ Varner Unit. He told a researcher with HumanRights Watch what life there was like:I got to Varner on a Thursday night, and they … said“tomorrow is Friday…. That’s fight night.” Friday comearound … all these fellows …  got together with ski masks,made up ski masks, go down there and go find a white dude and jump on him. Ididn’t get jumped on the first weekend, it was like the second weekendwhen I got into a fight. I guess it was my turn.[52]Richard claimed his injuries were not severe—just cutsand bruises—as a result of the fight. However, he said that:I’ve seen people … they’d set the edge ofhis blanket on fire. Or I’ve seen people get wooden locker boxes droppedon themselves. Seen people, they put locks in their socks and hit people whilethey’re sleeping. I’ve seen people get jumped on while theysleeping…. Seen stabbings. Seen a person get killed.[53]Many of the youth offenders contacted by Human Rights Watchreported being changed by what they saw or experienced:It has affected me because I now feel I am two separatepeople. One being the [Joseph Thomas] everyone knows, loves, would not hurtanyone and two being the man who puts on the mask and does what he has to do tosurvive in one of the most violent penal systems (CDCR) in the USA.[54]None of the 560 youthful offenders contacted by Human RightsWatch had managed to avoid violence in prison. When prison officials toleratesuch violence, it constitutes a serious human rights abuse.Protective and PunitiveIsolationYouth offenders often spendsignificant amounts of their time in US prisons isolated from the generalprison population. Such segregation can be an attempt to protect vulnerableyouth offenders from the general population, to punish infractions of prisonrules, or to manage particular categories of inmates, such as alleged gangmembers. Youth offenders frequently described their experience in segregationas a profoundly difficult ordeal.Life in long-term isolation usually involves segregatinginmates for 23 or more hours a day in their cells. Offenders contacted by HumanRights Watch described the devastating loneliness of spending their days alone,without any human contact, except for when a guard passes them a food traythrough a slot in the door, or when guards touch their wrists when handcuffingthem through the same slot before taking them to the exercise room or for ashower once a week. Youth had the same experience and feelings whether they hadbeen isolated to protect or to punish them.Protection that HarmsA growing consensus viewsprotective isolation as acceptable only as a last resort and interim measure.[55]Yet isolation is commonly used by prison officials asa quick solution to protection challenges—including the challenge ofkeeping a young person safe in a prison full of adults.Youth offenders reported toHuman Rights Watch that they sometimes sought out protective custody to avoidharm.Occasionally, prison authoritiesrecognize the problems a youth offender is having and take corrective measures.Jeffrey W., who entered prison at age 17, wrote:At the beginning, the focuswas on surviving…. Naturally, I was the target of sexual predators andhad to fight off a couple rape attempts…. These were hardened, streetwiseconvicts who had been in prison 10, 15, 20, 30 years and I was a naïve18-year-old who knew nothing about prison life…. Because of the rapeattempts on me … state prison officials [said] I should have beenclassified as needing protection. I was soon sent to the state’sprotection unit…. I stayed there for seven years until I was returned tothe general population—older, wiser, and capable of surviving generalpopulation.[56]Unfortunately, segregation can exacerbate the lack ofopportunities for programs described in more detail later in this report:Right now I’m not receiving no schooling orcounseling due to being in ASU Administrative Segretion Unit. They have noschooling for me or etc. They are way out of conduct here. I been asking toreceive some GED work but I haven’t receive no responce. I wish torecieve schooling. I learn how to read and write in prison and I want to besuccessful. I might get out one day.[57]Prolonged periods of isolation can be devastating foranyone, but are especially devastating for young offenders.[58]Punishment with aPermanent ImpactYouth offenders are oftenplaced in long-term isolation or super-maximum security confinement as adisciplinary sanction. Dennis Burbank, an administrative officer at ColoradoState Penitentiary, offered an explanation for why youth offenders serving lifewithout parole often end up confined in long-term isolation:One [factor] isage—when you come in at a young age with life without, there’s nota whole lot of light at the end of the tunnel. Also, it’s kind of a guything: the young ones come in with a lot of fear, anxiety, paranoia, and theywant to make a name for themselves—so they have a tendency to actout…. They say [to themselves] ‘I’ve got to impress everyonewith what a bad-ass I am.’[59]Long-term isolation can havelasting negative effects on inmates. Troy L. came to prison at age 16 aftercommitting first degree murder at the age of 15. He spent “something like300 days in an isolation cell” when he was awaiting trial and had beentransferred to isolation several times since for “differentreasons.”[60]Troy said he had spent so much time in isolation thathe was unable to feel comfortable relating to and living around other people,especially now that he was housed in the general population barracks:If you just see what thesebarracks are like, they got us piled in there like some cockroaches. AndI’ve spent so much time over the years … in just cells and lockdownfor different reasons. And it’s hard for me to deal with just having somany people around. So much—I can’t think—you know what Imean?[61]Human Rights Watch hassystematically documented and advocated against the human rights violationsinherent in the incarceration of individuals in super-maximum security prisonsthroughout the United States.[62]Segregated living also has long-term psychologicalimplications.[63]Human Rights Standardson Physical HarmAll inmates, whatever their age, have the right to be freefrom threats to their physical safety. Both US constitutional law andinternational human rights law require authorities to provide safe and humaneconditions of confinement.[64]The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) mandates that“[a]ll persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanityand with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person.”[65]The United Nations Human Rights Committee has further explained that stateshave “a positive obligation towards persons who are particularlyvulnerable because of their status as persons deprived of liberty.”[66]These obligations apply with particular force to children because of theirinherent vulnerability; human rights law underscores the need for specialtreatment of children in the criminal justice system.[67]All inmates are also protected from mistreatment that rises to the level oftorture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.[68]Prison officials have anaffirmative duty to ensure that youth offenders serving life without parole areprotected from violence while they are deprived of their liberty. This includesprotection from physical and sexual assault, rape, and other forms of abuseinflicted by other inmates and by staff. In testimony and survey responsesgathered from youth offenders serving life without parole, it is clear thatprison officials regularly fail to protect inmates from these forms of violenceand sexual assault. In some cases, failure to protect youth offenders fromabuse can rise to the level of cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment.In addition to direct assaults, long periods in isolationraise human rights concerns for all prisoners, irrespective of age. Accordingto the UN Human Rights Committee, the international body that monitorscompliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,“prolonged solitary confinement of the detained or imprisoned person mayamount to” torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment.[69]Moreover, the European Committee for thePrevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, anexpert prison-monitoring body elected by the Committee of Ministers of theCouncil of Europe, “pays particular attention to prisoners held, forwhatever reason … under conditions akin to solitary confinement.”[70]As with other uses of force, Human Rights Watch has foundthat prolonged isolation is a particularly serious issue with youth offenderswho enter facilities while children, both because they are more vulnerable toassault and disciplinary infractions and because they are commonly isolated asa form of protection. The United Nations special rapporteur on torture hasrecently concluded that the solitary confinement of juveniles for any durationcan constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.[71]III. Limited Access to Education and RehabilitationThe paradigm of prison as a place for rehabilitation hassteadily lost public support and political currency over the last two decadesin the United States.[72] Mostprisons pay nominal attention to improving inmates’ skills and lives,regardless of their sentences. Concern about promoting successful reentry isgaining recognition as an effective means of preventing recidivism but has yetto make a meaningful impact on the nature of most prison programs.Basic literacy programs and primary education are requiredunder international human rights law for persons under age 18, and other formsof rehabilitative programs are important in fulfilling governments’responsibilities to promote the human development of youth offenders.[73]These programs also help government to ensure that youth offenders areincarcerated in a manner that promotes their “re-integration and [their]assuming a constructive role in society.”[74]Prospects for rehabilitation are even worse for individualsserving life without parole. Few facilities provide specialized training formanaging such youth let alone education and rehabilitation programs tailored totheir situation.[75] Thesentence itself contains an unmistakable message that is never lost on theoffenders serving it. As one young woman put it, “I feel like they threwthe key away on me.”[76]Withstanding the odds against them, and often through self-study or with thehelp of parents or correctional officials willing to bend the rules, some youthoffenders serving life without parole nevertheless manage to obtain educationalopportunities in prison. This fact is even more astounding given the reality ofthe sentence they face, which tells youth they are devoid of potential.Not only is the message of the life without parole sentenceresoundingly clear to offenders, it has led correctional authorities to directincreasingly scarce rehabilitative resources to other prisoners, as evidencedby our interviews with such authorities in 22 states (see note 79 below). Inthose states, and possibly others we were unable to contact, educational andvocational programs ordinarily available to most inmates are frequently deniedto those serving life without parole, including those sentenced as juveniles.Categorized as theLeast DeservingThere are several reasons why inmates serving life withoutparole are denied access to existing programs and work opportunities. Manystates employ intake tools that put youth at a disadvantage. Frequently,security classifications or housing placement protocols not necessarily relatedto their behavior in prison make them ineligible for programs. Often times,inmates with shorter sentences have priority, in some cases making itimpossible for youth offenders serving life without parole to access services.Justifications for these policies are often grounded in theassertion that an individual must be released from prison in order to benefitfrom training:We don’t want to put someone [in programs] who has 60years [remaining on their sentence] instead of someone short term. Someone with60 years will have forgotten what they learned when they get out.[77]In the course of our research, HumanRights Watch contacted 22 state corrections departments to learn more about theprograms available to youth offenders serving life without parole. Officials inall 22 states explained that space in programs is limited, with access based onrelease date and other factors, such as security classification, which putsthose serving life without parole at a disadvantage.[78]As a result of these systems, youth offenders serving life without parolesentences are among the least likely to obtain educational and vocationalprograms and other services while in prison.Intake Tools Deny Youth Access to ProgramsCorrections systems seek to safely and efficiently managelarge groups of people. Agencies categorize inmates as they enter the prisonsystem, and the categorization determines where an inmate is placed within thesystem. Placement has far-reaching ramifications. Generally, the higher thelevel of security, the less access there is to programs and services. Rigidclassification processes put youth offenders at a disadvantage: their lack ofexperience in the world counts as a risk factor in correctional analysis. Forexample, in California, inmates are scored on the “CDC ClassificationScore Sheet” which, among other things, assigns points for backgroundfactors. The more points, the higher the security placement. On theClassification Score Sheet, normal attributes of the young are reframed asdetriments. Under a section titled “Stability,” every factorconsidered makes it more likely that a young inmate will be treated moreharshly than older inmates:Under age 18 at reception;Never married;Not having a high schoolgraduate or GED;Not spending more than sixmonths with one employer;Not having a primary rolemaintaining a household;No military service or nothonorable discharge.[79]A similar system exists in Florida. Security classificationin Florida runs from Level 1 to Level 5. The system is “based on internaland external factors. If you come in for murder, a sex offense, or otheraggravated offenses, you will be a Level 5 and the only way that comes down istime and good behavior.”[80] Thosewith sentences of life without parole can work their way down, but can never beclassified below medium (Level 3); according to state officials, “very,very few” get below a Level 4.[81]Placement LimitsProgramsSecurity classificationsoften dictate housing placement and frequently limit participation in existingprograms. Typically the security level is based on several factors, includingthe inmate’s sentence and behavior. For those serving life without parolein California, behavior is not counted; official Ross Meier clarified thatstate regulations mandate placement at the maximum level of security for everyperson serving a life without parole sentence. Other inmates can work their waydown to housing placements at lower levels of security with evidence of goodbehavior.[82]The programs available in different Floridafacilities depend on security clearance. Those inmates with the “highestsecurity [level] would have [access to] classes for special education,functional literacy, and GED,” but vocational classes require a lowerlevel of security.[83]As one correctional administrator in Arizonaexplained, “we aren’t going to put tools in your hand so that youcan kill someone.”[84]In California, as well as inother states, when inmates do get into programs, frequent“lock-downs” of facilities impede their ability to participate.Lockdowns are a method of controlling prisoners and are usually in response toviolence or feared violence. The lock-downs confine inmates to cells for 23hours a day. “I’m enrolled in education and I can attend AA/NA(Alcoholics Anonymous/Narcotics Anonymous) when it comes around but most of thetime we’re [on] lockdown so it’s almost impossible to get anycertificates,” said Cesar B.[85] Most California state prisons are at double or nearlydouble the population capacity for which they were built.[86] spanstyle='line-height:110%'>“See, there’s no time for program,”wrote Jose Luis C. “It’s a continuous thing, [we’re] alwayslocked down…. I've been here since last March 2006 and [in those 17months I’ve] only been [able to go outside or go to programs] for a totalof maybe two-and-a-half months. You do the math [Jose Luis C. attended programsfor only 14% of his time in prison].” [87]Length of SentenceDenies Youth Access to ProgramsEven when programs areavailable, prison practice and regulations often give youth offenders sentencedto life without parole the lowest priority for accessing them. Several statesemploy policies that give priority to inmates within a certain number of yearsof release. In the state of Washington, inmates can access programs startingfour years before their release for educational classes and seven years beforerelease for certain vocational programs.[88]The classes are then opened up to the rest of thepopulation in order of release date and as space permits. As a result,individuals sentenced to life without parole in such states are usually deniedan opportunity to partake in these programs.[89]Until they turn 18, most youth offenders imprisoned in theUS are able to take courses preparing them for the General EducationalDevelopment (GED) exam or a high school diploma. In states such as Pennsylvaniaand Arkansas, obtaining the GED or diploma is mandatory for prisoners under theage of 18. In other states, such as California and Colorado, inmates choosewhether or not to take the test.Once a youth offender reaches age 18, budgetrestraints place individuals with long sentences at the very bottom of longwaiting lists. This gives youth offenders serving life without parole littlehope of ever being able to benefit from these programs. For example, underOklahoma law, officials are required to provide basic education to those under21, “but if funding does not hold out, [inmates] are prioritized byrelease date.”[90] A correctional official in Arizonasaid, “If someone is doing a life sentence, they move to the back of thebus, and sometimes I wonder why we train them because they are never going toleave. But it’s because we are training them to have a positioninside.”[91]Many inmates we interviewedsaid that their sentence puts them on the lowest rung of waiting lists for GEDclasses and substance abuse rehabilitation groups like Alcoholics Anonymous(AA), with priority being given to inmates with a set number of years on theirsentence. “Those programs are mainly for people that are goinghome,” one said, echoing the conclusion of many.[92]Darryl T.’s sentence of life without paroleprevented him from accessing the college education that a court psychologistrecommended during his trial because of Darryl’s “highmentality.”[93]Darryl, who came to prison in California at age 18,wrote:LWOPs cannot participate in many rehabilitative,educational, vocational training or other assignments available to otherinmates with parole dates…. The supposed rationality is that LWOPs arebeyond salvagability and would just be taking a spot away from someone who willactually return to society someday.[94]Darryl’s explanation was confirmed by Margot Bach,Public Information Officer with the California Department of Corrections. Shetold a researcher with Human Rights Watch, “Those with the longersentences are not going to get the same programming as someone who is closer toleaving prison. It’s a question of resources.”[95]Thirty percent of respondents surveyed in 2007 by Human Rights Watch inCalifornia said no programs were available to them at the prison where theywere housed. Among those who said programs were available, 47 percent saidprison-imposed barriers prevented them from attending.Limited Access toEducationRegardless of whether they entered prison at 14 or 20, youngoffenders are incarcerated during the period of their lives when education andskill development are most crucial. Until they turn 18, some youth offendersimprisoned in the US are able to take courses preparing them for the GeneralEducational Development (GED) exam or a high school diploma. In states such asPennsylvania and Arkansas, obtaining the GED or diploma is mandatory forprisoners under the age of 18. In other states, such as California andColorado, inmates can choose whether or not to take the test. However, even ifavailable, educational opportunities often end with the GED.As described above, many impediments to education stem fromhow prisons classify youth serving life without parole sentences. Bill C. was22 years old when we interviewed him. He said he had been in prison five yearsand during that time had just one month in a GED class. “I wanted to getmy diploma,” he told us. “I did everything I could to get into theGED program and I was working hard in the class.” But after a month, hesaid, he was removed from the class and told there was no room for lifers.[96]Unfortunately, once a youthoffender has obtained his GED or its equivalency or has passed his eighteenthbirthday, he faces an uphill battle to obtain additional educationalopportunities in prison. Most of the youth serving life without parolesentences we contacted in the course of our research were incarcerated inprisons with further education and vocational training programs, but only a fewmanaged to gain access to these programs.One who was able to do so, Gerard C., came to prison at age18. He wrote:I have received my GED…. I completed college coursehours … through Arkansas State University. I maintained a 4.0 G.P.A. andmy courses were geared toward Sociology and Psychology…. Then they saidclasses would be paid for [only] if you were within five years of parole. I didnot fit those criteria; therefore, I had to discontinue taking classes.[97]Gerard’s college studies stopped abruptly because of acutback in the nationwide “Pell Grant” program, which once includedfunding for prisoners’ post-secondary education.[98]Today, the federal government providesfunding only for “incarcerated youth under the age of twenty-five andwithin five years of release to acquire functional literacy, life, and jobskills through the pursuit of a postsecondary education.”[99]By definition, youth serving life without parole will never be within fiveyears of parole and are therefore disqualified from this program.Post-secondary education is only available to youth offenders serving lifewithout parole if someone can pay the course fees, which tend to be beyond themeans of most offenders’ families.Cleveland B. entered prison at age 17 after committing hisoffense at age 16. He explained:I have received my GED. I also have graduated aneighteen-month program for behavior modification. It took twenty-eight months.I can do nothing else because the state offers nothing else for lifewithout-ers, but I am working on college courses in criminal justice through[a] correspondence course which I pay for with the help of my family.[100]Most child offenders who have been sentenced to life withoutparole are denied access to further education or vocational programs for a verysimple reason: the state and the federal government do not expect them ever toleave prison and so reserve the already underfunded programs for those whowill.Joe L., who was 17 at the time of his offense and 19 when hecame to prison, explained to a researcher with Human Rights Watch that hisprison did not “offer me anything else [other than the GED] because ofthe length of my time.”[101] DarbyB., who entered prison at age 16, wrote, “I’m not allowed toparticipate in counseling because of the amount of time I’m doing….Most programs [have] been eliminated by the state. I spend most of my timedoing nothing.”[102] Whenasked about educational opportunities in the Alabama prison he was held in,Holman C., who entered prison at age 20, wrote, “None. Can’t go toschool with LWOP. I was told I had to pay for trades [vocationalclasses].”[103]Limited VocationalTrainingAs with educational programs, youth offenders serving lifewithout parole have extremely limited access to vocational training. Cindy J.,who was 14 at the time of her crime and 16 when she entered prison, wrote,“My institution doesn’t allow LWOP inmates to attend vocationaltraining.”[104]Correctional authorities in a number of states told Human Rights Watch thatinmates serving life without parole sentences were at the “bottom of thelist” for getting access to vocational training.[105]Officials cited their state’s need “to put our resources where theinmates who are going home can access them first.”[106]Susan McNaughton, press secretary for the PennsylvaniaDepartment of Corrections, told a researcher, “Those going home have abetter chance of getting into a [vocational] program.”[107]However, she said that youth offenders with life without parole are not“sitting around doing nothing,” because the “prisonindustries program” is a “good one for them.”[108]But Pennsylvania’s own policy states“inmate employment coordinators use the inmate’s treatment level,treatment plan, custody level, and length of time remaining on his or hersentence to determine eligibility for referral to the [prison industries]program.”[109]By definition, offenders sentenced to lifewithout parole will have the longest amount of time remaining on theirsentence.As noted above, in some states classification systemsdictate eligibility for vocational training, with those sentenced to lifewithout parole given short shrift:Also for a[n] inmate who is[at my] privilege level, the waiting time for a job is a minimum of 3 to 5years at CSP. And that’s if you know someone to help get you a job. Sonot only do they give us a Death Sentence of LWOP, but they offer us no way toeven prove that we can succeed. So with no rehabilitation, activities, andLWOP, it’s a true lose, lose situation for us in here.[110]Human Rights Standardson Access to Education and Rehabilitation ProgramsHuman rights law underscores the importance of the rehabilitationof children in state justice systems.[111] Internationalstandards further state that children in prison must be provided with basicprimary and secondary education as well as vocational or college-levelopportunities.[112] Even those youth offenders who enterprison after reaching age 18 are entitled to further education and otheractivities. According to the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment ofPrisoners (which applies to all prisoners):Provision shall be made for the further education of allprisoners capable of profiting thereby, including religious instruction in thecountries where this is possible. The education of illiterates and youngprisoners shall be compulsory and special attention shall be paid to it by theadministration … Recreational and cultural activities shall be providedin all institutions for the benefit of the mental and physical health ofprisoners.[113]Prison officials have an obligation to ensure that youthoffenders serving life without parole receive programs. This must includeeducational opportunities as well as vocational and other rehabilitativeopportunities. Unfortunately, testimony and survey responses gathered by HumanRights Watch show that youth offenders are often deemed ineligible for existingprograms, let alone provided the opportunities called for in the UN MinimumStandard Rules described above.There is a considerable incongruity between the physical ormental immaturity of young prisoners and the kinds of experiences and peopleprison forces them to confront. Many of those interviewed by Human Rights Watchreported suffering from, and being medicated for, depression. Youth frequentlyreported having had suicidal thoughts and having attempted suicide. At leasttwo of the youth offenders with whom Human Rights Watch has been in directcontact have since committed suicide. Nearly every youth offender describedisolation from friends and family as one of the most profound factors affectingmental health during incarceration.Starting in the 1960s, sociologists and psychologists foundthat the negative psychological effects of imprisonment increase asincarceration continues, but begin to reverse as prisoners near the time ofrelease.[114]These negative psychological effects are morelikely to be acute in those who enter prison at a younger age.[115]Research also suggests that mental illness is prevalent among youth in thecriminal justice system.[116]Studies have found alarmingly high rates ofsuicide among children in prison. The US Department of Justice has reportedthat the average annual suicide mortality rate for youth under 18 in prisonbetween 2000 and 2002 (52 per 100,000 inmates) was nearly four times that forall other age groups (14 or below per 100,000 inmates).[117]Offenders serving life without parole knowthat they will never leave prison, meaning that for some, the negative effectsof imprisonment can be expected to increase as the years pass and, indeed, maynever lessen. For others, including those interviewed for this report whostruggled with mental health problems, their resilience, the passage of time,and the treatment offered in prison, helped them avoid lasting harm.Fear, Anxiety, andDepressionYouth offenders begin serving their time in fear. Themajority of individuals serving life without parole for crimes committed asyouth surveyed in California in 2007 told Human Rights Watch that the fear ofentering adult prison—especially given the striking physical differencesbetween themselves and the older prisoners—was overwhelming. “Ifelt like, ‘What am I doing in prison with all these grownmen?’” Robert C. recalls of entering prison as an 18-year-old.[118]Anthony C. remembers riding in the prison transport van as it pulled up to theprison where he would spend the rest of his life. “I was scared. I wasreally young. When I first saw the outside of the prison, my stomach washurting. My stomach started cramping. I had heard all the stories about theviolence.”[119]As noted above, Human Rights Watch spoke to many youth offenderswho reported feeling depressed and many who were being treated for depression.Several youth offenders, both male and female, spoke about withdrawing and notinteracting with others around them as a way to protect themselves. Brandon S.said he needs to “wear a mask, twenty-four/seven” in adult prison,and that this led to isolation and loneliness.[120] Psychologists haveobserved that some prisoners “learn to find safety in social invisibilityby becoming as inconspicuous and disconnected from others as possible. Theseprisoners retreat deeply into themselves, trust virtually no one, and adjust toprison stress by leading isolated ‘lives of quietdesperation.’”[121]Whether they enter prison as teenagers or young adults, child offenders servinglife without parole must face the possibility that their loneliness andhopelessness may continue until they die.Brandon S. was 17 when he was arrested and convicted offirst degree murder. He entered prison at age 18. Brandon wrote,“I’m very depressed because life without parole is the reality Iface every day, all day. I’m paranoid about people in general. I trust noone and I honestly believe there is no good person on the face of theearth.”[122]Suicide Thoughts andAttemptsThe psychological impact on youth offenders in prisonsometimes leads to suicidal thoughts and attempts. David C., now 29, was sentat age 18 to one of California’s highest security prisons:[I was] scared to death. I was all of 5’6”, 130pounds and they sent me to PBSP [Pelican Bay State Prison]. I tried to killmyself because I couldn’t stand what the voices in my head wassaying…. “You’re gonna get raped.” “You won'tever see your family again.”[123]David C. was not the only one who said he had tried to killhimself. A number of others told us they had considered or attempted suicidewhen they entered prison. Yekonya H. wrote, “I felt scared not knowingwhat would become of me, nor what to expect. I was alone, in desperate need ofguidance. I thought about killing myself to escape the pain and frustration Ifelt, for not being a better child.”[124]Several of those interviewed described watching other inmates commit suicide.“Prison life is a lot harder than it's made out to be. Especially when ajuvenile is placed in a grown man’s prison. There are no friends inprison. It’s every man for himself in prison. Many don’t makeit,” Jason E. said.[125]Perhaps it is not surprising that the psychological strainof a sentence that will only end in death causes many youth offenders tocontemplate suicide. Unfortunately, some suicides are successful. Human RightsWatch is aware of at least three such suicides in the past four years. DarrylLee James, Jr., committed suicide at age 24, on August 3, 2009, while serving life without parole at the United States penitentiaryin Lewisburg, Pennsylvania.[126] Gary J., a youth offender serving life without parolein California, committed suicide on April 4, 2010. He was 16 at the time of hiscrime, and 34 years old when he killed himself.[127] On January 6,2008, Jerome S. killedhimself in a California prison cell. Less than six months earlier he wrote tous saying, “Life without parole is as bad as the death penalty. This maybe a proper sentence for some, but for juveniles I believe it is unfairtreatment.” Jerome was serving life without parole for a crime thatoccurred when he was 17.[128]Several factors associated with suicide in prison areexacerbated by an inmate’s youth and by the length of the life withoutparole sentence, including:loss of outside relationships, conflicts within thefacility, victimization, further legal problems, physical and emotionalbreakdown…. When the inmate cannot effectively cope with these stressors,the result can be varying degrees of suicidal behavior—from ideation tocontemplation, attempt, or completion.[129]Richard I., who was 14 at the time of his crime and enteredprison at age 16, had suicidal thoughts for many years and would cut his armsfrequently. He said to a researcher for Human Rights Watch:When I went to prison, I was around all the—up allnight—all the violence. I was like, “man I gotta get out ofthis—how am I gonna get out of this prison?” I can’t do nolife sentence here at that age. And so I thought of that [killing himself].Gotta end it, gotta end it…. I’ve got so many cuts on me….Razor blades. They give us disposable razors, you pop it out.[130]Isolation from Familyand CommunityThose sentenced to life without parole as juveniles describetheir daily prison life in terms of nightmares and loneliness.“[It’s] a terrible dream that I can't wake up from. No matter whatI say or do in my dream, I can't wake up,” wrote William R., now 28 yearsold.[131] JohnD., now 31, says, “I feel like I am dead. My life doesn’t evenmatter.”[132]“There's no words to describe this experience. I’d rather bedead,” said 22-year-old Jesse A.[133]But many describe the pain of beingseparated from family, especially as parents and other loved ones die, as amongthe most difficult elements of their incarceration. Others write of trying tokeep a positive attitude and make the best of their situation.Everyone in prison experiences isolation and loneliness. Itis a direct function of being cut off from family, friends, and the rest ofsociety. One young man serving life without parole who came to prison at age15, and who is now 20 years old, wrote, “Every day I grow inside. But Ihave no room to grow in here…. It’s lonely. Your surrounded by1,500 people and it’s still so lonely.”[134]Another wrote, “my heart aches, my spirit screams and my tears are neverseen in its normal form.”[135]Psychologists suggest that some prisoners, “especiallythose serving very long sentences [use] withdrawal and self-imposed isolation… as a defensive reaction to the anticipated loss of … outsidesocial support.”[136]Using isolation as a defense takes its tollon prisoners, who may experience “protracted depression, apathy and thedevelopment of a profound sense of hopelessness.”[137]Most prisoners, particularly those serving long sentences,lose social support and family connections. The difference for youth offendersserving life without parole is that they are likely to be much more dependenton such relationships than older inmates and may suffer these losses at anearlier age, making the psychological harm of longer duration potentially moreprofound.Addison R., convicted ofattempted murder, armed robbery, and criminal sexual conduct, was sentenced tolife without parole. He entered prison at age 15 and wrote at age 35,“Since being in here I’ve lost my whole family. I don’t knowwhere they are or if they’re dead or alive. I’ve been on my own inhere since I was a kid fifteen years old. Twenty years done went by.”[138]Some state prison policies aggravate the inherent isolationof imprisonment. In the state of Colorado, “a person may only be approvedto visit an offender if there was an established relationship prior to theoffender’s incarceration.”[139]Inmates must provide documentary proof of such a relationship.One inmate serving life without parole in Colorado, EthanW., who was 25 when he was interviewed in the course of our research and 19when he entered prison for a crime committed at age 17, had lived in juvenilegroup homes for years before coming to prison. He explained that the lastdocumentary proof he had to show he had a relationship with someone other thanhis family members was a grade school yearbook. He said:So that means the only people that I can show them I knewwhen I was 12, from some photo when I was in school, those are the only peoplethat I can know for the rest of my life? I mean what am I supposed to do? Idon’t understand it? I mean … what am I supposed to hope for exceptfor dying tomorrow maybe?[140]John E. committed second degree murder and was sentenced tolife without parole in Pennsylvania when he was 17. He was 46 when he wrote:I would like to be able to live again and see all thosethings I miss from being lock up because the world has grown up so fast and Imess out on it. My situation for the last twenty some years has been very hardon me because I have seen most of my family members pass away on me….just last year I lost my mother, so what is left for me and my situation buthope someday I walk out of here without being carry out in a body bag? I wasseventeen then, now I’m forty-six.[141]Some youth report mixed feelings because of the emotionaldifficulty of visits with family whom they will never again see outside prison:Then you’re forced to sit there watching yourMom’s heart breaking in front of your eyes and all you can do is hold herhand because your heart is breaking too. So, at then end of every visit, I hopeand pray that they never come back. As much as it hurts not to see them, ithurts that much more when I do. It’s just a reminder of what exactlyI’m missing. Pure, unconditional love.[142]Human Rights Standardson Psychological HarmUnder human rights law,prison officials have an obligation to provide medical care for prisoners thatis at least at the level of that available to the general public.[143]The International Covenanton Civil and Political Rights requires that “[a]ll persons deprived oftheir liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherentdignity of the human person” and thus creates affirmative obligations inthe context of mental healthcare.[144]The prohibition against cruel, inhuman,or degrading treatment or punishment further protects youth offenders fromabusive treatment or conditions, such as prolonged solitary confinement, thatcan seriously harm mental health while incarcerated.[145]Finally, failures by prisonofficials to diagnose and treat mental illness or to monitor and protect thosewith mental illness that leads to suicide implicate the right to life.[146]This is all the more serious given thefrequency of suicide attempts among children deprived of their liberty.The widely accepted StandardMinimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners also stipulate that incarcerationfacilities must administer a medical health screening as well as provide careand treatment as necessary.[147]Given the human rights requirement of rehabilitation inthe context of imprisonment, international standards also require thatfacilities “seek to detect and shall treat any … mental illnessesor defects which may hamper a prisoner’s rehabilitation. All necessary… psychiatric service shall be provided to that end.”[148]These services should be tailored to meet thehousing, supervision, and care needs of those with mental disorders.[149]Unfortunately, as the testimonyand survey responses presented in this report demonstrate, youth offendersserving life without parole are frequently subjected to conditions orcircumstances that damage their mental health, especially those who enterprison while still children, as chillingly reflected in the data on youthsuicide. In some cases, the prison conditions youth offenders are subjected tocan constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.V. ConclusionHuman Rights Watch has described elsewhere how the sentenceof life without parole for juveniles violates human rights law and contradictsthe practice of governments around the globe.[150]Indeed, the United States’ practice of sentencing youth offenders to lifewithout parole has prompted three international human rights treaty oversightbodies in the past six years to find the United States out of compliance withits treaty obligations.[151]While imposing a sentence of life without parole on youthoffenders is cruel, it is especially harsh given the conditions of confinementthat youth confront during their lifetimes of incarceration. Youth offendersare especially vulnerable to physical and sexual assault by other inmates andsometimes by corrections staff and spend prolonged periods of time in isolatedsegregation. They are often denied access to educational and vocationalprograms necessary for their development and rehabilitation. Depression,thoughts of suicide, and suicide attempts are common among youth who feelprofoundly isolated from friends and family with no hope of ever rejoiningthem, a problem which chronically overstretched prison mental health systemshave proven incapable of addressing effectively. Many of the conditions violatehuman rights. Together, they can constitute cruel, inhuman, or degradingtreatment. Most fundamentally, they interfere with youth offenders’physical and psychological maturation: when youth offenders experience prisonconditions that thwart their natural human development, their punishment iscruel to the point of negating human dignity. Despite the fact that the lengthof their sentence and their youth upon entering adult prison make growth andrehabilitation extraordinarily difficult, some youth offenders sentenced tolife without parole do experience emotional, intellectual, and personaltransformation in prison—an extraordinary fact given the adversity theyface.Youth can and do commit terrible crimes. When they do, theyshould be held accountable and face appropriate consequences. But children aresignificantly different from adults, and the punishment imposed for theiroffenses should reflect their age and level of development. Both the sentencesof youth offenders and their conditions of confinement must adapt to account foryoung people’s particular vulnerabilities, needs, and capacities tomature, to reflect upon the harm they have caused, and to change.AcknowledgmentsThis report was written andresearched by Elizabeth Calvin, senior advocate with the children’srights division; Ian Kysel, Aryeh Neier fellow with the US program; and AlisonParker, director of the US program at Human Rights Watch. Additional researchwas provided by Ann Weir, legal fellow with the children’s rightsdivision.Austen Breen,intern,Soomi Lee, Ph.D , and Dana Nahoray, legalvolunteer with the children’s rights division, also provided substantialassistance. Many interns and volunteers have provided assistance and othersupport for our research on juvenile life without parole undertaken since 2004.Joseph Saunders, deputy program director,and Dinah PoKempner, general counsel, provided program and legal review.Production assistance was provided by Elena Vanko and Vikram Shah, associatesin the US program, and Kathy Mills, publications specialist.We thank all of the individualsserving life without parole and their families who have shared theirexperiences with Human Rights Watch. We also thank the family members ofvictims who shared their experiences and opinions with us. We are grateful fortheir willingness to discuss deeply personal and often painful matters.We are also thankful for the perspective of correctional officers andadministrators.In addition, Human RightsWatch is indebted to the work and comment of a network of experts andorganizations working on this and related juvenile justice and criminal justiceissues. In particular, we thank the Juvenile Life Without Parole Initiative inAnn Arbor, Michigan, which provided significant data. Corrections officials andthe federal government have also provided data and additional information thatcontributed to the report.[1]Inthis report, the words “youth,” “teen,” “juvenile,”and “child” are used to mean someone under the age of 18. The terms“youth offender” and “youthful offender” refer to anindividual who is convicted of an offense committed while they were under theage of 18.[2] HumanRights Watch, When I Die, They’ll Send Me Home: Youth Sentenced toLife without Parole in California, January 13, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/01/13/when-i-die-they-ll-send-me-home; HumanRights Watch and Amnesty International, The Rest of Their Lives: Lifewithout Parole for Child Offenders in the United States (New York: HumanRights Watch, 2005), http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/10/11/rest-their-lives-0.[3]There are no precise estimates of the number of youthunder 18 who are convicted each year of criminal offenses, as opposed todelinquency offenses (offenses adjudicated in juvenile court), but estimatesrange above 200,000. See Patrick Griffen et al, Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, US Department of Justice, “Trying Juveniles asAdults: An Analysis of State Transfer Laws and Reporting,” September2011,https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/232434.pdf(accessed December 2, 2011); Jennifer J. Woolard etal., “Juveniles within Adult Correctional Settings: Legal Pathways andDevelopmental Considerations,” International Journal of ForensicMental Health, vol. 4, no. 1 (2005); Campaign for Youth Justice, “ToPunish a Few: Too Many Youth Caught in the Net of Adult Prosecution,”October 2007, http://www.campaignforyouthjustice.org/documents/to_punish_a_few_final.pdf( accessed December 2, 2011).[4] HumanRights Watch, World Report 2009 (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2009),United States chapter, http://www.hrw.org/world-report-2009/united-states/;Human Rights Watch, “State Distribution of Youth Offenders ServingJuvenile Life Without Parole (JLWOP),” October 2, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/news/2009/10/02/state-distribution-juvenile-offenders-serving-juvenile-life-without-parole.[5] Of the420 youth offenders for which Human Rights Watch has such data, 29 percententered prison while still children. See Human Rights Watch and AmnestyInternational, The Rest of Their Lives.[6] Thisdata is not broken down by offense and thus includes all youth offenders. Thestates which did not hold any youth offenders who were still children in 2009were: Maine, New Hampshire, North Dakota, Kentucky, West Virginia, California,and Idaho. Heather West, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice,“Prison Inmates at Midyear – 2009,” June 2010, http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/pim09st.pdf(accessed December 9, 2011).[7]For prisoner data, see Bureau of Justice Statistics, US Department of Justice,“Suicide and Homicide in State Prisons and Local Jails,” August2005, http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/shsplj.pdf(accessed December 9, 2011). For persons not in prison, see Centers for DiseaseControl, Interactive Health Data, National Vital Statistics, “Mortalityby Underlying Cause Among Children,” and “Mortality by UnderlyingCause Age 18 +,” http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/hdi.htm(accessed December 27, 2011) (searchable tables from years 2000 to 2008revealed 18 to 24 year olds had the lowest rate of suicide among all othercategories of adults, and while 15 to 17 year olds had the highest rate ofsuicide among children, their rate [5.5 per 100,000 persons] remained lowerthan all other categories of adults).[8]Grahamv. Florida, United States Supreme Court, 2010 (130 S. Ct. 2011, 2028(2010)).[9]Human Rights Watchinterview with Samantha L. (pseudonym), Iowa, April 2004.[10]Laurence Steinberg et al., “The Study ofDevelopmental Psychopathology in Adolescence: Integrating AffectiveNeuroscience with the Study of Context,” in Dante Cicchetti and DonaldCohen, eds., Developmental Psychopathology (Oxford: John Wiley &Sons, 2006), p. 710.[11]Jay N. Giedd, “Structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the AdolescentBrain,” Annals of the New York Academy ofScience, vol. 1021 (2004), p. 83.[12] Ibid.[13]Ibid. See also Elizabeth Cauffman and LaurenceSteinberg, “(Im)maturity of Judgment in Adolescence: Why Adolescents MayBe Less Culpable Than Adults,” Behavioral Sciences and the Law,vol. 18 (2000), p. 741.[14]Laurence Steinberg and Elizabeth S. Scott, “LessGuilty by Reason of Adolescence: Developmental Immaturity, DiminishedResponsibility, and the Juvenile Death Penalty,” American Psychologist,vol. 58, no. 12 (December 2003), p. 1014.[15]Roperv. Simmons, United States Supreme Court, 2005 (543 U.S. 551, 570 (2005)).[16]Grahamv. Florida, United States Supreme Court, 2010 (130 S. Ct. 2011, 2029(2010)).[17] Conventionon the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25,annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered intoforce September 2, 1990, art. 37(c). The US signed the CRC in 1995 but has notratified.[18]Steinberget al., “The Study of Developmental Psychopathology in Adolescence”pp. 725-726.[19] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Troy L. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inArkansas, undated (on file with Human Rights Watch).[20] HumanRights Watch interview with Nelson H. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Colorado, July 28, 2004.[21] Surveyresponse from Patrick C. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inCalifornia, to Human Rights Watch, July 25, 2007 (on file with Human RightsWatch).[22] MartinForst et al., “Youth in Prisons and Training Schools: Perceptions andConsequences of the Treatment-Custody Dichotomy,” Juvenile &Family Court, vol. 4 (1989), p. 9. See also Jason Ziedenberg & VincentSchiraldi, “The Risks Juveniles Face When They Are Incarcerated withAdults” Justice Policy Institute, July 1997, http://www.justicepolicy.org/images/upload/97-02_REP_RiskJuvenilesFace_JJ.pdf(accessed December 12, 2011).[23]National Prison Rape Elimination Commission, “National Prison RapeElimination Commission Report,” June 2009,https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/226680.pdf (accessed December 25, 2011),Chapter 1: A Problem That Must Be Solved, p. 39.  As noted elsewhere inthis report, Human Rights Watch came across many cases of sexual violenceagainst youth offenders that were never reported.[24] AllenJ. Beck and Paige M. Harrison, Bureau of Justice Statistics, “SexualVictimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2008-09,” August2010, http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri0809.pdf (accessedDecember 19, 2011).  There are few studies focusing specifically on sexualabuse of youth under age 18; however the recent report produced by the PrisonRape Elimination Commission cited a 2005 study: “Youth confined withadults also are at high risk of sexual abuse. In 2005, for example, individualsunder the age of 18 made up less than 1 percent of all inmates in U.S. jails.Yet 21 percent of all victims of substantiated incidents of sexual abuseinvolving jail inmates that year were under the age of 18.” NationalPrison Rape Elimination Commission Report, p. 42,https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/226680.pdf (citing Beck, A. J., & Harrison,P. M., Bureau of Justice Statistics, “Sexual violence reported bycorrectional authorities, 2005,” 2006) (internal citations omitted).[25] PaulGuerino and Allen J. Beck, Bureau of Justice Statistics, “SexualVictimization Reported by Adult Correctional Authorities, 2007-2008,”January 2011, http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svraca0708.pdf (accessedDecember 9, 2011); Allen J. Beck, Paige M. Harrison, and Devon B. Adams, Bureauof Justice Statistics, “Sexual Victimization Reported by AdultCorrectional Authorities, 2006,” August 2007,http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svrca06.pdf (accessed December 9, 2011).Other reports have also found that victims consistently tend to be younger thanperpetrators. See Austin et. al, The JFA Institute, “Sexual Violence inthe Texas Prison System,” March 2006,https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/215774.pdf (accessed December 9,2011); Pat Kaufman, National Institute of Justice, “Prison Rape: ResearchExplores  Prevalence, Prevention,” March 2008, https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/221505.pdf(accessed December 9, 2011).[26]Beckand Harrison, “Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported byInmates, 2008-09,” http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri0809.pdf.Notably, inmate-on-inmate and staff-on-inmate sexual victimization in jails ishighest among youth under 20.[27]HumanRights Watch, No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons (New York: HumanRights Watch, April 2001), http://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/prison/, p. 70.[28]HumanRights Watch interview with Billy G. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein California, June 29, 2007.[29] Thispercentage is based on Human Rights Watch’s survey, in which 67 out of114 respondents reported that they had been the victim of an assault in prison.[30] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Brian B. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inPennsylvania, August 28, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[31]Letterto Human Rights Watch from Warren P. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Florida, March 2, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[32] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Tyler Y. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inColorado, March 16, 2004  (on file with Human Rights Watch).[33] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Eric R. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inMichigan, March 18, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[34] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Addison R. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Michigan, March 20, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[35] SeeHuman Rights Watch, Nowhere to Hide: Retaliation Against Women in MichiganState Prisons (New York: Human Rights Watch, 1998),http://www.hrw.org/reports/1998/09/01/nowhere-hide; and Human Rights Watch, AllToo Familiar: Sexual Abuse of Women in U.S. State Prisons (New York: HumanRights Watch, 1996), http://www.hrw.org/reports/1996/12/01/all-too-familiar.[36] SeeUnited Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (StandardMinimum Rules), adopted by the First United Nations Congress on the Preventionof Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Geneva in 1955, and approvedby the Economic and Social Council by its resolution 663 C (XXIV) of July 31,1957, and 2076 (LXII) of May 13, 1977,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/treatmentprisoners.htm (accessed December 12,2011), Rule 53 (female prisoners should be attended and supervised only byfemale officers; male staff such as doctors and teachers may provideprofessional services in female facilities, but should always be accompanied byfemale officers).[37] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Carolyn K. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein California, April 18, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[38] HumanRights Watch interview with Cheryl J. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Arkansas, June 24, 2004.[39] See,for example, American Corrections Association, Protective Custody (ACA:1982); Human Rights Watch, No Escape, p. 136 (cataloging a number ofempirical studies documenting the incidence and nature of sexual violence inprison).[40] Ninety-onepercent of respondents to the Human Rights Watch survey reported that they hadwitnessed violence while in prison. Respondents often provided longer,narrative answers to explain with more specificity the types of violencewitnessed and the perpetrator. Several did not answer the question and wrotethat they feared retaliation if they answered the question.[41] Withoutbeing asked directly about the type of violence witnessed, 46 percent ofrespondents who wrote a narrative answer describing violence they had witnessednoted that they had seen stabbings.[42] Surveyresponse from Gary J. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, July 26, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[43] Surveyresponse from Rudy L. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, July 29, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[44] Surveyresponse from Bilal R. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, July 24, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[45]Letterto Human Rights Watch from Michael S. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Michigan, March 22, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[46] HumanRights Watch interview with Joe L. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inColorado, May 28, 2004.[47] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Javier M. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Colorado, March 8, 2004  (on file with Human Rights Watch).[48] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Gregory C. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Colorado, March 13, 2004  (on file with Human Rights Watch).[49] HumanRights Watch interview with Jackson W. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Arkansas, June 21, 2004.[50] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Andrew H. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Pennsylvania, February 17, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[51]Letterto Human Rights Watch from Patricia L. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein California, July 14, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[52] HumanRights Watch interview with Richard I. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Arkansas, June 21, 2004.[53] Ibid.[54] Surveyresponse from Joseph Thomas N. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inCalifornia, to Human Rights Watch, July 24, 2007 (on file with Human RightsWatch).[55]“NationalPrison Rape Elimination Commission Report,” https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/226680.pdf, p.8.[56] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Jeffrey W. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Louisiana, April 26, 2004  (on file with Human Rights Watch).[57] Surveyresponse from Randy T. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, August 7, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[58] Becauseof the potential impact, US courts have looked closely at placement of adultsinto isolation, the length of isolation time imposed, and conditions in theisolation cell. See Bureau of Justice Assistance, US Department of Justice,“Juveniles in Adult Prisons and Jails: A National Assessment,”October 2000, https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bja/182503.pdf (accessed December28, 2011), p. 25 (citing Harris v. Maloughney, United States DistrictCourt for the District of Montana, 1993 (827 F. Supp. 1488 (D. Mont. 1993)); McCrayv. Burrell, United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, 1975(516 F.2d 357 (4th Cir. 1975)); and Lareau v. MacDougal, United StatesCourt of Appeals for the Second Circuit, 1972 (473 F.2d 974 (2nd Cir. 1972)).[59] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dennis Burbank, Administrative OfficerIII, Colorado State Penitentiary, December 1, 2004.[60] HumanRights Watch interview with Troy L. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inArkansas, June 23, 2004.[61] Ibid.[62]See,for example, Human Rights Watch, Out of Sight: Supermaximum SecurityConfinement in the United States, vol. 12, no. 1(G), February 1, 2000,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2000/02/01/out-sight-super-maximum-security-confinement-us;Human Rights Watch, Red Onion State Prison: Supermaximum Security Confinementin Virginia, vol. 11, no. 1(G), May 1, 1999,http://www.hrw.org/reports/1999/05/01/red-onion-state-prison; Human RightsWatch, Cold Storage: Supermaximum Security Confinement in Indiana,October 1, 1997,  http://www.hrw.org/reports/1997/10/01/cold-storage.[63]Craig Haney, “Mental Health Issues in Long-TermSolitary and ‘Supermax’ confinement,” Crime &Delinquency, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 124-156; Human Rights Watch, Ill-Equipped:U.S. Prisons and Offenders with Mental Illness (New York: Human Rights Watch,2003), http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/10/21/ill-equipped-0.[64] InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966),999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified by the UnitedStates on October 21, 1994, art. 7; see also CRC, art. 37.[65] ICCPR,art. 10(1).[66] UNHuman Rights Committee, General Comment 21, Article 10 (Forty-forth session,1992), Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted byHuman Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc.HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1 at 33 (1994), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/gencomm/hrcom21.htm(accessed December 12, 2011),  para. 3.[67] CRC,arts. 37, 40; ICCPR, arts. 10, 14. The Human Rights Committee has interpretedthe ICCPR’s provisions on child offenders to apply to all persons underthe age of 18. Human Rights Committee, General Comment 21, para. 13.[68] ICCP,art. 7; Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment (CAT), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46,annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), enteredinto force June 26, 1987, ratified by the United States, arts. 11, 16(1).[69]HumanRights Committee, General Comment 20, Article 7 (Forty-fourth session, 1992),Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted by HumanRights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 at 30 (1994), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/gencomm/hrcom20.htm(accessed December 12, 2011), para. 6.[70] EuropeanCommittee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment (CPT), “Second General Report on the CPT’s Activitiescovering the period 1 January to 31 December 1991,” CPT/Inf (92) 3,Strasbourg, France, April 13, 1992,http://cpt.coe.int/en/annual/rep-02.htm  (accessed December 12, 2011), p.15.[71] InterimReport of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on torture andother cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Juan Mendez, U.N.G.A. Doc. A/66/268, August 5, 2011, http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/445/70/PDF/N1144570.pdf?OpenElement(accessed December 12, 2011), para. 77.[72] See,for example, Michele D. Buisch, “Budget Cuts Present Challenge to ManyState Correctional Agencies,” Corrections Today, December 2003;Erin M. Samolis, “Divergent Clockwork Oranges: The Juvenile JusticeSystems of the United States and Great Britain,” University of ChicagoLaw School Roundtable, vol. 8 (2001), p. 189; Barry C. Feld,“Juvenile and Criminal Justice Systems’ Responses to YouthViolence,” Crime and Justice, vol. 24 (1998), p. 189; Craig Haney,“Psychology and the Limits to Prison Pain,” Psychology, PublicPolicy, and Law, vol. 3, no. 4 (1997), p. 499.[73]Convention on the Rights of the Child, art. 28.1a requires states to“make primary education compulsory and available free to all.” Inaddition, the UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of theirLiberty, G.A. Res. 45/113, annex, 45 U.N. GAPR Supp. (no. 49A) at 205, U.N.Doc. A/45/49, (1990), http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/45/a45r113.htm(accessed December 12, 2011), para. 12, state that “children should beguaranteed the benefit of meaningful activities and programs which would serveto promote and sustain their health and self-respect, to foster their sense ofresponsibility and encourage those attitudes and skills that will assist themin developing their potential as members of society.”[74]Convention on the Rights of the Child, art. 40.1.[75] RichardE. Redding, “The Effects of Adjudicating and Sentencing Juveniles asAdults: Research and Policy Implications,” Youth Violence and JuvenileJustice, vol. 1, no. 2 (2003), p. 142.[76] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Cindy J. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inAlabama, March 18, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[77] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Angela Day, Secretary of LouisianaAssociation of Public, Community, and Adult Education, December 6, 2011. Seealso Human Rights Watch telephone interview with James Wilson, Dean of IngramState Technical College of Alabama, December 6, 2011 (stating theinmates’ “skills will have gotten dusty or old if it’s morethan five to six years.”).[78]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with JamesWilson, Dean of Ingram State Technical College of Alabama, December 6, 2011;Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Wayne Bennett, Deputy Director forCareer and Educational Programs, Virginia Department of Corrections, December7, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Alan Overstreet, SeniorAdministrative Clerk for Reentry and Education, Florida Department ofCorrections, December 6, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withAngela Day, Secretary of the Louisiana Association of Public, Community andAdult Education, December 6, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withKristi Warren, Oklahoma Department of Corrections, Treatment and RehabilitativeServices, December 6, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with BobbieRichardson, School Administrator for Educational Service Section, NorthCarolina Department of Corrections, December 7, 2011; Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Sam Borbely, Treatment Program Manager, WyomingDepartment of Corrections, December 6, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Michael Paris, Education Administrator, Washington Department ofCorrections, December 7, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withRichard Eimerman, Arizona Department of Corrections, December 7, 2011; HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Tammy Walter, Program Assistant, ColoradoDepartment of Corrections, December 7, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Brian Garnett, Director of External Affairs, ConnecticutDepartment of Corrections, December 8, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with John Nally, Director of Education, Kentucky Department ofCorrections, December 8, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Anne Fornal,Assistant Superintendent, Ohio Department of Corrections, December 8, 2011;Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Mark Wentz, Lead Teacher of theLincoln Facilities, Nebraska Department of Corrections, December 8, 2011; HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Tammy Barstad, Business Manager ofSchools, North Dakota Department of Corrections, December 8, 2011; Human RightsWatch telephone interview with Sadique Isahaku, Education Coordinator,Wisconsin Department of Corrections, December 8, 2011; Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with John Ryan, Director of Education, Delaware Departmentof Corrections, December 9, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withRalph Orleck, Special Education Principal, Rhode Island Department ofCorrections, December 9, 2011; Human Rights Watch telephone interview withDinah Tyler, spokeswoman, Arkansas Department of Corrections, October 2004;Human Rights Watch interview with treatment director at Iowa CorrectionalInstitute for Women, Mitchellville Iowa, April 5, 2004; Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Susan McNaughton, press secretary, PennsylvaniaDepartment of Corrections, October 2004; Human Rights Watch interview withMargot Bach, public information officer, California Department of Corrections,November 3, 2004.[79] CaliforniaDepartment of Corrections, Classification Score Sheet, Form 839, July 1988 (onfile with Human Rights Watch).[80]Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Alan Overstreet, Senior Administrative Clerk forReentry and Education, Florida Department of Corrections, December 6, 2011.[81] Ibid.[82] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Ross Meier, Sacramento, California,November 14, 2007. California State prisons are divided into four levels ofsecurity, with level I being the lowest level of security and IV the highest.See California Code of Regulations, Title 15§3375.(2)(a), which states,“An inmate serving a sentence of life without possibility of parole shallnot be housed in a facility with a security level lower than Level IV, exceptwhen authorized by the Departmental Review Board.” Meier told HumanRights Watch that individuals serving life without parole are allowed topetition to have their level lowered. However, for those serving life withoutparole, a change in security classification to a level III requires a decisionby the Deputy Director after review by a classification committee. Meierrefused to speculate as to how often an inmate serving life without parole hashis or her classification reduced. None of the 135 individuals in Californiawith whom Human Rights Watch communicated said they had had theirclassification reduced from a level IV to a level III.[83] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Richard Eimerman, Education ProgramsManager for the Arizona Department of Corrections, December 7, 2011.[84] Ibid.[85] Surveyresponse from Cesar B. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, August 1, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[86] TheCalifornia Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation lists on its websitethe current inmate population and the design capacity of each of thestate’s 33 prisons. Twenty-five prisons have near double the population(1.9 times designed capacity) or more than double the intended population.Seven prisons have almost double the population (1.5 to 1.8  times thedesigned population capacity). Only one, the California Medical Center, hasprisoner numbers at or below designed facility capacity. California Departmentof Corrections and Rehabilitation, “Adult Facilities andLocations,”2007, http://www.cdcr.ca.gov/Visitors/Facilities/index.html(accessed November 5, 2007). Conditions in California prisons, including thoserelated to overcrowding, are the subject of several lawsuits and legislation.[87] Letterfrom Jose Luis C. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California, toHuman Rights Watch, July 25, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[88] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Michael Paris, Education Administratorfor the Washington Department of Corrections, December 7, 2011. See also HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Alan Overstreet, Senior AdministrativeClerk for Reentry and Education for the Florida Department of Corrections,December 6, 2011 (stating that individuals must be  three to four years torelease date before programs are available) and Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Tammy Walter, Program Assistant in the Colorado Department ofCorrections, December 7, 2011 (stating that individuals must generally be fiveyears away from mandatory release date to participate in programs).[89] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Michael Paris, Education Administratorfor Washington Department of Corrections, December 7, 2011 (stating,“Life without parole would not be selected for programs because they willnot be out in seven years…we don’t really have any [inmates with]life without parole in vocational programs. The only options for lifers will bework programs and even then there are limits in amount of time they can be in aparticular job.”).[90] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Kristi Warren, Oklahoma Treatment andRehabilitative Services, December 6, 2011.[91] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Richard Eimerman, Education ProgramsManager for the Arizona Department of Corrections, December 7, 2011.[92] Surveyresponse from “Anonymous,” serving life without parole inCalifornia, to Human Rights Watch, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[93] “AmenabilityDetermination,” Southern Reception Center and Clinic, December 17, 1991(on file with Human Rights Watch).[94] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Darryl T. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein California, March 20, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[95]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Margot Bach, Public Information Officer,California Department of Corrections, November 3, 2004.[96] HumanRights Watch interview with Bill C. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inCalifornia, January 26, 2006.[97] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Gerard C. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Arkansas, March 15, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[98] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Linda Shephard, Programs Officer, ArkansasDepartment of Corrections, July 18, 2005.[99]SeeHigher Education Act, 20 USC 1151, title VIII, sec. D, “Grants to Statesfor Workforce and Community Transition Training for Incarcerated Youth.”[100] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Cleveland B. (pseudonym), serving life withoutparole in  Alabama, March 29, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[101] HumanRights Watch interview with Joe L. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inColorado, May 28, 2004.[102] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Darby B. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inMichigan, March 1, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[103] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Holman C. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Alabama, March 3, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[104] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Cindy J. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inAlabama, March 17, 2004  (on file with Human Rights Watch).[105] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dinah Tyler, spokeswoman, ArkansasDepartment of Corrections, October 2004; Human Rights Watch interview withtreatment director at Iowa Correctional Institute for Women, Mitchellville,Iowa, April 5, 2004; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with SusanMcNaughton, press secretary, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, October2004; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Margot Bach, publicinformation officer, California Department of Corrections, November 3, 2004.[106] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Dinah Tyler, Arkansas Department ofCorrections Public Information, October 2004.[107] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Susan McNaughton, Pennsylvania Departmentof Corrections press secretary, October 2004.[108] Ibid.[109]Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, “TeachingInmates to Work,” March 2005,http://www.cor.state.pa.us/stats/lib/stats/ci.pdf(accessed on April 1, 2005).[110]Letterto Human Rights Watch from Peter O. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inCalifornia, July 10, 2008 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[111]CRC,arts. 37, 40; ICCPR, arts. 10, 14.[112] UNRules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty, G.A. Res.45/113, annex, 45 U.N. GAPR Supp. (no. 49A) at 205, U.N. Doc. A/45/49, (1990), http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/45/a45r113.htm(accessed December 12, 2011), para. 12 (stating that “children should beguaranteed the benefit of meaningful activities and programs which would serveto promote and sustain their health and self-respect, to foster their sense ofresponsibility and encourage those attitudes and skills that will assist themin developing their potential as members of society”).[113]Standard Minimum Rules, arts. 77(1) and 78.[114] Fordocumentation of increased negative effects, see, for example, Stanton Wheeler,“Socialization in Correctional Communities,” AmericanSociological Review, vol. 26 (1961), p. 697; Peter Garabedian,“Social Role and Processes of Socialization in the PrisonCommunity,” Social Problems, vol. 11 (1963), p. 140. Fordocumentation of decreased negative effects, see, for example, Robert Johnsonand Hans Toch, “The First Cut is the Deepest: Psychological Breakdown andSurvival in the Detention Setting,” The Pains of Imprisonment(Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, 1982); Haney, “Psychology and theLimits to Prison Pain,” p. 499.[115]Craig Haney, “The Psychological Impact ofIncarceration: Implications for Postprison Adjustment,” in Jeremy Travisand Michelle Waul, eds., Prisoners Once Removed: The Impact of Incarcerationand Reentry on Children, Families, and Communities (Urban Institute Press,2003). Researchers have also observed that “individuals experiencinglonger incarcerations have a harder time preserving their self-identity andtheir self-esteem,” which may be exacerbated when an individual’scharacter is not formed to begin with. Kristy Matsuda, “The Impact ofIncarceration on Young Offenders,” Ph.D. dissertation, June 2009,https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/227403.pdf(accessed December 9, 2011) (citing T.J. Flanagan,“Dealing with long-term confinement: Adaptive strategies and perspectivesamong long-term prisoners,” Criminal Justice and Behavior, vol. 8,no.2 (1988), pp. 201, 222).[116] DanielC. Murrie et al., “Psychiatric Symptoms Among Juveniles Incarcerated inAdult Prison,” Psychiatric Services, vol. 60, no. 8 (2009)(stating that prevalence rates may exceed 60 percent). See, for example, JasonJ. Washburn et al., “Psychiatric Disorders Among Detained Youths: AComparison of Youths Processed in Juvenile Court and Adult CriminalCourt,” Psychiatric Services, vol. 59, no. 9 (2008), Table 2.[117]ChristopherJ. Mumola, Bureau of Justice Statistics,“Suicide and Homicide in StatePrisons and Local Jails,” August 2005, http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/shsplj.pdf(accessed December 9, 2011) (reporting suicide rates of 14 per 100,000prisoners age 18 to 24, 25 to 34, and 35 to 44, as well as a suicide rate of 13per 100,000 for those prisoners age 45 to 54 and 55 or older).[118] Surveyresponse from Robert C. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, July 28, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[119]HumanRights Watch interview with Anthony C. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein California, July 17, 2007.[120] See,for example, Human Rights Watch interview with Luke J. (pseudonym), servinglife without parole in Colorado, July 27, 2004; Human Rights Watch interviewwith Alexis V. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in Iowa, April 2004.[121] Haney,“Psychology and the Limits to Prison Pain,” p. 499 (citing R.J.Sapsford, “Life Sentence Prisoners: Psychological Changes DuringSentence,” British Journal of Criminology, vol. 18, no. 128 (1978)).[122] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Brandon S. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Michigan, March 22, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[123] Surveyresponse from David C. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, July 28, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[124] Surveyresponse from Yekonya H. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inCalifornia, to Human Rights Watch, July 26, 2007 (on file with Human RightsWatch).[125] Surveyresponse from Jason E. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, August 20, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[126]United States District Court, District of Arizona,Criminal Docket for Case # 3:03-cr-00900- MHM-1 (“Docket”), EntryNo. 292, and Letter from B.A. Bledsoe, Warden, Federal Bureau of Prisons, toThe Honorable Mary H. Murguia, United States District Court, District ofArizona, Aug. 4, 2009 (filed with the Clerk of the United States DistrictCourt, District of Arizona on Aug. 14, 2009).[127]Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Tom A. Edmonds, Chief Deputy Coroner/PublicAdministrator, Kings County Coroner's Office, Hanford, CA, December 22,2011.[128] Surveyresponse from Jerome S. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, July 25 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch). JeromeS. committed suicide on January 6, 2008.[129]LindsayM. Hayes, National Center on Institutions and Alternatives, “PrisonSuicide: An Overview and Guide to Prevention,” 1995, http://static.nicic.gov/Library/012475.pdf(accessed December 12, 2011).[130]HumanRights Watch interview with Richard I. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Arkansas, June 21, 2004 .[131] Surveyresponse from William R. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inCalifornia, to Human Rights Watch, July 26, 2007 (on file with Human RightsWatch).[132] Surveyresponse from John D. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, July 30, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[133] Surveyresponse from Jessie A. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, July 30, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[134] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Warren P. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Florida, March 2, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[135] Survey responsefrom Chosen T. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California, to HumanRights Watch, July 26, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[136] Haney,“Psychology and the Limits to Prison Pain,” p. 499 (citing CreasieHairston, “Family Ties during Imprisonment: Important to Whom and forWhat?” Journal of Sociology and Social Welfare, vol. 18 (1991), p.87.).[137] Ibid.,p. 499 (citing Judith Herman, “Complex PTSD: A Syndrome in Survivors ofProlonged and Repeated Trauma,” Journal of Traumatic Stress, vol.5 (1992), p. 377).[138] Letterto Human Rights Watch from Addison R. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Michigan, March 20, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[139] ColoradoDepartment of Corrections, “Offender Visiting Program,” http://www.doc.state.co.us/visitors/visitors.htm(accessed on October 24, 2004).[140] HumanRights Watch interview with Ethan W. (pseudonym), serving life without parolein Colorado, July 28, 2004.[141] Letter toHuman Rights Watch from John E. (pseudonym), serving life without parole inPennsylvania, March 15, 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[142] Surveyresponse from Taylor C. (pseudonym), serving life without parole in California,to Human Rights Watch, August 17, 2007 (on file with Human Rights Watch).[143] SeeICCPR, arts. 6, 7, and 10(1); CAT, art. 16; Basic Principles for the Treatmentof Prisoners (Basic Principles), adopted December 14, 1990, G.A. Res. 45/111,annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (no. 49A), at 200, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990),principle 9.[144]ICCPR,art. 10(1).[145] Ibid.,art. 7.[146] Ibid.,art. 6.[147]Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,adopted Aug. 30, 1955, by the First United Nations Congress on the Preventionof Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, U.N. Doc. A/CONF/611, annex I, E.S.C.res. 663C, 24 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (No. 1) at 11, U.N. Doc. E/3048 (1957), amendedE.S.C. res. 2076, 62 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (No. 1) at 35, U.N.Doc. E/5988 (1977),principle 24.[148] Ibid.,principle 62.[149] Ibid.,principle 82.[150] See,for example, Connie de la Vega and Michelle Leighton, “Sentencing ourChildren to Die in Prison: Global Law and Practice,” University of SanFrancisco Law Review, vol. 42 (2008); Human Rights Watch, When I Die,They’ll Send Me Home; Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, TheRest of Their Lives.[151]TheHuman Rights Committee (the oversight and enforcement body for the ICCPR,ratified by the United States in 1992) has said that “[t]he Committee isof the view that sentencing children to life sentences without parole is ofitself not in compliance with … the Covenant.” UN Human RightsCommittee, “Concluding Observations of the Human Rights Committee:The United States of America,” U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/USA/CO/ 3/Rev.1, Dec. 18,2006, para. 35. Moreover, the Committee Against Torture (the oversight andenforcement body for the CAT, ratified by the United States in 1994) has statedthat life without parole sentences for youth “could constitute cruel,inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment” in violation of the treaty.Committee Against Torture, “Conclusions and Recommendations of theCommittee Against Torture: United States of America,” U.N. Doc.CAT/USA/CO/2, July 25, 2006, para. 34. Finally, the Committee on theElimination of Racial Discrimination (the oversight and enforcement body forthe International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of RacialDiscrimination, a treaty ratified by the United States in 1994) concluded that,in light of the racial disparities in the sentencing of youth to life withoutparole, “the persistence of such sentencing is incompatible with …the Convention.” Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,“Concluding Observations of the United States,” U.N. Doc.CERD/C/USA/CO/6, Feb. 6, 2008, para. 21.Related ContentJanuary 2, 2012News ReleaseUS: Harsh Conditions for Young LifersSexual Violence, Solitary Confinement, DepressionJanuary 2, 2012News ReleaseUS: Harsh Conditions for Young LifersRegion / CountryUnited States Criminal JusticeProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch