Barely Surviving: Detention, Abuse, and Neglect of Migrant Children in Indonesia | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportJune 23, 2013Barely SurvivingDetention, Abuse, and Neglect of Migrant Children in IndonesiaSummaryArif B. was just 15 years old in early 2011 when he leftAfghanistan to travel to Indonesia by himself.He borrowed US$7,000to pay smugglers to bring him to Jakarta. From there, he made his way toBanjarmasin, a town in South Kalimantan, and boarded another smuggler’sboat to take him on what he hoped would be his final destination: Australia.The crossing from Banjarmasin to the nearest Australianterritory covers approximately 700 miles, and is perilous and often fatal,plied by unseaworthy vessels that lack sufficient navigation equipment, food,or fuel. Seven days into the 15-day journey, Arif’s boat went intodistress. A passing cargo ship picked up the passengers, including Arif, andtook them to the Indonesian police, who ignored the fact that Arif was a childtraveling alone, half a world away from his parents. Immigration officials heldthe passengers overnight in an informal detention facility in Samarinda, EastKalimantan, before transferring them to the Balikpapan Immigration DetentionCenter (IDC), some 60 miles away.Arif remained at Balikpapan IDC for 50 days, confined to acell with unrelated adults for 22 hours each day. When he tried to escape, oneday after arriving at Balikpapan, the guards beat him. He told Human RightsWatch,That day I was beaten up very roughly…. There wereeight or nine people beating me, most were guards and there was one person fromthe outside. They hurt my shoulder, my ear, my back. I was beaten with one ofthe other people who was caught. It was in the courtyard, everyone wasthere.... They saw and watched. Including one family from Iran, with aseven-year-old boy. He was watching too.After 50 days, Arif was taken to Kalideres IDC near thecapital Jakarta, one of Indonesia’s largest of the 12 or so IDCsnationwide. There, he bribed an immigration official with $400 to secure hisrelease.Arif tried to make the boat crossing to Australia again inDecember 2011. Again, his boat went into distress, but this time theconsequences were fatal. Arif reports that hundreds of his fellow passengersdied, and he himself nearly drowned:We spent eight hours on the boat before it was in trouble,then three nights floating in the boat while it was sinking down.... For threedays and nights, no water and food. We kept climbing higher and higher as theboat was sinking.After Arif was rescued, Indonesian authorities brought himback to Jakarta, and all but turned their back on him. Now 17, he lives in ashelter that a non-governmental organization (NGO) runs near Jakarta forunaccompanied migrant children. Although Arif has paperwork certifying that heis a refugee from the UN’s refugee agency, UNHCR, the Indonesiangovernment does not recognize him as in the country legally. The governmentdoes not provide guardianship or other assistance to unaccompanied boys likeArif, and he cannot work legally, or move freely around the country. He hopesto be resettled to Australia, but in the meantime has no school to go to, andclaims he still feels the psychological trauma of his flight, detention, andnear-drowning.**A Growing ProblemDespite his hardships, Arif is now one of the luckier ones:he has a place in a shelter and refugee status from UNHCR. Many other migrantchildren in Indonesia—both those traveling with parents or otherguardians, and those traveling alone—are still detained, abused, andneglected.Each year, a growing number of asylumseekers—primarily from Afghanistan, Somalia, Sri Lanka, and Burma—enter Indonesia in search of safer lives. At the end of February 2013, therewere 9,226 refugees and asylum seekers in UNHCR’s active caseload inIndonesia, a 2,000 percent increase since 2008.Almost 2,000 asylum-seeking and refugee children were inIndonesia as of March 2013.During the year 2012, 1,178 unaccompanied childrenentered Indonesia, the highest number in recent years.The real number ofmigrant children is likely to be far higher since many migrants and asylum seekers—includingchildren—do not register with UNHCR, preferring to remain out of sightand try to make their way to Australia.While many migrants and asylum-seeking children, like Arif,may try to reach Australia, they often spend months or years caught inIndonesia. This report focuses on the thousands of children—accompaniedand unaccompanied—who enter Indonesia every year, and it documents theabusive conditions and interminable waits children face during the months andyears they spend in limbo in Indonesia.Thousands Detained and AbusedMigrant children—both accompanied andunaccompanied—are arbitrarily detained in terrible conditions for monthsor years, without knowing how long they will be held. Of the 102 migrantsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch, 82 were or had been detained. Of the 42children covered in our research, all but 7 of them were or had been detained.Safia A., an Afghan refugee, was held with her husband and three daughters aged10, 6, and 4 years old in a cell at Pekanbaru IDC for a year: “Mychildren asked and asked, ‘When can we go outside?’ But … wehave no answers for them.”Indonesian law permits immigration detention for up to 10years without judicial review. As a result, many children remain in detentionfor years, facing an array of abuses including physical violence fromimmigration officials, bribery and confiscation of property, and lack of basicnecessities. The impact of prolonged, indefinite immigration detention isparticularly severe for children, many of whom experience post-traumatic stressdisorder or depression.The detention centers are overcrowded, unsanitary, and canflood during the rainy season. One child with whom we spoke said there was onetoilet for thirty-seven people when he was detained at Pontianak IDC forseven-and-a-half months. Interviewees complained that the food in the detentioncenters is dirty and lacks the nutrition that young children need. Somemigrants and asylum seekers said they were not allowed outdoors for weeks ormonths. “How can I explain what it’s like when we went out?”said 17-year-old Faizullah A., who was kept inside for five months. “Wewere like the wild, running all around. We were thinking we were aliveagain.”Most unaccompanied children—like Arif andFaizullah—are detained with unrelated adults at risk of violence andexploitation. Sher K., an adult asylum seeker, was detained at Kalideres IDC:There were 20 or 30 unaccompanied minors… Wheneverthe boys talked on the phone with their families, they would cry. The boyscried all the time. They were the most powerless in there. They would getattacked.Both adults and children described guardskicking, punching, and slapping them or other detainees. Some reported thatguards tied up or gagged detainees, beat them with sticks, burned them withcigarettes, and administered electric shocks. For instance, Sher K. was beatenafter trying to escape:Three shifts of guards, they would each come with sticksand knives and hit us. Six or seven guards would come and beat us for fun. Itlasted for three days, every day, all day. They did it for fun. One friend ofmine … had a broken arm. My face was black and blue. My kidney wasdamaged for a month—it was bad—from the beating.Severalunaccompanied boys told Human Rights Watch that Indonesian immigration guardsbeat them in detention. In another case, parents said immigration guards forcedtheir children, including their four year old and six year old, to watch guardsbeat other migrants.The ill-treatment can be fatal. In February 2012, TaqiNaroye, a 28-year-old Afghan asylum seeker was beaten to death in Pontianak IDCafter attempting to escape. Police had returned him to the facility in goodhealth. The next day, he was delivered, dead, to the local hospital. Accordingto our interviews, other migrants witnessed his beating, including oneunaccompanied migrant child who was then beaten himself.Accountability for abuses is generally lacking. Apart fromsome minor changes at Pontianak, there has been little accountability for Naroye’sdeath. There has been no nationwide review of physical abuse in detention, andthere are no comprehensive procedures in place to train immigration staff orprovide a complaints mechanism for detainees. Nor does the immigrationdetention system have published regulations establishing clear consequences forviolations of detainees’ rights.No Refuge, no ProtectionDespite the growing numbers of migrant children, Indonesiafails to respond to their needs. It does not provide access to asylum formigrant children or their families and leaves unaccompanied migrant childrenalone, unprotected, and without access to services.Indonesia has not ratified the 1951 Refugee Convention orits Protocol, and does not have adequate domestic asylum laws. As a result,processing asylum applications falls to UNHCR, which provides certificatesrecognizing individuals and families as refugees. Yet UNHCR’s processcomes with many delays, leaving hundreds of migrant children in detention, andthese certificates carry little official weight with the Indonesian government.Indonesia does nothing to assist unaccompanied children,some of the most vulnerable asylum seekers. Though Indonesia is obliged, due toits ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, to provideunaccompanied children with guardians, it has neglected to assign that role toany government entity. Without guardianship, some children remain in detention,unable to be released without anyone to care for them.Outside detention, only a handful of unaccompanied children,like Arif, have any assistance. There are places in shelters for perhaps 140children at any time. Others still live on the street or in crowded privateaccommodation with other migrants, at risk of exploitation, destitution, andre-arrest. None receives the care to which they are entitled by law from theIndonesian government.Even with recognition from UNHCR, migrantchildren—whether accompanied or unaccompanied—have no viable futurein Indonesia. They have no legal status under Indonesian law, cannot work, andhave limited access to education. Constantly vulnerable to arrest or rearrestfor violating these or other rules, refugees are reluctant to seek policeprotection should they become victims of crimes. Only a small minority (just247 people in 2012) are resettled to third countries.Given this toxic limbo, it is no wonder that migrants,asylum seekers, and refugees frequently choose to take smugglers’ boatsto Australia, despite the risks posed by these journeys. One Afghan fatherexplained, “It’s taking years, and people’s families are backhome, needing money. At least on the boats, you know your fate in 36 hours, in24 hours.”[1]Role of the Indonesian, Australian GovernmentsIndonesia bears primary responsibility for its appallingtreatment of migrants, asylum seekers, and refugees. However, Australia haspursued a strategy of immigration enforcement first, refugee protection secondwhich leave migrants with few options other than to risk boat journeys. It hasassisted the Indonesian government in constructing new immigration detentionfacilities, and Australia supports UNHCR and IOM operations in Indonesia,including some inside the detention centers.In August 2012, Australia reinstated the much-denounced“Pacific Solution,” which sends migrants to offshore facilities inNauru and Manus Island, Papua New Guinea, for processing of their asylumclaims, which should be heard in Australia itself. Australia claims that suchmeasures help to deter irregular boat migration, yet in the months after thePacific Solution was reinstated, significant numbers of boats continued toarrive in Australian territory.While Australia and Indonesia do have the right to controlirregular immigration into their countries, they must do so in a way thatrespects children’s rights and provides protection for some of the mostvulnerable new arrivals. Both Australia and Indonesia should prioritizechildren’s rights above immigration enforcement, so that children receiveappropriate protection and care. Children like Arif B., who show great courageand resilience in journeying far from home, deserve the chance to have ameaningful future.Key RecommendationsTo the Indonesian GovernmentImmediately review all immigration detention policies,end guards’ physical abuse of detainees, and improve the appallingconditions of detention.Immediately release all unaccompanied migrant children,and actively explore alternatives to detention for children.Ensure that, in the rare occasions where children aredetained, that conditions are suitable, that children are not held withunrelated adults, and that they have access to education.Ensure that unaccompanied migrant children are grantedguardians, legal assistance, and assistance with their basic needs.Ratify the 1951 Refugee Convention and implement a fair,humane, and speedy asylum system.Take wide-reaching measures to respond to the needs ofasylum seekers and refugees throughout the asylum process, including providingviable options for life in Indonesia.To the Australian GovernmentEnd aggressive attempts to deter irregularmigrants from reaching Australian territory.Demand that Indonesia live up to minimumhuman rights standards before providing funding to detain irregular migrants.Take advantage of opportunities to ensure ameaningful life for refugees awaiting resettlement in Indonesia, includingthrough funding access to education, as one measure in deterring boatmigration.MethodologyHuman Rights Watch carried out research for this report inIndonesia in August and September 2012. Two researchers interviewed 102migrants between the ages of 5 and 66, including 36 women and girls.Forty-two of our interviewees were, according to their own accountsor those of their parents, children when they entered Indonesia. Thirty-eightwere still children when we interviewed them. Eleven were unaccompanied(without a parent or guardian) when they entered the country. We interviewedthe parents of six children below the age of five years to understand theexperiences of very young migrant children.43 percent of our interviewees were from Sri Lanka (most ofwhom were Tamil); 26 percent were from Afghanistan (many of whom were Hazara[2]);17 percent from Burma (mostly Rohingya[3]); and 7percent from Somalia. The other interviewees were Nepali, and people born inIran of Afghan descent. According to our interviews with officials fromgovernment, intergovernmental organizations, and NGOs, there are also asylumseekers in Indonesia from Iraq, Iran, Libya, Pakistan (including people born inPakistan of Afghan descent), China, Russia, and various African countries.We conducted some interviews in English and Nepali, andother interviews with the help of interpreters in a language in which the migrantwas comfortable (such as Pashto, Dari, or Tamil). We interviewed migrants andasylum seekers in areas near residential facilities in Medan, Bogor, andelsewhere, as well as in detention facilities. We explained to all intervieweesthe nature of our research and our intentions concerning the informationgathered through our interviews, and we obtained verbal consent from eachinterviewee. No interviewee received financial or other compensation in returnfor interviewing with us.Most interviews were conducted individually and privately;this included extensive, detailed conversations with released detainees. Inaddition, Human Rights Watch researchers visited several immigration detentionfacilities and conducted group interviews with detainees (the number ofparticipants ranged from 2 to 12). In order to safeguard interviewees who weredetained at the time of our interviews, our conversations took place outsidethe hearing of immigration staff.Human Rights Watch researchers met a number of government officialsconcerned with migration, who worked for the police, Imigrasi (directorategeneral of immigration), and the Ministry of Social Affairs. We also sentletters requesting data and other information concerning immigration anddetention in Indonesia on December 21, 2012, and again on March 5, 2013, to thechief of national police, the minister of law and human rights, and the ambassadorsto the US and to the UN in Geneva and in New York. We received oneacknowledgement of our request for information but no substantive answers toany of the questions posed.In addition, we met with representatives fromintergovernmental organizations including the International Organization forMigration (IOM), as well as staff members of NGOs, migrant community leaders, journalists,and human rights lawyers and activists. While Human Rights Watch was able toobtain UNHCR data on asylum seekers in Indonesia, UNHCR told Human Rights Watchit was unable to comment on Indonesia’s treatment of refugees andmigrants.Virtually all names of adult migrants interviewed have beenreplaced by pseudonyms to protect their identity; where the real name is used,that is indicated. All names of children have been changed. Where migrants wereinterviewed inside detention facilities, we have taken additional steps toavoid the possibility of identifying the individual, for instance by concealingthe location of the interview or by withholding precise details of themigrant’s case. Likewise, many staff members of government agencies,intergovernmental organizations, and NGOs in Indonesia are not identified attheir request.Human Rights Watch did not assess whether the migrants wespoke to qualified for refugee status. Some, perhaps many, undoubtedly do. Thisreport instead focuses on how the Indonesian government fails to upholdmigrants’ human rights, regardless of whether or not those migrants havelegitimate asylum claims or other protection needs, and how Indonesia’spolicies should be improved.TerminologyThis report focuses on migrants traveling through Indonesia,many with the goal of seeking refuge in Australia. Most lodge refugee claimswith UNHCR in Indonesia, which is not party to the 1951 Convention and has madeno commitment to provide permanent asylum. UNHCR recognizes some as refugeesbut has no authority to grant asylum. Some never file refugee claims with UNHCRin Indonesia, hoping instead to file in Australia.An “asylum seeker”is a person who is trying to be recognized as a refugee or to establish a claimfor protection on other grounds. Where we are confident that a person isseeking protection, whether in Indonesia or Australia, we will refer to thatperson as an asylum seeker. A “refugee,” as defined in the 1951Convention and its 1967 Protocol, is a person with a “well-founded fearof being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of aparticular social group or political opinion” who is outside his countryof nationality and is unable or unwilling, because of that fear, to return. Inthis report, we use the term “refugee” when UNHCR in Indonesia hasrecognized that person as a refugee, though it should be noted that UNHCRrecognition of refugee status is declaratory, which means that people are, infact, refugees before they have been officially recognized as such.Although international law defines “migrant workers,”it does not define “migrants.” In this report, “migrant”is a broad term to describe third-country nationals in Indonesia. We use theterm inclusively rather than exclusively, including people traveling in andthrough Indonesia and passengers on boats moving irregularly. The use of theterm “migrant” does not exclude the possibility that a person maybe an asylum seeker or refugee.In line with article 1 of the Convention on the Rights ofthe Child, the term “child” refers to a person under 18.[4]We discuss children traveling with their families as well as unaccompaniedchildren. The report discusses these groups separately and together, and usesthe term “migrant children” to refer to them together. The termincludes children seeking asylum or those granted UNHCR refugee certificates.The definition of “unaccompanied migrant child” comesfrom the term “unaccompanied child” used by the Committee on theRights of the Child. According to the committee’s General Comment No. 6,“‘Unaccompaniedchildren’ are children, as defined in article 1 of the Convention, whohave been separated from both parents and other relatives and are not beingcared for by an adult who, by law or custom, is responsible for doingso.”[5]I. Seeking Refuge: Journeys to Indonesia andAustraliaFor tens of thousands of migrants and asylum seekers—mostfrom East Africa and South and Southeast Asia—Indonesia is an intendedway station along a difficult and dangerous journey to Australia, wheremigrants hope to find opportunities for a better life and, often, protectionfrom violence and persecution in home countries. Yet most stay in limbo inIndonesia for months or years. As of February 2013, most refugees and asylum seekersin Indonesia came from Afghanistan, Burma, Sri Lanka, and Iran.[6] Thousandsof children travel this route annually—some with their families andothers alone.[7]Indonesia has seen a remarkable increase in the numbers ofpeople seeking asylum in the past five years: up from 385 new arrivals in 2008to 3,230 in 2009.[8] Largenumbers of new arrivals continue—in July 2012 alone, for example, therewere 753 new cases. At the end of February 2013, there were 9,226 refugees andasylum seekers in the UN refugee agency(UNHCR)’s active caseloadin Indonesia, of whom 1,938 were recognized refugees.[9]There are more migrants and asylum seekers who choose not toregister with UNHCR and are not included in the statistics above. Some may notwish to lodge an asylum claim, seeing few benefits to the procedure in acountry that does not officially recognize refugees, and hoping to move on toAustralia sooner rather than later.[10]Other organizations, including the InternationalOrganization for Migration (IOM), assist people who are not registered withUNHCR; IOM, for example, reports as of February 2013 487 beneficiaries who havenever registered with UNHCR or who have been denied refugee status by UNHCR.[11]It is hard to know the total numbers of refugees, asylum seekers, and othermigrants in need in Indonesia, many of whom receive no assistance at all.The Indonesian government did not respond to multiple HumanRights Watch requests for information as to how many migrants there are in thecountry in addition to those registered with UNHCR.Lengthy and Dangerous Journeys to Indonesia and AustraliaAlmost all of the migrant children we interviewed—boththose who traveled with families and those who traveled alone—had stoppedin Indonesia en route to Australia, risky and expensive journeys of months andeven years. Most migrants and asylum seekers interviewed cannot fly directly toAustralia because they lack visas needed to board planes. Instead, the journeytypically involves a smuggler, either in a migrant’s home country or in aneighboring or transit country. For instance, an Afghan might contract with apeople smuggler at home, or through Afghan communities in Iran or Pakistan.For example, Karim Ali S., a 34-year-old Rohingya man, leftBurma on September 20, 2011, with his wife and two cousins, 29 and 24 yearsold, bound for Australia. We went through Malaysia,” he said. “[Afterseveral months there], we paid 10,000 Malaysian ringgit (about US$3,225). Wewere three days and two nights on a boat [from Malaysia]…. The agentstopped on an island [in Indonesia] … we didn’t know where we were.”[12]Fartuun A., originally from Somalia, flew to Indonesia fromYemen with her sister, brother in-law, and their four children in 2011. Shesaid,It cost $1,000 each. We paid a smuggler and used fakepassports…. The smuggler said that he would take us to Australia, butthen in Indonesia he disappeared…. In Jakarta he took us to a hotel, westayed the night, and then in the morning he was gone…. Eventually [my brother-in-law]found a Somali man and arranged for us to come here [to the migrant communitiesoutside Jakarta].[13]Click to expand ImageSample migrationroutes based on Human Rights Watch interviews. © 2013 John Emerson/HumanRights WatchUnaccompanied migrant children, who travel without parentsor guardians, are particularly vulnerable to exploitation on smuggler routes. RafiqA., a Burmese Rohingya boy, described his journey to Indonesia in February 2011when he was 14 years old:We had a lot of problems in Burma.... My parents thought Iwas in danger so they told me to leave…. The boat ride was long—18days and nights. We arrived in Thailand, and rested for one day and one night.The Thai navy took our boat motor and our food and put us in the sea. They tookus to the middle of the sea and they left us. We had some bamboo and someplastic tarpaulins, so we made a sail. We traveled for three days like that. Inthe sea we saw a fisherman’s boat. He guided us to Aceh. Police arrestedus.[14]Ahmad Z., a Hazara boy, was 17 years old when he found a smugglerin Kabul to take him from Afghanistan to Pakistan and then to Malaysia, whereis stayed in a hotel for 10-12 days before taking a boat to Indonesia:[I]t was four hours long and we landed in Sumatra. Thesmuggler’s contact met us in Indonesia and took us to his house. Westayed one or two days there…. He sent us to another place in Sumatra,and we spent three months there. Every day he would come and tell us, “Ohtomorrow I will send you [to Jakarta].” We couldn’t go outside atall. One day he dropped us at the Padang airport, all 12 Afghan Hazaras [elevenadults and one child]. We were caught in the airport by the police.[15]Azim M. was also 17 when he traveled from Kabul withsmugglers in August 2012. He went to Dubai, and then to Jakarta, where asmuggler promised to take him on to Australia. “He promised that afterone month he would take me, but nothing has happened,” Azim said.[16]Being smuggled to Indonesia is much more expensive thanmaking the same trip by commercial plane. Our interviewees reported varyingcosts: for example, 300,000 Sri Lankan rupees (around $2,363) for oneunaccompanied boy who traveled from Sri Lanka to Indonesia;[17]$3,200 for a Rohingya family of three that traveled from Malaysia to Indonesia(having previously made a separate trip from Burma to Malaysia);[18]and between $7,000 to $12,000 for unaccompanied boys who traveled fromAfghanistan to Indonesia.[19]Similar trips by air, according to fare quotes found on-line in May 2013, aresignificantly cheaper: for instance, a one-way ticket from Colombo to Jakartacosts around $400-500; a one-way ticket from Kabul to Jakarta costs around$750-1,000; and a one-way ticket from Kuala Lumpur to Jakarta costs less than$100.Once in Indonesia, many migrants and asylum seekers will contractwith smugglers for onward travel to Australia through a dangerous boat trip.This costs an additional fee, which varies greatly but some estimates place itbetween $3,000 and $6,000.[20]Boats leave from many locations, including Jakarta, towns insouthern Java, and Kupang in West Timor. Many boats trips are intended forChristmas Island (one of the closest Australian territories to Indonesia).The boat journeys are incredibly risky. Smugglers, bound byno safety regulations, overload unseaworthy boats and often fail to supplyadequate amounts of fresh water, food, or fuel for the journey.[21]Sometimes the journey is deadly. Almost 1,000 people died onthe crossing between 2001 and 2012, according to known statistics[22]—aperiod in which the numbers of people attempting the crossing has grownconsiderably. There are no official passenger records for these unregulated,illegal journeys, and many hundreds more people go missing, presumed drowned,each year.[23]Arif B., the unaccompanied migrant boy from Afghanistan, was15 years old when his boat from Indonesia to Australia sank. He said he spent“three nights floating in the boat while it was sinking down.... Forthree days and nights, no water and food. We kept climbing higher and higher asthe boat was sinking.” [24]Despite the risks of the onward boat journey to Australia,many migrants and asylum seekers we interviewed felt that attempting to makethe trip was preferable to the hardships of life in Indonesia.When a boat goes into distress, Australian or Indonesiansearch-and-rescue obligations are triggered.[25] Some boat passengershope merely to reach Australian territorial waters in order to call for helpthere.Left without LegalStatus or ProtectionIndonesiaMigrants and asylum seekers receive a poor welcome inIndonesia, which has faulty or non-existent mechanisms for protecting asylumseekers and child migrants. A variety of government bodies in Indonesia offerincomplete care for migrants in Indonesia. The Directorate General forImmigration oversees immigration detention facilities and should takeresponsibility for migrants outside of detention but does not meet theseduties. Likewise, the Ministry for Social Welfare is responsible for childprotection, but is not tasked to protect migrant children.[26]Indonesia has a recent history as a country of emigration,and indeed, the Indonesian government takes steps to protect its own citizensabroad. Indonesia has ratified the International Convention on the Protectionof the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families,[27]and it takes measures to aid Indonesians working as, for instance, domesticworkers in Malaysia or elsewhere.[28]Indonesiahas also taken steps toward assisting refugees, for instance by donating toUNHCR’s annual appeal in 2012 for the first time in over a decade.[29]Because Indonesia has not ratified the 1951 RefugeeConvention or its Protocol and does not have adequate domestic asylum laws, theprotection of asylum seekers and refugees in Indonesia has fallen to UNHCR. IOMassists the government in operating migration detention facilities and supportssome migrants outside detention; as of February 2013, it was assisting 2,946refugees and asylum seekers in Indonesia, approximately half of whom weredetained.[30]AustraliaAustralia has ratified the 1951 Refugee Convention and its1967 Protocol and implemented it through domestic laws and procedures, and asylumseekers who reach Australian territory can apply for refugee status there. Inaddition, Australia resettles several hundred refugees recognized in Indonesiaeach year, and the government increased the number of places available forresettlement in 2012. Yet there are not enough resettlement places availablefor all recognized refugees in Indonesia.Despite its ratification of the Refugee Convention,Australia has instituted punitive asylum policies that make it difficult forrefugees to enter the country and ask for protection.[31]Australia has long maintained policies, including offshore processing, thatdeter “irregular maritime arrivals” from reaching the country. ButAustralia, a geographically isolated state, has erected visa regimes and otherlegal barriers that make it almost impossible for asylum seekers to arrivespontaneously by air legally.Australia has repeatedly sent asylum seekers arriving byboat to Nauru and Papua New Guinea for “offshore” refugeeprocessing, despite human rights groups repeatedly raising concerns overchildren’s and asylum seekers’ rights.[32]In 2012, Australia reinstated this policy after fashioning a legal mechanism toovercome a high court ruling that had found it unlawful. Yet Australia’s reinstatedpolicy is not likely to effectively deter boat migration.[33]These policies and others are designed to discourage“queue jumpers,” positing that refugees should wait in thirdcountries for resettlement to Australia.[34] Inreality, there is no queue for resettlement. The consequence of these policiesis that people fleeing Afghanistan, Burma, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and elsewhereget stuck in Indonesia, faced either with a prolonged wait for a slim chance atresettlement, or compelled to take the smugglers’ boats to Australia atgreat personal risk.[35]Australia co-chairs, along with Indonesia, the Bali Process,a regional intergovernmental body on people smuggling and trafficking. Therecent initiative, with UNHCR, to map the protection needs of unaccompanied andseparated children in the southeast Asian region is a welcome start. However,as co-chairs, both countries should ensure that immigration enforcementmeasures that emerge from the Bali Process prioritize children’s rightsabove policing measures. While states retain the capacity to control theirborders, they also must respect the rights of all children in theirterritories, including non-nationals.II. Lack of Protection for Unaccompanied MigrantChildrenUnaccompanied children (children who travel without parentsor other guardians) are particularly vulnerable to rights violations outside oftheir country of origin.In recent years, around 1,000 children annually have arrivedin Indonesia after traveling alone from Afghanistan, Burma, and other countries.During the year 2012, for example, 1,178 unaccompanied minors were registeredin Indonesia by UNHCR.[36]Most were boys, and 81 percent were from Afghanistan, with Pakistan and Burmaas other main countries of origin.[37]While most unaccompanied children arriving in Indonesia are 16 or 17, some 3percent of the arrivals in 2012 were below 14 years old.[38]Because some of these children move through Indonesiarelatively fast, and because children age out of this category, the cumulativenumbers of unaccompanied minors in the country fluctuates. As of March 2013,there were 718 unaccompanied minors registered with UNHCR in Indonesia; 121 ofthem, or 16 percent, were in detention.[39]There are likely more unaccompanied minors in Indonesia thanthose included in UNHCR’s statistics since not all children register withUNHCR, either because of periodic backlogs in UNHCR’s registrationsystem, or because they decide that registration does not provide anysignificant benefits. Others may be in detention awaiting UNHCR’s firstvisit, which can take weeks or months.According to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, thesechildren deserve special care.[40] Thecommittee, the body authorized to interpret the UN Convention on the Rights ofthe Child, a treaty to which Indonesia is party and which it must follow,issued General Comment No. 6 in 2005. General Comment No. 6 dictates that whenunaccompanied migrant children enter a country, they should be assigned aguardian who can look after their material needs, and receive legalrepresentation in immigration proceedings.[41]Yet Indonesia, for the most part, fails to meet theobligations described in General Comment No. 6. It leaves these childrenwithout guardianship, so no-one takes responsibility for assisting thesechildren in accessing basic services or making decisions about futuremigration. They are not given free legal representation, making it hard forthem to understand asylum proceedings and present their case. As discussedbelow, every year hundreds are detained with unrelated adults, and many aresubject to physical abuse. Of those not detained, only a handful of childrenhave shelter, and others are left to fend for themselves.No Guardianship, no ShelterIndonesia fails to provide unaccompanied migrant children inits territory with guardianship, despite its obligations to protect thisexceptionally vulnerable group. Without a guardian, children have no one tolook after their basic needs, and do not receive guidance on changing their migrationstatus or on other matters. Some children remain in detention, while others areon the streets without any assistance with basic needs such as shelter and food.The Committee on the Rights of the Child specifies thatunaccompanied migrant children must be assigned a guardian to protect theirinterests.[42] Accordingto the Committee, the guardian’s job is much broader than that of a legalrepresentative, to which the child is also entitled: the guardian, who need notbe a lawyer, should be consulted on all actions taken for the child whetherthey are legal in nature or not; should have the authority to be present in alldecision-making processes, including immigration hearings, care arrangements,and efforts to make long-term plans for children; and should be knowledgeableabout child care in order to ensure that the child’s “legal,social, health, psychological, material and educational needs are adequatelycovered.”[43]As far as Human Rights Watch is aware, no Indonesiangovernment agency has been given the legal responsibility for providingguardianship to unaccompanied migrant children.An NGO, CWS, runs ashelter program for approximately 90 unaccompanied minors in Indonesia butdescribes the scope of their mandate as “a care and maintenanceprogram,” not a formal assignation of guardianship.[44]The government of Indonesia is failing not only in itsresponsibility to provide guardians but also to provide adequate shelter forunaccompanied minors. At the time of our investigation in September 2012, justone organization, CWS, provided shelter for unaccompanied minors, and with 93children in facilities near Jakarta, those facilities were full.[45]As of March 2013, IOM had negotiated with the North Sumatra ProvincialDepartment of Social Affairs (DINSOS) to house 44 unaccompanied minors withrefugee status in DINSOS shelters designed for Indonesian children. IOM hopesthat this model might be replicated in other provinces, including Yogyakartaand Makassar.[46]Nonetheless, with more than 1,000 unaccompanied minors arriving in Indonesiaannually, and these shelters covering fewer than 140 places, these arrangementsare far from sufficient.Many unaccompanied minorsare detained, as discussed below. The lack of guardianship and shelter canextend their periods of detention. According to IOM and CWS, unaccompaniedminors in detention need to wait for there to be room in a shelter beforeIndonesia will release them.[47]At the time of our investigation in September2012, 150 children remained in detention awaiting space to open in a shelter;[48]as of March 2013, there were 121 unaccompanied minors seeking asylum orwith refugee status in detention.[49]Those lucky enough not to be detained, but without a placein a shelter, are left to fend for themselves. This can amount to some 700children per year without help. Some get informal assistance from othermigrants. Others are left without money, food, and shelter. Ali H., 16 yearsold, said,I don’t get any money. The house costs 600,000 rupiah[roughly US$61], for a bedroom with four people, one small room ... Idon’t have a job.The house my family sold [in Afghanistan, tofinance his trip], the money from that will last for one more month. Afterthat, I’m not sure what I’ll do.[50]Some boys, vulnerable without assistance, fear arrest orre-arrest. Azim M., an unaccompanied migrant boy from Afghanistan who hadarrived in Indonesia two months before his interview with Human Rights Watch,was effectively confined to a small house in an area outside Jakarta that is popularwith migrants.“I stay inside the house all day,” he said. “I’mafraid [immigration officials] will find me. I do nothing all day—sitinside all day.” Azim had received a token from UNHCR—a piece ofpaper the size of a business card indicating a date several months ahead forhim to register as an asylum seeker. He said he had no other assistance fromthem and said he had not communicated with them since.[51]There is a nascent understanding within the region thatunaccompanied children need more care. UNHCR, in collaboration with The BaliProcess, a regional intergovernmental body on people smuggling and traffickingthat Indonesia and Australia co-chair, initiated a mapping project in September2012 to understand issues faced by unaccompanied and separated children in SoutheastAsia.[52]No Legal AssistanceUnaccompanied migrant children in Indonesia receive no legalrepresentation, either in requesting asylum or in challenging detention.[53]Article 37(d) of the CRC mandates that children deprived of their libertyshould have prompt access to legal assistance, and the Committee on the Rightsof the Child has emphasized that this specifically applies to unaccompaniedmigrant children in migration detention.None of the unaccompanied migrant children we interviewedsaid they had legal assistance. Sayed M., a 16-year-old unaccompanied Afghanboy detained at an IDC with unrelated adults told us, “I’ve neverseen a lawyer.”[54] AhmadZ. was 17 years old when he was detained at Pekanbaru IDC. He said that“some people were released by an Indonesian lawyer, but I didn’thave a lawyer.” He remained in detention for almost eight months beforeUNHCR helped secure his release.[55]The Committee on the Rights of the Child emphasizes that incases where unaccompanied children are subject to administrative proceedings,including immigration or asylum proceedings, they should be provided with alegal representative (in addition to the guardianship functions describedabove).[56] Yet unaccompanied migrant children in Indonesia receive no suchassistance at any stage in the process of applying for refugee status.III. Abuses in DetentionIt was a cage. Shut. In the jail we stayed there for a longtime. I don’t know how many months.[57]—Enayet H., an 11-year-old Burmese Rohingya boy,who said he was detained in migration facilities starting when he was 9 yearsold.Migrant children—including children in families,unaccompanied children, and very young children—are arbitrarily detainedin violent, inadequate detention facilities throughout Indonesia. Immigrationauthorities and Indonesian police arrest migrants and asylum seekers either asthey cross into Indonesia or as they move towards the boats to Australia; NGOsand asylum seekers have also reported arrests in the areas outside Jakartawhere many migrants live. Indonesian authorities routinely detain families, unaccompaniedmigrant children, and adult asylum seekers for months or even years in informaldetention facilities and formal Immigration Detention Centers (IDCs). Migrants,including children, are typically detained without judicial review or bail,access to lawyers, or any way to challenge their detention.Of the 102 migrants interviewed by Human Rights Watch, 82were or had been detained, 76 of those in one or more IDCs. Of the 42 childrencovered in our research, all but 7 were or had been detained, includingchildren ranging in age from 2 to 17 years old.[58]Thirty-two children were detained in a formal IDC, and 12 were detained ininformal facilities (the numerical overlap exists because some children weredetained in multiple facilities).On multiple occasions, Human Rights Watch asked, amongothers, the minister of law and human rights (who oversees the DirectorateGeneral of Immigration) for both the numbers of immigrants held at the IDCs andtheir demographic details, but the government did not provide this information.[59]Indeed, it is not clear whether the government knows the number of orbiographical details for the detainees in its facilities.[60]A high-ranking police official in Tanjung Pinang City, near one of the largerIDCs, said of those responsible for facilities, “Since they don’trecognize these immigrants as human beings, they don’t track them atall.”[61]Data we received from IOM indicates that as of February2013, approximately 1,450 refugees and asylum seekers, including children, whofall under IOM’s care were detained.[62] The total number ofdetainees in migration detention facilities is higher as not all fall underIOM’s mandate.Indonesia operates—through the Directorate General ofImmigration under the Ministry of Law and Human Rights—approximately 11to13 formal IDCs, though not all are always occupied and sometimes officials openfacilities temporarily.[63] Thelarger facilities include Belawan IDC, near Medan; Tanjung Pinang IDC, onBintan Island; Pontianak IDC, in Pontianak in West Kalimantan; Kalideres IDC,in Jakarta; and Makassar IDC in South Sulawesi. The smaller facilities includePekanbaru IDC in Riau province in central Sumatra; Manado IDC in NorthSulawesi; Surabaya IDC in East Java; Denpasar IDC in Bali; and Kupang IDC in WestTimor. Facilities in Bandar Lampung, in southern Sumatra, Balikpapan, in East Kalimantan,and Papua are not always open or do not always contain detainees.Click to expand ImageIndonesianimmigration detention centers. © 2013 John Emerson/Human Rights WatchMigrants interviewed by Human Rights Watch, includingchildren, reported being held in a number of alternate facilities in additionto the IDCs. Regional immigration offices, including those in Medan, Denpasar,Padang, and Jakarta, have holding rooms or cells, which typically are used tohold migrants for short periods of time (our interviewees who were held inthese facilities referred to periods of time less than one month). In addition,Indonesian authorities use hotels or other buildings, with guards (sometimesfrom the Directorate General of Immigration, and sometimes from the police), tohold groups of migrants for short periods.The total number of informalfacilities used to detain migrants is hard to know, as different facilities areopen at different times.Arbitrary DetentionIndonesia routinely holds children of all ages in migrationdetention for months or years, rather than use alternatives todetention—such as registration and community monitoring. Young childrenare detained with one or both parents, and unaccompanied migrant children areheld with unrelated adults. Single adults are also detained for lengthyperiods. Neither children nor adults have any means of challenging theirdetention, nor do they know for how long they will be detained. Such indefinitedetention without recourse to judicial review amounts to arbitrary detentionprohibited under international law.For instance, children are arbitrarily detained at theTanjung Pinang IDC, where according to its director, several families weredetained at the time of our visit in September 2012.[64] Asecurity officer at Tanjung Pinang said there were two unaccompanied migrantchildren there at the time, whom he believed to be 13 or 14 years old.[65]Another boy, Jairaj N. was 12 years old when he was taken to Tanjung Pinangwhere he was held for six-and-a-half months. Interviewed after his release hesaid, “I stayed with my mom in detention, and my two sisters, agessixteen and six. It was very bad though, we couldn’t go outside.”[66]At some facilities, migrant children were held with theirmothers but separated from their fathers; in others, the entire family wasdetained in the same cell. Saasvikan P. was nine years old when he was detainedat Tanjung Pinang with his family for several months:In one room, 10families lived…. They separated us: Mothers and children in one room, andfathers in another room. They opened the fathers’ room from 8 a.m. to 5p.m. every day. My father was not allowed to eat dinner with us.[67]Parents did not know how long they and their children wouldbe detained. Safia A., an Afghan woman, was held with her husband and threedaughters in a cell at Pekanbaru IDC for a year; her daughters were 10, 6, and4 years old. Safia said, “My children asked and asked, ‘When can wego outside?’ but we cannot answer. We are responsible parents, but wehave no answers for them.”[68]Mariam A., Safia’s eldest daughter, added, “We couldn’t gooutside the gate. It was very difficult for us.”[69]Some parents had concerns about their children’sphysical safety. Raahitha H., for example, a Sri Lankan Tamil mother who hadbeen detained in an IDC for five months with her two-year-old son, said,“There is no safety here because there are so many men. We are scared forour children because of the other men being around us. Sometimes they fighteach other, the men. My son sees them fight—he watches likeentertainment.”[70]Click to expand ImageAn asylum-seeking girl, thought to be from Sri Lanka, walksthrough Belawan Immigration Detention Center while detained with her family,September 2012.© 2012 Kyle Knight / Human Rights WatchParents reported worries about the impact of lengthy detentionon their young children. For instance, Selva P., a Tamil man, was detained atKalideres IDC for three-and-a-half months with his daughter, who was then fouryears old.Men and women are already adults when they have theseexperiences, but children don’t understand them—the first thingthey know in their lives is painful. We have to explain to them many times.[71]Children and adults are also held in informal detentionfacilities apart from and in addition to the IDCs, including hotels andimmigration offices.Ahmad Z., an unaccompanied migrant boy fromAfghanistan, was 17 years old when he arrived in Indonesia. He reported that hewas held in multiple immigration offices, including the Medan office for 25days. “Five people in one small room. It was all day, all nightlock-up.”[72]Ahmad was then transferred to Kalideres IDC where he was held for approximately14 months. Labaan A., an unaccompanied Somali boy, was 17 years old when heattempted to cross to Australia by boat, said, “The police arrested us.They kept us in a hotel (Jayana Hotel) in Sumbawa for 25 days…. Thesecurity at the hotel was Indonesian police.”[73]These immigrationdetention facilities are not also used to house criminals. Nonetheless,children and adults detained repeatedly referred to their detention asjail-like, despite UNHCR standards mandating that detention of asylum seekersnot be criminalized or punitive,[74] and despite the notion thatdetention of children, which is only permitted to occur exceptionally, must nothave punishment as its purpose. Faizullah A., an unaccompanied boy fromAfghanistan, was 17 years old when he was detained at Pontianak IDC forseven-and-a-half months. “The room had walls with windows [gesturing tointernal windows] and a cage on one side. It was not a detention center, it wasa real jail.”[75]According to Indonesia’s immigration law, the criminalpenalty for illegal entry or illegal exit is maximum one year imprisonmentand/or a maximum fine of 100 million rupiah (US$10,315).[76] Anyimmigrant who enters Indonesia without proper documentation will be regarded asan illegal immigrant, and may be subject to detention awaiting deportation.[77]Detention is permissible until deportation is executed, and where deportationcannot be carried out, for up to 10 years.[78] Immigration officialshave discretionary power to move a foreigner who “is sick, will givebirth, or is still a child” out of detention and to an alternativelocation, though the law does not specify what that location would be.[79]Indonesia’s laws do not give migrants or asylumseekers opportunities to challenge their detention, nor do they provide any wayfor them to know when they will be released.[80] Indeed, migrantsrarely if ever have assistance from lawyers in challenging their detention.“There are no lawyers,” said an IOM staffer at Pontianak.[81]Indonesia’s prolonged, automatic migrationdetention—without the possibility of judicial review orremedy—amounts to arbitrary detention prohibited by international treatiesto which Indonesia is party. Article 9 of the International Covenant on Civiland Political Rights forbids arbitrary detention, and the United NationsWorking Group on Arbitrary Detention holds that a migrant or asylum seekerplaced in detention “must be brought promptly before a judge or otherauthority.”[82]The Working Group’s mandate to investigate arbitrary deprivation ofliberty refers to five legal categories for arbitrary detention, including onedescribing arbitrary detention as “[w]hen asylum seekers, immigrants orrefugees are subjected to prolonged administrative custody without thepossibility of administrative or judicial review or remedy.”[83]A prohibition on arbitrary detention is also found in the InternationalConvention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Membersof their Families,[84]ratified by Indonesia in 2012. UNHCR emphasizes that asylum seekers andrefugees have the rights to liberty and freedom of movement and that detentionmust only be in accordance with and authorized by law.[85]Migrant children have a further level of protection fromdeprivation of liberty under international law. Article 37(b) of the Conventionon the Rights of the Child (CRC) mandates that the detention of children“shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortestappropriate period of time.”[86] The treaty body that interprets the CRC has stated thatunaccompanied children must not be criminalized for reasons related to theirimmigration status or illegal entry,[87]and urges states to cease the detention of all children on the basis of theirimmigration status.[88] UNHCRasserts that family detention should be a last resort, when alternatives todetention are exhausted.[89]Physical and Psychological AbuseImmigration officials, under the Directorate General ofImmigration in the Ministry of Law and Human Rights, appear to frequently beatmigrants and asylum seekers in Indonesian detention facilities, according toour interviews. Of the 82 interviewees who were or had been detained, 11reported that they had personally experienced incidents of violence, and 3 of the11 reported multiple incidents in which they had been physically abused byimmigration guards. Nineteen interviewees gave credible, detailed testimony ofincidents of violence against others with whom they were detained, with oneinterviewee reporting multiple instances of violence against others. Theexperiences documented in this report, while not statistically representativeof the detained population, are at least indicative of the types of abusessuffered and the lack of redress available.Interviewees were consistent in their descriptions of thetypes of violence in detention facilities, describing guards kicking, slapping,and punching detainees, beating detainees with sticks and other implements,burning detainees with cigarettes, and using electroshock weapons. Somemigrants reported sustaining lasting injuries. Multiple immigration officialsmight attack one migrant or a group of migrants in a single incident.Unaccompanied migrant children were among those who reportedbrutality from immigration officials. In addition, according to our interviews,children as young as four years old have been witness to attacks, including onecase in which guards forced children to watch as they beat adult migrants.Human Rights Watch’s interviewees discussed incidentsof violence between 2010 and 2011 in each of the four largest detentionfacilities: Belawan, Pontianak, Tanjung Pinang, and Kalideres IDCs, each ofwhich routinely host asylum seekers, unaccompanied migrant children, andfamilies. We also received reports from detainees of abuse in 2011 at Pekanbaruand Balikpapan IDCs; in summer 2012 at Kalideres IDC; and September 2012 atBelawan IDC. Our interviewees reported violence in informal detentionfacilities, during arrest, and at police stations between 2010 and 2012. Amedia report indicates further instances of violence at Surabaya IDC inFebruary 2012,[90]and a support group for asylum seekers reported allegations that guards beatseveral Afghan men after they tried to escape from Tanjung Pinang IDC in July2012.[91]Despite the death following a severe beating of an Afghanmigrant in Pontianak IDC in February 2012, and some limited accountability thathas followed, the government has not launched a systematic review of physicalabuse in the immigration detention system. Our interviewees reported instancesof violence after February 2012.In April 2013, eight migrants died in custody following ariot at the Belawan IDC near Medan,[92]creating further worries about the government’s capacity to maintain anatmosphere free of violence in the detention facilities.International law binding on Indonesia prohibits corporalpunishment and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment in detention facilities,whether criminal or civil.[93]Death of AsylumSeeker at Pontianak IDCOn February 28, 2012, Taqi Naroye, a 28-year-old Afghanasylum seeker previously detained at Pontianak IDC, was declared dead at alocal hospital.[94] Mediareports indicate that he had been bound at the wrists,[95]gagged, beaten with a piece of wood and a cable, and electrocuted the nightbefore, while in the custody of immigration guards at the IDC.[96]On February 26, Naroye had attempted to escape from Pontianak with five otherasylum seekers. He was recaptured the next day by the Pontianak police and,according to the West Kalimantan chief of immigration, was delivered back tothe IDC in good health, prior to receiving the beatings that led to hisdeath.[97]Click to expand ImageGraffiti written byAfghan detainees on a wall in Pontianak Immigration Detention Center. Itreads "Shaheed Taqi Naroye" in Dari, or “Taqi Naroye, themartyr”—a reference to a 28-year-old Afghanasylum seekerwho escaped from the center in 2012, was captured and returned by police,and delivered dead to a local hospital the next day.© 2012 Human Rights WatchAccording to UNHCR’s media reports, others who wererecaptured at the same time as Naroye, including a 17-year-old unaccompaniedboy, were also beaten and some were hospitalized.[98]Several migrants detained at the facility witnessed the beatings, includingMirza, another unaccompanied migrant boy, who himself was kicked by theguards during the incident.[99]At the time of our investigation, several of the guards onduty at the time no longer worked at the center, but it is not clear whetherthey left or were fired.[100] Tenemployees of Pontianak IDC were each sentenced to ten months imprisonment forassault.[101] Yetno systemic investigation into guards’ misconduct—either atPontianak or nationwide—had been undertaken, nor have comprehensiveprocedures to train immigration staff or provide a complaints mechanism fordetainees been put in place.Children BeatenHuman Rights Watch collected accounts of multiple incidentsof immigration officials beating children in detention between 2010 and 2012.Unaccompanied migrant boys told us they were beaten in detention, and adultstestified that boys detained with them were beaten. One boy traveling with hisfamily was also beaten.Arif B. was 15 years old when he traveled to Indonesiawithout a parent or guardian. He said he was detained with unrelated adults atBalikpapan IDC for 1 month and 20 days in 2011, but tried to escape within thefirst 48 hours:Those who were trying to escape were beaten…. Threepeople got away, four were caught. I was caught. That day I was beaten up veryroughly…. There were eight or nine people beating me, most were guardsand there was one person from the outside. They hurt my shoulder, my ear, myback. I was beaten with one of the other people who was caught.[102]Faizullah A., an unaccompanied migrant child fromAfghanistan, was 17 years old when he was detained at Pontianak IDC in 2010: “Theimmigration officer hit me on the face. I had gone to ask for water [to beturned on], I was shouting. He hit me two or three times. That stopped me. Iwas quiet then. I was crying for three or four hours after this.”[103]A psychologist reported that one of his clients, anunaccompanied Afghan boy, was beaten in the same incident that led to TaqiNaroye’s death in 2012 (see above). Mirza,[104] whowas 17 years old at the time, was in the courtyard and witness toNaroye’s beating. According to the psychologist, “the guards kicked[Mirza], his ankles, his shins, his feet, shouting at him emotionally. This wasto get him away from the area of the beating.”[105]Mirza suffered severe anxiety in the months that followed (see below).[106]Daoud T., an Afghan adult asylum seeker, said he went on ahunger strike at Belawan IDC in 2011, with several other migrants, including anunaccompanied migrant child. Many of them were beaten, said Daoud. “Theyeven beat the 17 year old.”[107]Later testimony from detainees confirms continuing violence at Belawan. KannanA., a 16-year-old boy detained with his family at Belawan in late 2012,reported that “immigration officers … grabbed me by my shirt andthrew me into the room” after he says he was making too much noise.[108]In all but one case reported to Human Rights Watch,immigration staff carried out the beatings. Yet in one instance in 2011reported to us by an adult migrant, guards at Belawan forced another migrant tobeat an Afghan unaccompanied child, Sadiq,[109] who was 16 years oldat the time. Mohammad S., an Afghan refugee detained with Sadiq, said,“The person who beat Sadiq … was a prisoner like us, butimmigration … told him, ‘You must beat this boy.’”[110]Sadiq was 16 years old at the time; Mohammad could see Sadiq’s cell andthe hallway from his own cell:[The other prisoner, who was Bangladeshi] took Sadiq toanother room, with three immigration guards…. They locked the door to[the] room. The guards were still in the room while he [the other prisoner]beat Sadiq … I could hear him crying … he was beaten for 10 or 15minutes. The next day he had black, black marks where [the other prisoner] hadpunched him…. Sadiq did see a doctor…. The marks stayed for threeor four days…. For Sadiq, we complained to UNHCR and to IOM. All theAfghans who were living inside did. But … nothing happened.[111]International law prohibits the use of force againstchildren in detention except in exceptional circumstances to preventself-injury, injury to others, and destruction of property.[112]Beating children is a serious violation of this standard.Adults BeatenReports of children beaten in immigration detention aresymptomatic of a larger problem. Adult migrants said they were also beaten in anumber of different detention facilities, including Kalideres, Belawan, TanjungPinang, and Pontianak IDCs.In 2010, Sher K., an asylum seeker who fled Afghanistanafter working as a translator for coalition forces, attempted to escape fromKalideres IDC near Jakarta:About twenty people managed to get out, but I got caughtwith five others. They beat us brutally. Three shifts of guards, they wouldeach come with sticks and knives and hit us. Six or seven guards would come andbeat us for fun. It lasted for three days, every day, all day. They did it forfun. One friend of mine … had a broken arm. My face was black and blue.My kidney was damaged for a month—it was bad—from the beating. Wewere put in a four foot by eight foot cell for six months—for six people.[113]Ahmad Z., who said he arrived in Indonesia from Afghanistanwhen he was 17 years old, was 19 years old when he was detained at KalideresIDC. He told us he was beaten and kept in a segregated cell when he was caughtattempting to escape:The [immigration] police found us…. They caught usand they beat us so badly. They punched me, they kicked me, they slapped me.Eight people each hit me. [After driving back to to Kalideres,] they took usinside and beat us more. They stomped on our food and kicked us in the stomach.Then they put us in a room with nothing. [We were] just sleeping on the floor.The next day they came and woke us up and beat us for 20 minutes….For about six months we were locked inside of that room. No doctor visit duringthe six months. My friend got sick.[114]Several migrants saidthat guards beat them and others at Belawan IDC, in northern Sumatra. MohammadS., who was detained there for 14 months in 2010 and 2011, said, “at Belawan, they beat people, many times, in frontof my eyes.”[115]At thetime of our interview, Daoud T. still sustained injuries from one of hisbeatings at Belawan, which took place in 2010:The immigration guards beat me….We wanted themto open the door so we could see the sky ... We staged a five-day hungerstrike…. On day five, the guards slapped and kicked me. I can’thear in my right ear because of the beating—they slapped my ear so hard.[116]A number of intervieweeswho were detained at Tanjung Pinang IDC reported being beaten after being foundwith mobile phones or SIM cards. Nuwan D. described one incident in 2010:One of my friends used a cellphone. He bribed a guard tobuy it. Once the guards discovered him they attacked him—[including] thesame officer he had gotten the phone from. They took him to a privateroom—three guards—and they beat him. He was burned by cigarettes,we could see this when he came out. He was 23 years old. He came out upset andinjured.[117]Ravith N. related a similar incident at the center after oneof his cellmates objected to the guards’ delay in opening the gates tothe recreation area: “The guard took a cigarette and burned him on hischest … the guard did this inside the guard room.”[118]Abuse is not limited to IDCs: Migrants also reported abusesat immigration offices and police stations. After almost a month at Manado IDC,Khalid A. said he was caught while escaping with several other Afghan men, andbeaten at a police station in Palu in 2010:The police beat me. I’ve never been beaten like thatbefore. They used electric shocks … 10 people beat us. All 10 werepolice. They were laughing and beating us. One had an electric shocker[119]that makes you shake…. He hit me with that maybe 20 or 25 times. I wasfeeling very weak. When he stopped the shocker, the other police beat me with astick. We all cried, cried, cried. They beat me with a stick here, here, here[indicates his left elbow, knee, ankle, and shoulder]. They were telling us, “Doyou want to escape next time? Do you want to escape? This time I’mbeating you, next time I will kill you.”This was in Indonesian and a little in English. I was leftbruised. I had black marks in every place of my body. I couldn’t move myhand like that [indicates swinging elbow horizontally].[120]Khalid also said immigration officers beat him when he washeld at the Polonia immigration office for 11 days in 2011: “They …[p]unched me two or three times and asked why I tried to escape. Ifyou’re illegal, you must be beaten…. It was a big guy who beat me,an immigration guy[.]”[121]Mohammad S. also said he was beaten at the Polonia immigration office when hewas held there for seven days in 2010 shortly after entering the country:“The officer beat me because I didn’t want to give him my money. Hesaid, ‘Just be quiet,’ and he beat me. ‘Give me your watch,and money, and be quiet. You’re illegal.’ He hit me. On my face, onmany parts of my body.”[122] FaizullahA., who was 17 when he came to Indonesia alone, and 19 at the time of thisincident, said immigration officers “grabbed me and slapped me on theface” when they re-arrested him in Medan in July 2012 and took him to thePolonia immigration office.[123]Children Forced toWitness ViolenceAmong our interviewees, children of all ages were witness toharsh episodes of violence, underscoring the unsafe and unhealthy environmentof detention. In one case, parents reported that immigration guardsspecifically forced children to watch as they beat other migrants. Mediaaccounts confirm similar incidents in which children were exposed to violencein detention: for instance, in April 2013, multiple families were detained atBelawan IDC, when a riot broke out that left eight migrants dead and 15injured.[124]Arif B., a 15-year-oldAfghan boy, said he was beaten on his shoulder, head, and back by “eightor nine people” he thinks were guards when detained at Balikpapan IDC in2011. He said the incident took place “in the courtyard—everyone was there.... They saw andwatched. Including one family from Iran, with a seven-year-old boy. He waswatching too.”[125]Faizullah A. was 17 years old when he was detained andlearned of guards beating two other migrant who had tried to escape in separateincidents. According to Faizullah, the first “had cigarette burns overhis body, on his arms and whole body [indicates torso.]”Faizullahwitnessed the punishment meted out to the second escapee: “They beat himvery badly. They hit him with a stick, and broke his hand.”[126]He described an atmosphere of routine intimidation and violence at PontianakIDC during his seven-and-a-half months there: “They [immigration guards]had a stick, an electric stick. They would run it on the wall of the cage, itwas very loud, like screeching…. They beat with everything—glass,boxes, anything around.”[127]Enayet H., an 11-year-old Burmese Rohingya boy, said he wasdetained starting when he was 9 years old at a facility in Bandar Lampung. Hetold us, in English, that:There, the police beat all people. My father, my uncle....My father was beat, beat; my uncle was beat, beat, beat; but not me. They onlybeat the big people. I was the only child there. I stayed a long time.... ithappened in the police room. The police were very bad in there. When people run[attempt to escape], they beat.... My father said to them, “I want to gooutside, my child to study.” So the police, they beat my father.[128]Children Forced toWatch Beatings at Pekanbaru IDCSafia and Nasir A., a couple from Afghanistan, weredetained at Pekanbaru IDC for one year with their three daughters who werethen 10, 6, and 4 years old.[129] Theyrelated an incident in late 2010 when immigration guards forced their familyand two other families to watch as the guards beat two adult migrants:Safia said, “Ten people escaped. Two were caught bythe guards, and they brought them back. They beat them like animals. Theblood came from their nose, their face, all parts of their bodies. They hadcalled all the families to watch…. My children were very scared whenthey saw this happen in front of them.”The beating took place, according to Nasir, in a smallinternal courtyard between the immigration office and his family’scell. “Eight guards brought the two people back,” said Nasir.“They beat them in front of the three families [who were staying in theIDC at the time].” Safia reported that the immigration guards said,“See this person, don’t escape, or you will be likethis.”Nasir said he attempted to intervene: “I pleaded,‘Don’t beat them in front of my kids.’ Eventually, they letus take the kids into the room, and [the immigration guards] locked them inthere. They made me go back outside [to watch].” Safia said she knewher young children could still hear the beating. “The men were cryingvery loudly. [The immigration guards] used electric shocks too.”Lack of Accountability for ViolenceThey [the immigration guards] didn’t have rules. Wewere in a cage, and they were outside.[130]—Faizullah A.,17-year-0ld unaccompanied Afghan boy held at Pontianak IDC.The immigration detention system appears to have nopublished regulations for staff behavior, nor are there clear consequences forviolations of migrants’ rights. We requested, on multiple occasions,information from the Minister of Law and Human Rights (overseeing theDirectorate General of Immigration) regarding procedures regulating staffbehavior or providing accountability for abuse or other violations ofmigrants’ rights; we received no substantive response to these requests.[131]Our own research on Indonesian domestic law and policyyielded no evidence of the existence of comprehensive regulations, and interviewswith nongovernmental and intergovernmental organizations involved in providingsupport to asylum seekers and refugees further supports the notion thatcomprehensive regulations do not exist.Intergovernmental agencies provide limited, unofficialchannels of support for those subject to violence, though they do not have amandate to monitor abuses. For instance, IOM, which provides assistance to somedetainees, has no official capacity or mandate to monitor IDCs, and when staffmembers hear of abuses they are reported to the Directorate General ofImmigration in Jakarta.[132]UNHCR has protection staff in seven locations (Medan, Tanjung Pinang,Pontianak, Makassar, Kupang, Surabaya, and Bogor) who regularly work within theIDCs,[133] butHuman Rights Watch is not aware of any UNHCR mandate that would enable them tomonitor the facilities.A staff member of an NGO who spoke on condition of anonymityreported that[I]mmigration staff employed in the IDC[s] havereceived little or no training on how to respond to detainees, there is a lackof guidance regarding detainees’ rights and obligations … the lackof regulations and guidelines tends to lead to choosing strict conduct asimmigration staff fears to receive sanctions if detainees abscond.[134]The staff member added that “there is no mechanisminside immigration to file complaints about violence, and there are no nationalstandard operational procedures that could standardize simple complaintprocesses.”[135]Rudy Prasetyo, an immigration officer at Pontianak,explained how new detainees learn what behavior is expected of them: “Usuallyone or two Afghan asylum seekers speak English, and IOM tells them therules… sometimes it’s body language.”[136]Migrants said they were punished for a variety of offenses, includingattempting escape, possessing mobile phones, going on hunger strikes, orarguing with guards.Groups of migrants have been punished collectively. Forinstance, after a group of Afghan asylum seekers attempted to escape fromPontianak IDC in February 2012, other Afghan asylum seekers in the facilitysaid they had their recreation curtailed and were no longer allowed to usemobile phones some migrants had been able to purchase. “The Myanmar andThai people [detained in the facility] can go outside, they can havephones,”[137]said Afghan asylum seeker Nazar M. in a group interview. Zabiullah M., alsoAfghan, added, “[Immigration] says we can’t because we escaped. ButI didn’t escape, that wasn’t me.”[138]There is no independent monitoring body for immigrationdetention facilities. The Directorate General of Immigration falls under theMinistry for Law and Human Rights, which, as discussed above, does not haveclear regulations for oversight of the facilities. As far as Human Rights Watchis aware, no institution has a mandate to monitor treatment of detainees byguards.Failure to Provide forChildren’s RightsConditions for childrendetained in Indonesian immigration detention facilities violate multipleinternational standards, leaving children without adequate care. Unaccompaniedmigrant children are detained with unrelated adults, and many have no contact withtheir families. No child has meaningful access to education, and recreation andmedical care are limited. The prolonged, indefinite detention damages bothadult and child mental health.Detention of children—which should only occur inexceptional circumstances—must meet standards in the UN Rules for theProtection of Children Deprived of their Liberty.[139]These rules articulate standards for the provision of education, recreation,and medical care, among others. According to our investigations, several detentionfacilities in Indonesia failed to meet these standards.Detention ofUnaccompanied Migrant Children with Unrelated AdultsUnaccompanied migrant children were routinely detained in anumber of immigration facilities with unrelated adults, making them vulnerableto exploitation and neglecting their need for specialized care.[140]During a visit to Pontianak IDC in September 2012, Human Rights Watch observeda boy who said he was 16 held in the same area as adult men. Many boys weinterviewed reported they were detained with adults. For example, Arif B. fromAfghanistan, who was 15 when he was held at Balikpapan IDC, said, “Therewere four people in each room. In that room, I was the only underage there. Theother three were adults.”[141]Faizullah A., also from Afghanistan, was detained at Pontianak IDC:I told the police I was 17 years old. They said “it’sno problem for us, you still go to detention.”… There were 34 or 35other people [in my cell], all male [adults], and [one] other boy.[142]Many adults also reported they were held with boys,including Shakairan A., a 44-year-old Tamil man, who said that while he wasdetained at Tanjung Pinang IDC in 2010 and 2011, “the 16 or 17 year oldslived with us, the men.”[143]Some adult migrants said they worried about the welfare ofthe boys with whom they were detained. Udaya V., an adult male Tamil refugee,was detained for 10 months at Tanjung Pinang starting in 2010 and held withunaccompanied minors:In my block there were three people under 18. They were 17when we were there. They were just treated the same as us. The immigrationofficers and UNHCR, they knew they were kids. But they didn’t doanything. The boys felt stressed … They stayed with 40-year-old men, with50-year-old men; they felt pressure.[144]Sher K., from Afghanistan, wasdetained for over two years:In Kalideres [IDC] … there were 20 or 30unaccompanied minors. We got a weekly food supply from IOM. Boys had foodstolen from them. Immigration didn’t listen; they laughed when wecomplained. Whenever the boys talked on the phone with their families, theywould cry. The boys cried all the time. They were the most powerless in there.They would get attacked.[145]No routine age determination is conducted in Indonesianimmigration facilities. Several boys reported that officials knew their age butthey remained in detention with adults anyway, suggesting that the detention ofunaccompanied minors with adults did not occur from mere oversight. “Theytook us to the immigration office in Padang for 20-25 days,” said AhmadZ., an unaccompanied migrant boy from Afghanistan who was 17 years old when hearrived in Indonesia. “I told the police I was 17. They just put me withthe others, and treated me like the others.”[146]Sayed M., from Afghanistan, was detained with adults at thetime we interviewed him:I’m 16 going on 17. UNHCR knows I’m here.I’ve been here for four months. I talked to UNHCR last week, I havetalked to them many times…. I sleep in a room with these guys [pointingto adult men around him].[147]The Convention on the Rights of the Child and theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights oblige states parties toseparate adults from children in detention,[148] and the Committee onthe Rights of the Child emphasizes that this obligation specifically applies tomigrant children in detention.[149]Lack of Access toEducationNone of the children or parents we interviewed said childrenhad access to formal education in detention,[150] and children are notallowed to leave the IDCs to attend schools.[151] Childrencan, therefore, lose months or years of education while they are detained.Mariam A., from Afghanistan, who was 10 years old when she was detained for oneyear from 2010-2011 with her family at Pekanbaru IDC, said, “Therewasn’t any school there.”[152] Madudeva N., anunaccompanied boy from Sri Lanka, was detained for a year from 2010 to 2011 inTanjung Pinang IDC starting at age 16. He said, “There wasn’t aschool [at Tanjung Pinang]. We studied English by ourselves; IOM gave us books.”[153]The CRC indicates that, in the exceptional cases wherechildren are detained, they should receive care appropriate to their age,including access to education.[154]Every child of compulsory school age has the right to education, which shouldbe provided outside the detention facility in community schools whereverpossible. Children above compulsory school age who wish to continue theireducation should be allowed to do so.[155]As Madudeva’s testimony illustrates, IOM provides somebooks and English classes, but no formal education. Balanandini N., a SriLankan girl, was detained at Belawan IDC in 2011 when she was 12 years old.“There was no school. I studied by myself with books I brought, and a fewextra books from IOM.”[156]The deputy chief of mission of IOM in Indonesia reported that the organizationoffers some teaching in IDCs, but “it comes down to what the heads of theIDCs allow.”[157]Lack of RecreationInterviewees including children reported inconsistent accessto recreation facilities and to time outdoors, despite international standardsprescribing access to outdoor facilities for an hour per day.[158] Somemigrants reported not being allowed outdoors for weeks or months. Labaan A., anunaccompanied migrant boy from Somalia, aged 17, said he was detained for 25days in an informal hotel facility, where he was “never permitted to gooutside.”[159]Mohammad S., an Afghan man, was detained at Belawan IDC: “Immigration putus inside a room and locked us in. For one month, and they never opened thedoor.... After one month, the constable came inside and let us out, he openedthe door for just one half hour.”[160]Click to expand ImageAn Afghan asylum-seeker walks in the courtyard used foroutdoor recreation time at Belawan Immigration Detention Center, September2012. Some interviewees reported being held for months without access to recreationspaces. © 2012 Kyle Knight / Human Rights Watch.According to our interviewees, access to recreation seemedto be at the whim of immigration staff. Faizullah A., also from Afghanistan,was 17 years old when he was detained for seven-and-a-half months at PontianakIDC:I was in that room [at Pontianak] for five months withoutgoing outside. For the last two months we could go outside. But for about fivemonths I didn’t see the sun. They changed the rule, I don’t know why.For the last two months we were allowed outside from 4 p.m. to 5 p.m. How can Iexplain what it’s like when we went out? We were like the wild, runningall around. We were thinking we were alive again. In the yard there was waterup to here [indicates waist] and we were running in it. [161]Lack of SufficientMedical Care and Deteriorating Mental HealthMedical care is made available to some detainees in IDCs throughIOM (the organization sends doctors to visit the IDCs and refers some cases tolocal hospitals).[162]However, some migrants reported delays in receiving care in emergencysituations, and children did not always receive routine medical care necessaryfor child development. Meanwhile, the arbitrary and lengthy detention took atoll on the mental health of many interviewed, affecting particularlychildren’s mental health.Thivviya N., a Sri Lankan girl who was 13 and 14 years oldwhen she was detained at Tanjung Pinang IDC with her family, said, “Inthe detention center I went to the doctor. They didn’t give us propermedicine. I had [the] flu.”[163]Delani K., who was 16 years old when she was detained with her mother atKalideres IDC, said:When people got sick, they would bang on the gate to getthe officer’s attention. The officers sometimes got mad and kickedthem…. I told the immigration officers that my mother was very sick andhad passed out. They said, “Oh, the doctor didn’t come today.”Then they told me to go away. I sprayed water on her face and she woke up later… she was with the doctor the next day and he gave her some pills.[164]Sher K. said he was denied access to a doctor when held in aconfinement cell at Kalideres IDC in 2010:I had a fever and stomach pain and diarrhea. For three daysI asked to see the doctor. The IOM doctor said he wasn’t allowed to comesee me because I was in the solitary detention area. I wrote a letter and gaveit to an IOM social worker. [Once I obtained permission to see the doctor], theguards came and told me to come close to the door so they could see if I wasreally sick. But I couldn’t walk at that point, I was too weak and sickafter three days of waiting. I threatened to kill myself if they didn’topen the door and help me stand up…. They took me to the doctor, and hegave me some medicine. The doctor told IOM that I was so sick I should go tothe hospital, but Immigration said no, and put me back in the cell.[165]Mohammad S. reported that a man detained with him was deniedaccess to a doctor when they were held in one room at Belawan IDC in 2010 for amonth without ever being allowed out:[He] became sick because of the water and the smell …We called to immigration but they never came inside to help him … Hethrew up many times, it was very serious. His eyes became red color and hefainted, fell over many times.[166]Asylum seekers at Pontianak IDC, and their doctors, reportedmental health problems connected to lengthy detention. Prolongeddetention—especially with no finite time limit—can have adevastating effect on migrants’ and asylum seekers’ mental health,especially that of children, who are thought to be more vulnerable to mentaltrauma. In 2003, the respected medical journal The Lancet publishedresearch finding that lengthy asylum detention in the United States correlateswith higher rates of post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, and depression,and that detention exacerbates pre-existing symptoms, including mental traumasustained while fleeing torture or persecution.[167]A psychologist who volunteers at Pontianak IDC reported thatboth his adult and child clients suffered psychological deterioration connectedto the prolonged, ill-defined wait:They lose hope, they lose dreams. There’s notimeframe on when they can have a normal life and go outside as humans. Itleads to hopelessness and depression…. My job is to … keep themwith some hope, so they can live through the detention period.[168]One asylum seeker detained at Pontianak IDC said, “Ifyou are a criminal you know the sentence, two years, three years. But here, thewait is unknown. It’s hurting the mind, to wait and wonder, it makes uscrazy.”[169]Detention can be particularly severe for children’smental health. According to medical experts in the United Kingdom, childrenheld in immigration centers developed “clinically significant emotionaland behavioral problems.”[170]Drawing on an extensive study from Australia’s Human Rights and EqualOpportunities Commission, the International Detention Coalition finds thatChildren who are detained for immigration purposes are atrisk of a variety of psychosocial and developmental problems linked to theirdetention experiences … The experience of detention may mimic theexperience of human rights abuses, persecution and terror.… Children andyoung people who are detained for extended periods of time are more likely thanothers to experience feelings of isolation, detachment, and loss of confidence.[171]An IOM doctor reported that one 14-year-old boy detained atPontianak IDC “became a stammerer because of the stress of the longdetention. He had problems in the past, he was a stammerer … as a youngboy in Afghanistan. He had been treated for depression then, and got better.But it came back, the stammer, when he was in detention.”[172]Another IOM staffer added, “The minors have more psychological problemsthan the adults, they haven’t developed their defenses yet.”[173]The psychologist who volunteers in Pontianak IDC describedsome of his child patients:There were recently [in 2012] seven unaccompanied minors indetention, all of whom were Afghan. Three of them had serious psychologicalproblems; they felt very distressed there. They had trauma from before, back inAfghanistan, they were harassed there…. They have developed a fear ofauthority figures, so being in detention is hard.The psychologist reported that these children“don’t communicate, they don’t act alive or participate inactivities, they look morose.” He said that restrictions oncommunications took a particular toll on the boys: “They have heavydepression because they can’t communicate with their families in theircountries.”[174]One of C.A.’sclients was an unaccompanied migrant boy who witnessed the severe beating thatled to the death of Taqi Naroye, an adult asylum seeker, in February 2012. Theboy, Mirza,[175] was 17 years old at the timeand was beaten himself during the incident (see above).Now, he cannot sleep well, he has nightmares, and his heartbeats very fast,” said C.A. “[H]is heart problem … ispsychological; he is very anxious…. Before the beating, [he] hadproblems, psychological problems … After the beating, things got moreintense for him, the nightmares started in earnest…. It’s not easyto make this better.[176]Lack of Contact withFamilyMigrants, including children, go for months or years withoutbeing allowed to communicate with their family; there are no routine provisionstaken for detainees to contact family from Indonesian immigration detentionfacilities. International standards mandate that individuals shall have theright to inform their families of imprisonment “at once,”[177]and the individual’s capacity to communicate with his family shall not bedenied for more than “a matter of days.”[178] TheCRC indicates that, in exceptional cases where unaccompanied children aredetained, they should be able to contact family.[179]Madudeva N. said he was 17 years old when he arrived inIndonesia alone and was detained, with unrelated adults, for a year at TanjungPinang IDC.In detention, in the jail, we didn’t have anyconversations with my family. I only talked to my parents after I got out …My parents didn’t know where I was. They just knew I was arrested on theway…. I sent them a letter from IOM but got no reply. I was very worried,because I hadn’t heard from them and I couldn’t talk to them.[180]Sayed M., an unaccompanied migrant boy from Afghanistan, was16 years old when Human Rights Watch interviewed him inside an adult detentionfacility. “It’s been four months without contact with my family.We’re not allowed to make phone calls.”[181]Many adult asylum seekers felt isolated by the lack ofcontact. Nuwan D., a Tamil asylum seeker, was detained at Tanjung Pinang IDCfor five months. “We were not allowed to use phones. It was difficult notto talk with our families for so long.”[182] ShajunanP.. was detained at Tanjung Pinang for 11 months: “We had no contact withour families, and no cell phones. It was so isolated.”[183]Failure to Provide Basic NecessitiesWe had a bad life in our country. We left to seek asylum.We got worse conditions here. We had cement benches for sleeping. No mattress,just bed sheets and a pillow.[184]—Ravith N., a Tamil refugeePhysical conditions in Indonesian detention facilities areoften poor. Immigration detention centers are, at times, filled beyondcapacity. Many migrants and asylum seekers reported a lack of basic sanitationfacilities, with only short periods of running water; lack of bedding; andflooding in sleeping areas. For example, we observed flooded, overcrowdedsleeping areas in Pontianak IDC during our visit in September 2012. Detaineesat many facilities said their food was dirty, with insufficient nutritionavailable for young children.Detention of migrants and asylum seekers should conform tointernational standards, including the UN Standard Minimum Rules for theTreatment of Prisoners,[185] as wellas the UN Rules for the Protection of Children Deprived of their Liberty.[186]These rules mandate minimum space; adequate bedding and decent sanitation;access to water; and adequate food. Many of the Indonesian immigrationdetention facilities that we investigated failed to meet these standards.Overcrowding inDetention FacilitiesAccording to Human Rights Watch interviews, IDCs around thecountry are, at times, overcrowded beyond their stated capacity. The directorof Belawan IDC told Human Rights Watch in September 2012 that there were then“189 detainees, the capacity is 120,”[187]while Human Rights Watch observed, during a tour of the facility, that a familyof six was held in a room approximately eight feet by twelve feet, with asingle set of bunk beds.Media reports confirm overcrowding: for instance, at thetime of a fatal riot in the Belawan IDC in April 2013, the facility reportedlyheld 280 people, more than twice its capacity.[188]Belawan is not the only facility that experiences overcrowding. An immigrationofficial at Bali IDC told Human Rights Watch that the facility was overcapacity when we visited in September 2012: “There are 90 people here.The capacity of the facility is 80 people.”[189]During our visit in September 2012, the director of Tanjung Pinang IDC toldHuman Rights Watch, “We have 304 people here now. The capacity is300.”[190]Overcrowding results in packed rooms with little or noprivacy. Nasir A., from Afghanistan, said he was detained at Pekanbaru IDC withhis wife and daughters, then aged 10, 6, and 4 years, for one year. “Theroom [we stayed in] was a little bigger than these two rooms [a total areaabout 30 feet by 15 feet] for three families, a total of 17 people. There wereno walls, no curtains.”[191]Faizullah A., an unaccompanied migrant boy who was 17 years old when he wasdetained in 2011 at Pontianak IDC, reported that the room in which he sleptwas, approximately 20 feet by 30 feet. “There were 34 or 35 other peoplethere, all male ... including [another unaccompanied child],” he said.[192]Sher K., an adult Afghan refugee, was held in a confinementcell at Kalideres IDC: “We were put in a four foot by eight foot cell forsix months—for six people. There wasn’t even space for us all tosleep at night. There wasn’t space on the floors; we slept in shifts.[193]Khalid A., also an Afghan refugee, experienced severe overcrowding at two IDCsbetween 2009 and 2011: “Manado’s capacity is 100. The most when Iwas there was 160.” In Kupang IDC, near a popular departure point forboats to Australia, he said, “the capacity is 60 to 80 people. The mostwho were there when I was there was 280.”[194]Migrants also reported overcrowding in the temporary holdingcells in immigration offices in Jakarta and Polonia.[195]Lack of AdequateBedding, Flooded Sleeping AreasSome migrants in IDCs interviewed by Human Rights Watch saidthey were not given adequate bedding,[196] and experiencedflooding in their sleeping areas, particularly during the rainy season.Mohammad S., age 30, said he was detained at Belawan IDC for 14 months startingin 2010:During the raining, the water would always come into theroom. But Immigration wouldn’t do anything, and wouldn’t listen tous when we complained. It was a lot of water, which was about this deep[indicating knee height, about one foot]. The water came from the toilet too.It was very dirty and smelled very bad … The water would take from nightuntil morning [to drain]. In that room, IOM gave us mattresses, a little offthe floor made of cement.[197]Children detained at the Belawan facility at the time of ourinterviews reported similar conditions. A 17-year-old girl detained at theBelawan facility reported, “When it rains, the toilets flood and comeinto the room.”[198]A mother detained with her infant son, said, “When it rains and the waterlevels get high, the sewage comes up out of the toilets. It stays in the room.It’s very dirty. There are insects in the water anyway, but this is evendirtier.”[199]Faizullah A., an unaccompanied boy age 17, was detained forseven-and-a-half months in Pontianak IDC in 2010 and 2011:Always, it was raining. The water was on the floor and thenwe were sleeping there … There were no beds. For some people who camebefore us, they had mats. For us, nothing. For four or five months. Then they deportedsome people to Afghanistan, so we used their mats. It was thin, like a type ofcarpet. We used the old sheets. They never gave anything else [new sheets]. Andon the floor we had nothing.[200]During Human Rights Watch’s visit to Pontianak IDC inSeptember 2012, damp corners of sleeping areas were clearly visible. Accordingto our interviews with detainees while there and to our observations, groups ofsix to eight migrants and asylum seekers slept on raised concrete platformswith bedrolls or thin mattresses.Mustafa A., from Afghanistan, was detained at Kalideres IDCin 2010 and 2011: “During my 17 months [in Kalideres], I slept on thefloor. We had nothing to make us comfortable.”[201] ShajunanP., a 44-year-old man from Sri Lanka detained at Tanjung Pinang for 11 months,reported dirty and crowded conditions. “They made us sleep on the flooron a thin mattress—sometimes one for two people, sometimes one for oneperson.… The room was dirty, so many people.”[202]Lack of Water and BasicSanitationMigrants reported poor sanitation facilities andinsufficient amounts of water for drinking and bathing in a variety ofdetention facilities. A girl age 17 interviewed at Belawan IDC reported,“It’s difficult for girls to have a bath. There is no privacy. Ourwindow got broken in the bathroom so we have to cover it with some cloth tohave privacy now.”[203]Click to expand ImageA cell at Kalideres Immigration Detention Center near Jakarta.Detainees reported that living areas were unsanitary and that they frequentlylacked adequate water, bedding, and mattresses. © 2012 Muni MoonMigrant children in two centers reported that immigrationguards limited the quantity of water they received for bathing. Thivviya N., aSri Lankan girl who was 13 and 14 years old when she was detained at TanjungPinang IDC with her family, said she was held in one room with 12 or 13 otherfamilies. She reports that there were two toilets and a shower inside the room:“Sometimes the water was on, but sometimes off. Sometimes it was only onat four in the morning for half an hour, so we’d get up and showerthen.”[204]Faizullah, the unaccompanied child detained at Pontianak IDC for seven-and-a-halfmonths, said,We had one toilet for 37 people. The water was outside,like this [points at tank]. They [the guards] could turn it on and off, offwhen they were unhappy. There was no hot water until the last month I wasthere.[205]Shakairan A., a 44-year-old Tamil refugee, was detained atTanjung Pinang for 11 months, ending in 2011. He commented that “the lackof consistent water flow made toilets sometimes get blocked up for five to sixdays,” and that “it would make the whole place smell.”[206]Lack of Adequate Nutrition for ChildrenAt many different facilities, migrants reported they foundinsects, metal, and other items inside their food. Children, who have specialnutritional needs, do not always receive food appropriate for their developingbodies.Faizullah A., an unaccompanied boy at Pontianak, said,“the food [provided by IOM] was very bad … inside the rice you canfind everything if you try. Flies, insects, little bugs.”[207]Daoud T. was detained at Belawan IDC: I was always hungry.… The food …was dirty—we got sick all the time…. There were lizards in thefood. It was filthy.… The smell was bad.”[208]Families were concerned about their children’s healthin relation to the food provided. A mother interviewed in Belawan IDC reportedto us that the food there made children sick: “The children sometimesvomit after eating the food.”[209]Kannan A., a boy detained at Belawan, said “My sisters vomit if they eat[the food]…. Even the water they use for cooking has worms in it.”[210]Safia A., who was detained at Pekanbaru IDC with threedaughters who were then 10, 6, and 4 years old, said, “Inside the food wecould see how dirty it was, you could see metal in there. Sometimes we went tosleep hungry.”[211]Parents found it hard to get milk for their children. OneBurmese father reported that he and his family waited five months in twodifferent detention facilities before they started receiving milk for thechildren. Another Burmese father, detained at Belawan, said he bribedimmigration officials to get supplies for his children: “I pay the maintenanceman to get me milk.”[212]Bribery, Corruption, and Confiscation of PropertyMigrants, including children, reported that it was possibleto pay immigration officials for access to mobile phones, and in some cases,release from detention. Hussein A., a Burmese father detained in an IDC withhis wife and infant son, said, “If we want something to happen, we needmoney to make it happen.”[213]Arif B., an unaccompanied Afghan boy, was 15 years old whenhe was arrested.From Kalideres, I paid [US]$400 to Immigration to get out.I went to talk to the boss of Immigration to get out, asked him how much itcost.... I have a friend outside. He is 16 ... My brother [older, in Australiaalready] sent the money to him, through Western Union, and he brought it to me[at Kalideres]. After my friend came, I gave the money to immigration….One of the other boys had paid too. $400, the same. [214]Mustafa A., from Afghanistan, found himself in a similarposition at Kalideres IDC in 2011:The immigration guards make business … there were twopeople who each paid $2,000 for their release … they wouldn’trelease me because I didn’t have any money.” Mustafa stated that hewas detained with “unaccompanied minors … the guards demanded moneyfrom them [too] if they wanted to go.[215]Daoud T. was detained at Tanjung Pinang IDC in 2010 and2011, even after he was granted refugee status: “I wanted the releaseimmediately [after getting status], but immigration staff asked me for a bribe.I didn’t have any money.”[216]Migrants, including unaccompanied children, reported thatimmigration officials took away their personal property when they were arrestedor transferred between detention facilities, and that the property was notalways returned.Ahmad Z., an unaccompanied Afghan boy, was detained at theMedan immigration office. “They took our money, then before theytransferred us [to an IDC] they only gave some of it back. They said they werecharging us for food.”[217]Khalid A., an adult Afghan refugee, asserted:I was arrested inMedan, by immigration. They took us from the airport to the Polonia immigrationoffice. They took my money, my everything. My mobile, everything. Dollars, mywatch, rings, everything. They never gave it back.[218]Sayed M., an unaccompanied migrant boy interviewed in anIDC, was worried that the loss of property meant he could not contact hisfamily: “[When I was arrested] they took my phone and my wallet. Theytook all my money, [US]$700. And plus, all the numbers for my family at home,they’re in the SIM card in that phone.”[219]International standards mandate that property should beplaced in safe custody, returned to the detainee on release, and that thedetainee should get a receipt.[220]IV. Problems Obtaining Refugee ProtectionAsylum seekers in Indonesia find it difficult to obtainrefugee status, which is granted by UNHCR as the Indonesian government has nomechanisms for processing refugees. These difficulties occur even forunaccompanied migrant children, for whom child-specific forms of asylumhearings are appropriate, and whose applications should be reviewed as quicklyas possible in light of their increased vulnerability to abuse during thewaiting period. Yet translation is inadequate, and children are not given legalassistance.Both adults and children face protracted delays in theprocessing of their cases: the average time for a first-instance refugee statusdetermination is 12-13 months for people in detention, and 14-15 months forpeople who are not detained.[221] Thesedelays occur because the Indonesian government takes no responsibility andbecause UNHCR is understaffed.The consequences of lengthy waits for refugee statusdetermination include the risks of arrest and prolonged detention. Migrants,including children can remain in detention while various stages of their claimare processed, even though they are exceptionally vulnerable migrants. They arevulnerable to abuse while they wait, whether in detention or outside, becauseIndonesia fails to protect them or provide them with even minimalassistance.Even once refugees are granted status by UNHCR, they do nothave sufficient legal status in Indonesia to reconstruct their lives (see SectionIV, below).Even once refugees are granted status by UNHCR, they stillare not adequately protected in Indonesia. Only a small proportion of therefugees are resettled to a third country, because the number of resettlementplaces made available by other countries, notably Australia, is smaller thanthe demand. The statistics provided by UNHCR in April 2013 indicate that 826people have been resettled in the last three years: 176 people were resettledin 2010, 403 in 2011, and 247 in 2012 (86 percent went to Australia, 7 percentto New Zealand, 3 percent to the US, and the remainder to Norway, Sweden, andCanada).[222]Delays in Getting Review and StatusIndonesia is not party to the 1951 Refugee Convention or its1967 Protocol and does not provide migrants with chance to claim asylum underIndonesian law. UNHCR has a memorandum of understanding with the Indonesiangovernment through which it operates a refugee status determination procedure.UNHCR can issue first an Asylum Seeker Certificate (ASC)while claims are pending and then, after a more detailed interview andrecognition as a refugee, a Refugee Certificate (RC). Even with an ASC or anRC, the bearer may not choose their residence, move freely around the country,or work, and the certificates offer only minimal protection against arrest anddetention (see Section V, below).Refugees, asylum seekers, and NGOs working with themcomplained of extended waits for UNHCR processing, to obtain an ASC, to beinterviewed for refugee status, and for UNHCR to report back the decision onrefugee status. As of April 2013, following significant numbers of new arrivalsin 2012, the average times for processing a first-instance refugee statusdetermination (including interview and decision-making) were 12-13 months fordetained people, and 14-15 months for people who are not in detention.[223]At some times, thebacklog in registration is such that asylum seekers are issued a“token,” or appointment slip, before being allowed to register asan asylum seeker. The token is a piece of paper the size of a business cardwhich has an appointment date and time to return to UNHCR. The token has nolegal bearing and offers no defense whatsoever against police action, leavingasylum seekers with even less protection than they would have once they gain anASC. In September 2012, there was an eight-month wait in order to register asan asylum seeker.[224]By November 2012, however, UNHCR had absorbedthe registration backlog such that the use of the token system was no longernecessary; however, in April 2013 UNHCR maintained that they would reinstatethe token system if needed.[225]An asylum seeker—bearing a token, or immediately whenthe token system is not operating—has a preliminary interview and is thenissued the asylum seeker certificate (ASC). Once an asylum seeker has an ASC,they have to renew it, potentially many times, before the process is finallycomplete. Fartuun A. said she traveled to Indonesia with her sister, brotherin-law, and their four children in 2011. They first received asylum seekercertificates two months after arrival, which lasted for two months. When theyrenewed them, they got “papers for eight months. Then four months. Nowagain for two months.”[226]An individual with an ASC then waits for a refugee statusdetermination interview. In April 2013, the average wait was 8-9 months for aperson in detention, and 10-11 months for someone who is not detained.[227]Afterthe interview, the wait continues, this time for the results. In April 2013,the average wait for the results of the interview was 4 months. Consequently,the total wait for a first-instance refugee status determination was 12-13months for someone in detention and 14-15 months for someone not detained.[228] Somepeople may choose to appeal a negative decision; the average wait foradjudication of that appeal was 180 days, or 6 months.[229]Asylum seekers reportedlong waits for UNHCR processing even while in detention, where the timetableshould be considerably accelerated. Sher K. waited nine months indetention—six of them in a “confinement” cell with five othermen—before his first interview with UNHCR. “Fourteen months later[after the interview], I was finally granted refugee status…. I waitedanother two and a half months to be released from detention.[230]Sher spent a total of two years, one month, and two weeks in immigrationcustody. Nabi B. who was interviewed while detained at Pontianak IDC, was stillwaiting for the outcome of his refugee status determination interview. He saidhe had waited 5 months for the interview and had been waiting 11 months for theresult, for a total of 16 months in detention.[231]Baqir N., an asylum seeker from Helmand, Afghanistan,requested voluntary return in part because he remained in Pontianak IDCawaiting UNHCR processing, where he had witnessed an asylum seeker die afterbeing beaten by guards:It’s been eight months without an interview.…If Immigration will kill me here, I may as well be in Afghanistan.… Due tothe late [delayed] process, I must go. I know the situation in Helmand isdifficult … after being back for a week I will flee again, to Pakistan.[232]Refugees who traveled through Malaysia and received refugeestatus from the UNHCR office there had to go through the UNHCR process inIndonesia regardless, and many were detained during this period. Karim Ali S.,the father of a Rohingya family from Burma who arrived in Indonesiaapproximately eight months before meeting Human Rights Watch, said, “we hadrefugee status in Malaysia, but we have asylum seeker papers only inIndonesia.”[233]A a Tamil man, had refugee status in Malaysia, but spent 11 months inimmigration detention before receiving refugee status from UNHCR in Indonesia.[234]Even children in this situation were detained: Kiriti T., aSri Lankan mother who traveled to Indonesia with her husband, two daughters(now aged 17 and 9 years old) and one son (now aged 8 years old), said, “Wehad refugee cards from Malaysia but they still locked us up for six months [atTanjung Pinang IDC].”[235]Even some vulnerable people may linger in detention, albeitfor shorter periods. Shajunan P. was at Tanjung Pinang IDC for two monthsbefore UNHCR came to register him: “Because of my artificial leg, I wasgiven priority for my interview. It was three months more to wait until theyinterviewed me.”[236]After Shajunan received his refugee certificate from UNHCR, he said, “theimmigration office told me I had to go to Belawan [IDC] first before I couldget released.”Shajunan spent another month at Belawan for atotal of six months in detention.Some asylum seekers have difficulties going through theapplication process due to inadequate translation. While IOM provides some helpwith translation, asylum seekers reported that they still needed moreassistance. Sher K., an Afghan who helps translate for many of his communitymembers, commented, “The forms we have to fill out to get recognized bythe UN are long and confusing for a lot of people.”[237]Selva P., a Tamil man who traveled to Indonesia with his then four-year-olddaughter, said, “We have interpreters at our interviews [for refugeestatus], but then afterward we don’t have one so it’s hard to tellthem when we have questions.”[238]Delays for Unaccompanied Migrant ChildrenUnaccompanied migrant children in Indonesia have access toUNHCR’s procedures to seek refugee status, but also face extended waittimes, even though UNHCR tries to accelerate procedures for children. If theydo gain refugee status, they still cannot work or build a meaningful life inIndonesia.Unaccompanied minors—who are particularly vulnerableto police abuse, arrest, and the impacts of prolonged detention—may fallunder the token system, which, as explains above, offers the bearer noprotection. Ali H., who was 16 years old when he arrived in Indonesia,explained the problems with the long delays:I went to UNHCR to get the token. I went four times, andthen got the [ASC]. It was very difficult between here and Jakarta, becausethere are checkpoints and I could get caught. I was thinking they could take meto prison…. Every two months you renew the card. That’s when youknow if you have an interview [for refugee status] or not.[239]Some children miss being identified by UNHCR. Azim M. was 17years old when he arrived in Indonesia, six weeks before Human Rights Watchinterviewed him:On my second day in Indonesia, I went to UNHCR. They gaveme a token for 2013.It just has my name and a date on it. They neverasked me my age. There was no special line [for those under 18]…. It wasvery crowded so the interview went quickly and I didn’t get to tell themmy age….Azim feels the token does not give him protection: “Ican’t go out. I stay inside the house all day. I’m afraid[immigration officials] will find me. I do nothing all day—sitinside.”[240]V. Restricted Living Conditions outsideDetentionHere we are outside [detention]. But … [w]e’renot all free—there are rules. If we break them, they send us back to thedetention center.[241]—Faizullah A., an unaccompanied Afghan migrant whoarrived in Indonesia aged 17.We don’t like it here. We have lost our lives …everything is finished.[242]—Kiriya J., a Sri Lankan girl who came toIndonesia with her family when she was 16 years old.Life in Indonesia is extremely difficult for migrant andasylum-seeking children, even when they are not detained. Without legalpermission to be in Indonesia, migrants live in constant fear of arrest, unableto go to the police in events of crimes. Asylum-seekers with only tokens havelittle or no protection, while UNHCR’s asylum seeker certificates andrefugee certificates offer only marginal improvements. Even when recognized asrefugees by UNHCR, families, unaccompanied children, and others cannot build alife in Indonesia, as they are not given the right to work or move freelyaround the country. Violating these or other conditions can lead to re-arrestand detention.Lack of Assistance Prior to UNHCR RecognitionAsylum seekers receive no assistance at all from theIndonesian government, and are constantly vulnerable to arrest by Indonesianimmigration authorities. Once they register and receive an asylum seekercertificate, but while waiting for the outcome of the refugee statusdetermination process, some asylum seekers receive some material and financialassistance through NGOs such as Jesuit Refugee Services (JRS). However, as thenumbers of asylum seekers in Indonesia grows, the need far outstrips thecapacity for NGOs to respond to this need.[243]Fartuun A. and her family are Somali asylum seekers who haveregistered with UNHCR living near Bogor, outside Jakarta, where many migrantslive. They arrived in Indonesia in June 2011, but only found assistance fromJRS in December 2011, after they were able to register as asylum seekers.“Before JRS, no one else helped us. [Only other]Somalis would help us,” said Fartuun. “We can’t work here totake care of the children, to buy food, to pay rent, to make a better futurefor all.[244]According to our interviews, police have raided homes of migrantsand asylum seekers in the areas around Bogor. An NGO worker in the areareported, “Since UNHCR instituted the token system, uniformed men havebeen going house-to-house to homes of single males and demanding money‘because they have no papers.’ No-one knows who they are but theyusually wear black jackets and brown pants.” (Brown uniforms are typicalof the Indonesian police.)The NGO worker said, “In February2012 there was a police sweep in Cisarua [near Bogor]. They arrested around 150people in their homes, starting at 6 a.m.”[245]Lack of Freedom of Movement and Restrictions onResidencyIndonesian authorities restrict asylum seekers and refugees toparticular geographical areas of Indonesia, and in some cases forbid them tolive outside of assigned housing. Interviewees—including recognizedrefugees awaiting resettlement—reported that they were rearrested if theybroke these rules. International law provides for freedom of movement forrefugees, such that refugees may choose where to live within their country ofrefuge, and may move freely around the country.[246]Udaya V., a recognized Tamil refugee, said, “Ican’t travel within Indonesia; Immigration gives us rules andregulations. I can’t go to any other island. If I do leave SumatraI’d be put in detention again. Immigration already told us that. Theytold us when we left detention what our rules are.”[247]Khalid A., an Afghan refugee, arrived in Indonesia in 2010 and now lives inMedan: “Of the people I came with, I have one friend left. He’s nowin Yogyjakarta. But I can’t go see him. Immigration won’t give mepermission.”[248]Refugees said they had no choice which residential area they are sent to whenthey leave the detention facility. Sher K., an Afghan refugee, said, “Iasked to go to Bogor or Yogyakarta, but they sent me to Medan.”[249]Click to expand ImageLiving center for asylum seekers and refugees in Medan,northern Sumatra. Even once released from detention, asylum seekers andrefugees must live in certain areas and cannot move freely about the country.Families living here reported flooding, overflowing sewage, and concerns aboutneighborhood crime. © 2013 Kyle Knight / Human Rights WatchRefugees said they feared they could be arrested forbreaking these rules. Ravith N., also a Tamil refugee, told us, “I canonly be in Medan. I can’t go to Jakarta. I can’t go to the airport,I can’t go to the port.… We can’t get permission to go. If Itake a bus to Jakarta and I get checked by police, they will arrest us.”[250]Khalid said immigration authorities arrested and beat himafter he tried to travel from Medan to Jakarta in violation of the restrictionsplaced on those with refugee certificates:I talked to a smuggler, an Indonesian man, who took us toPolonia airport [to go to Jakarta]. I paid $500. He left us in the airport, meand another Afghan man. Airport security asked for paperwork. We didn’thave one, we showed the refugee certificate. They knew better about us, theycalled Immigration…. Immigration came and took us to Polonia office, andafter 11 days we were taken to Belawan…. After three months they sent meback to [the assigned residence in Medan].[251]Faizullah, a 19-year-old Afghan refugee, said immigrationauthorities arrested him when they caught him at a friend’s apartment(outside of the assigned housing). He reported that the authorities alleged hehad moved there, a violation of the rules, though he maintains he was onlythere for a few hours. “They put me in detention near here, at Poloniaimmigration center, for 24 hours … I was in a room by myself, no lawyer,nothing. For 24 hours no one came.”[252]Lack of Work Permits and Access to SchoolIndonesian authorities do not allow refugees to work,contravening international standards. Children of asylum seekers have limitedcapacity to enroll in school (which varies by area).[253] Evenwhen they can enroll, they face significant language barriers.Sher K., an Afghan refugee unable to work, said, “Somepeople say we are living, we have a life. But I say we have no life and we arenot living, we are surviving only.”[254] ShajunanP., a Tamil refugee, worried that without work he could not support his familyin Sri Lanka: “My wife and children live alone there now. I worry aboutthem, I can’t look after them.… My sons are having difficulties …because they don’t always have enough money for food or school.”[255]Children reported that they had limited access to educationin Indonesia and were waiting until they were resettled to study. “I wantto study maths, I want to be an engineer,” said Delani K., a 16-year-oldTamil girl. “But I can’t do that in Indonesia. Even if I learnedthe Indonesian language, I wouldn’t be allowed to enroll inschool.”[256] JairajN., a Tamil boy who came to Indonesia with his family when he was 11 years old,said,[I]t’s not good. We cannot go to school because weare refugees…. The Indonesian government doesn’t make it possiblefor us to live here. I want to study maths, English, and science … I cando that when I leave here.[257]Mirza S., from Afghanistan, said of his three children, aged6, 8, and 16 years old: “They know things, but they have no educationbeyond survival. That’s what they see us doing—surviving—sothat’s all they know.”[258]Click to expand ImageRohingya children seeking asylum with their families attendan English class sponsored by the International Organization for Migration ata living center for asylum seekers in Medan, September 2012.© 2012 Kyle Knight / Human Rights WatchThough many children do not have access to formal education,IOM in collaboration with some local NGOs provide some informal education,including English classes, for refugees and asylum seekers who fall under IOMcare.[259] YetIOM’s programs are not sufficient to replace formal education programs.Under international law, a child’s nationality cannot act as a barrier toaccessing education.[260] TheIndonesian government must ensure that migrant children have full access toschools, not just to English programs or other forms of informal education thatintergovernmental or nongovernmental agencies provide.VI. Few Options for the FutureI am nothing now….All I do is worry about myfamily and my future. Three years like this now.[261]—Ahmad Z., who traveled alone from Afghanistan toIndonesia when he was 17 years old.For refugees and asylum seekers, including children, thereare few viable options for building a life in Indonesia. Their only hope is forUNHCR to resettle them, a protracted and often unsuccessful process. Faced byyears in limbo in Indonesia, asylum seekers, recognized refugees, and othermigrants choose the more dangerous but more immediate route of taking boatsillegally to Australia.Resettlement ProcessThere is an Afghan proverb, “being killed is betterthan having to wait.” Our waiting here is like a traffic light that isalways red. We have no idea when it will turn green.[262]—Daoud T., a refugee waiting for resettlement.People who successfullymake it through UNHCR’s process and gain refugee status still lackprotection in Indonesia, at risk of rearrest and unable to work (see above); tothe best of Human Rights Watch’s knowledge, however, they are generallyprotected from refoulement, meaning that the Indonesian government doesnot try to send them home. Left in limbo in Indonesia, resettlementin another country, through UNHCR, is the bestoption for these people.Yet only a few refugees are actually resettled,and the wait can be long.In the three-year period from 2010 to 2012, 826 people wereresettled from Indonesia to a third country (in 2010, 176 refugees wereresettled; in 2011, 403 were resettled, and in 2012, 247 were resettled).[263]86 percent of these people went to Australia, with the remainder to NewZealand, Canada, Norway, Sweden, and the US.[264]Given that just 826 people were resettled from Indonesia ina three year period, and given that as of February 2013, there were 1,938refugees recognized by UNHCR in Indonesia,[265] it is clear that manyface a long wait. As with refugee status determination itself, there areseveral steps to the resettlement process, with no guaranteed outcome. Thereare currently 754 refugees in Indonesia whose applications for resettlementhave been submitted to a third country, and another 247 whose applications havebeen accepted (by Australia and New Zealand) and who are awaiting departure.[266]In 2012, Australia increased, to its credit, the numbers of resettlement placesavailable, but this does not answer the need in Indonesia.Kiriti T., a Sri Lankan refugee who arrived in Indonesia in2010, has been staying in a temporary shelter in Medan, waiting forresettlement, with her husband, two daughters and a son for a year and a half:We bought birds for our children. We needed to change theirmindset, to make them smile. The kids are depressed. We can see it in them. Weare trying to give them a decent life. But they see the terrible situation andthis is what they know about the world. They are always asking: “Whenwill we go?”[267]Unaccompanied migrant children are among those stuck in thislimbo. Labaan A., who was 17 years old when he traveled alone from Somalia toIndonesia, told us,I don’t have any money so I don’t have any wayto help [my mother in Somalia]. This month I asked UNHCR to send me back toSomalia because I’d rather die with my mother. I told them, “If youwon’t send me to another country, send me home.” I do nothing allday. No classes, no job, it’s like my life is on embargo.[268]Compelled to Risk Boat Journeys to AustraliaThere was an 18-year-old here [in this residential facilityin Medan], but he left recently to get on a boat because he had been waitingfor two years.[269]—Sher K., an Afghan refugee.We’re not satisfied here. We don’t know whenwe’ll be resettled. UNHCR says they can’t promise we will go to athird country. So people go [take the boats] to Australia.[270]—Khalid A., an Afghan refugee.Many migrants, including families and unaccompaniedchildren, find themselves compelled to take boat journeys to Australia, seeingthat risky journey as the only way to break the limbo of life in Indonesia. Astaffer at an NGO that works with refugees and asylum seekers explained themotivation he had seen many times when his clients decided to risk these boats:“If you are not given a timeline with reasonable dates, why would youwait? You grew up in uncertainty, you fled uncertainty, why would you want tostay and live in more uncertainty?”[271]These boats, typically arranged by smugglers, often lacksufficient food, fuel, and water, and are unseaworthy; there are frequentfatalities.[272]Despite the frequent drownings from these unregulated crossings, many migrantschoose to make the trip. Sher K. observed, “Many of the men have wivesand kids [at home] they think about, they can’t wait here. If they getthere, good. If not, at least the suffering ends.”[273]Unaccompanied migrant children are among those who choose torisk the boat journeys. They reported that they felt they had few options. Noneof the unaccompanied migrant children with whom we spoke attended school inIndonesia, and children with refugee status, like adults, do not havepermission to work. Indonesia has no alternative immigration statuses availablefor these children.Ali H., a 16-year-old Afghan asylum seeker, was consideringtaking a boat: “Next I’m asking and enquiring to [UNHCR to] processmy case. But it is difficult, a lot of expenses and a lot of time, and youdon’t know if you’ll get a positive or a reject. So I might takethe boat. I will borrow money from someone in Quetta, from family there.”[274]Arif B., a recognized refugee and unaccompanied minor, who at the age of 15narrowly escaped drowning on a smuggler’s boat to Australia, was tryingagain: “I’ve made many attempts to go.… I keep trying becausethe cases are very slow here.”[275]Barat Ali Batoor, a refugee and Afghan photographer ofHazara ethnicity, explained that the limbo created by the refugee processing inIndonesia was difficult: “After eight or nine months you are called foran interview, and then there’s more time to wait for the result.It’s taking years, and people’s families are back home, needing money.At least on the boats, you know your fate in 36 hours, in 24 hours.”Barat knew the risks he and his fellow refugees faced: “People selleverything to come here, and they will have nothing if [the boat goes down].”[276]VII. Conclusion and RecommendationsAsylum-seeking and refugee children in Indonesia are trappedin a prolonged waiting game with no certain outcome. Many have fled desperatesituations, and hope to find refuge in Australia or elsewhere. Yet Indonesiadetains them without judicial review, subjecting them to poor conditions andbrutal treatment in detention facilities. Outside detention, asylum seekers andrefugees cannot work legally and are prohibited from moving freely around thecountry.By failing to ratify and implement the 1951 RefugeeConvention, Indonesia leaves refugees and asylum seekers living at the marginsof society with no chance to integrate. Many wait months or years for UNHCR toprocess their cases. Only a small number will ultimately be resettled to athird country. It is no surprise, therefore, that some asylum seekers decidethat boarding a rickety boat to travel irregularly to Australia looks like arisk worth taking.Unaccompanied migrant children fall into a legal void. Withno government agency taking responsibility for their guardianship, they areleft in detention or on the streets, without the legal or material assistanceto which they are entitled. Without a viable future in Indonesia even oncereleased from detention, and with a long wait for the possibility ofresettlement, many unaccompanied migrant children take the rash decision totake dangerous boat journeys.Children who migrate with their families also have no futurein Indonesia. Often detained in terrible conditions as young children, they areexposed to violence and left without an education. Once released, they andtheir parents have no secure immigration status in Indonesia, and children havefew prospects for gaining an education and no way of becoming a part ofIndonesian society.Instead of leaving people without options, compelling themto take dangerous boat journeys, Indonesia should create a legal environmentthat protects asylum seekers and refugees, including through ratification ofthe 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol. Indonesia should stop detainingchildren without review, impose an absolute ban on detention of unaccompaniedchildren, and immediately reform its immigration detention system. Australiashould support its neighbor in establishing these policies, and should liftpunitive asylum policies in order to minimize the risks of smugglers’boats.Migrants and asylum seekers will continue to come toIndonesia, in numbers that are likely to continue to increase. Indonesia shouldestablish an immigration screening system that, while including enforcement ofimmigration laws through proper and humane deportation of migrants who do nothave claims to enter or remain, protects children’s rights, recognizesvalid claims for asylum, and offers a viable future for those who can remain inthe country.To the Indonesian GovernmentAccede to the 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967Protocol and implement their provisions into Indonesian law, providing afair and timely asylum process accessible to all migrants who want to makerefugee claims.Provide appropriate living conditionsfor those seeking asylum and those granted refugee status, including byallowing the right to work and the right to move freely throughout the country.Provide all children in Indonesia,including migrant children and child asylum seekers, access to education.Regarding Detention of Migrants and Asylum SeekersEnd arbitrary detention of migrants andasylum seekers. Provide all migrants detained with access to mechanisms tochallenge the legality of their detention.Develop a clear, nationally applicable standard operatingprocedure for immigration detention that prevents the detention ofvulnerable migrants and asylum seekers, establishes benchmarks foracceptable conditions of confinement, and enables those detained to accessan effective complaints procedure about immigration staff conduct.Strictly enforce the prohibition of abuse of migrants indetention facilities, and implement a thorough, nationwide review ofviolence, abuse, and corruption in detention facilities. Ensure thatchildren are never subject to or witness to violence in detentionfacilities.Enable the National Commission on Human Rights(Komnas HAM), the Inspector General, or other independent monitoring body,to be responsible for oversight of a complaints procedure aboutimmigration staff conduct.Provide migrants with access to lawyers, including freelegal assistance for unaccompanied migrant children.Consider the detention of children in families as anabsolute last resort, after exploring all alternatives to detention, suchas registration and community monitoring for them and for their familymembers, while always prioritizing the child’s best interests andright to family unity.Regarding Unaccompanied Migrant ChildrenImmediately prohibit the detention ofunaccompanied migrant children and provide them with safe accommodationsoutside detention facilities.Grant unaccompanied children lawful statusfor as long as they are in Indonesia, to ensure their enjoyment of rights andprotection on an equal basis with Indonesian children and to protect them fromrepeated arrest and detention.Resolve which division within the government should takeresponsibility for guardianship of unaccompanied migrant children.Take immediate steps to ensure that there are sufficientplaces in shelters for unaccompanied migrant children, and that they haveaccess to education, adequate nutrition, and contact with family membersabroad.To the agency deemed responsible for the guardianship ofunaccompanied migrant children (for example, the Ministry of Social Affairs)Develop comprehensive policies to meet the protectionneeds of unaccompanied migrant children in line with the Convention on theRights of the Child and the UN Committee on the Rights of theChild’s standards articulated in its General Comment No. 6,including by:Establishing a meaningful guardianshipsystem through which each unaccompanied migrant child in the country isassigned, as soon as possible after arrival in the country, a guardian with theauthority to be present in all decision-making processes, including immigrationhearings, care arrangements, and efforts to make long-term plans for children,and who is knowledgeable about child care in order to ensure that thechild’s legal, social, health, psychological, material, and educationalneeds are adequately covered.Increasing the number of places available incare facilities (such as shelters and foster care settings) to the levelrequired to ensure placement for all unaccompanied children in the country.Establish and enforce minimum standards for all care placements and providespecialized care for particularly vulnerable children, such as those who arevictims of trafficking. Ensure care placements provide social and educationalservices, access to free legal aid, and protection from violence andill-treatment. Design programs to reach out to unaccompanied children who liveoutside state-sponsored care to ensure their protection and educate them aboutrisks of further travel. Set up a foster family system andprovide adequate support to foster parents in the exercise of theirfunctions.In cooperation with the Directorate Generalof Immigration, setting up a registration and tracking system for unaccompaniedchildren, to account for every child. Investigate incidents of unaccompaniedchildren who abscond from care centers and design strategies to counter suchoccurrences.Ensuring that unaccompanied migrant childrenhave access to free legal assistance in asylum proceedings and other legal andadministrative proceedings.To the Directorate General of ImmigrationRegarding Detention GenerallyConsider the detention of children in families as anabsolute last resort, after exploring all alternatives to detention forthem and for their family members, and while always prioritizing thechild’s best interests and right to family unity.Develop a clear, nationally applicable standard operatingprocedure for immigration detention that prevents the detention ofvulnerable migrants and asylum seekers, establishes benchmarks foracceptable conditions of confinement, prohibits bribery or corruptionamong staff members, and enables those detained to access an effectivecomplaints procedure about immigration staff conduct.Immediately prohibit the detention of unaccompaniedmigrant children and provide them with safe accommodations outsidedetention facilities.Regarding Conditions of ConfinementImmediately bring detention conditions in line withinternational minimum standards, including standards relating to overcrowding,water and sanitation, nutrition, and access to recreation, among others.Immediately cease detaining children with unrelatedadults.Provide appropriate, age-specific education to allchildren in detention facilities of compulsory primary education age, andallow children of secondary education age to continue their education ifthey desire.Ensure that detainees have the means to communicate withfamily members, UNHCR, and legal representatives.Ensure free and full access for independent agencies suchas national and international governmental organizations andnon-governmental organizations, and permit them to monitor detentionconditions.Regarding Abuse and Corruption in Detention FacilitiesIssue clear standardsand provide training to ensure that violence, ill-treatment, bribery, andcorruption do not occur in the detention facilities under yourjurisdiction.Institute accountability mechanisms, including aconfidential individual complaints procedure, to prevent abuses andredress corruption in immigration detention facilities. Ensure free andfull access for independent agencies such as international governmentalorganizations and non-governmental organizations, and permit them tomonitor detention conditions.Promptly investigate any allegation of ill-treatment ofmigrants and asylum seekers, including children, by officials and holdperpetrators fully accountable under the law. Take targeted andcomprehensive measures to prevent ill-treatment of migrants, includingunaccompanied children, in the custody of state agents. Put in placevictim protection mechanisms during investigations and make publicstatements condemning such acts.Regarding Migrants and Asylum Seekers outside DetentionIn cooperation with the Ministry of Social Affairs (or whicheveragency takes guardianship for unaccompanied children), set up aregistration and tracking system for unaccompanied children, to accountfor every child. Investigate incidents of unaccompanied children whoabscond from care centers and design strategies to counter suchoccurrences.Ensure that all unaccompanied migrant children inIndonesia are given an opportunity to seek asylum, and are providedrepresentation by a guardian and a lawyer for all unaccompanied childrenwho seek asylum. Prioritize the determination of asylum applications byunaccompanied children while ensuring a fair and full assessment of theirclaim.Ensure that all migrant children inIndonesia—including unaccompanied children and children with theirfamilies—have timely access to quality education, both in theexceptional cases where they are detained, and when they are livingoutside detention.To the Indonesian National PoliceRefrain from arresting refugees, asylum seekers, andpeople with tokens from UNHCR.Use only the minimum force necessary in apprehendingmigrants and investigate and punish instances of excessive force.Conduct comprehensive investigations into abuse claimsmade by migrants and asylum seekers in immigration detention, including byputting in place victim protection mechanisms during investigations.To the Australian GovernmentLead by example by lifting punitive asylum policies(including offshore processing and harsh visa regimes) and allowing thoseseeking asylum to reach Australian territory, thus minimizing the risks ofthe smugglers’ boats.Strongly promote and facilitate the development of refugeelaw and refugee protection in Indonesia, including by encouraging theIndonesian government to ratify the 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967Protocol, and by working with the Indonesian government to develop itscapacity to assess asylum claims and protect refugees.Support Indonesia in developing appropriate laws andpolicies to respond to the protection needs of unaccompanied migrantchildren, including those enumerated by the UN Committee on the Rights ofthe Child in its General Comment No. 6.In regional intergovernmental dialogues that addressmigration issues, push for a more humane approach to migration thatprioritizes children’s rights about immigration enforcement.Make funding of migration activities in Indonesiaconditional on respect for human rights and international standards onmigrant detention conditions, including provisions for monitoring andreview.Pressure Indonesia for accountability on instances of abusein immigration detention.Accelerate resettlement procedures and continue toincrease the number of refugees resettled from Indonesia to Australia.To International Donor GovernmentsStrongly promote and facilitate the development of refugeelaw and refugee protection in Indonesia, including by encouraging theIndonesian government to accede to the 1951 Refugee Convention and its1967 Protocol, and by working with the Indonesian government to developits capacity to assess asylum claims and protect refugees.Call on the Indonesian government to cease detainingasylum seekers and refugees with UNHCR documents, to consider thedetention of children in families as an absolute last resort, and toprohibit the detention of unaccompanied migrant children.Support Indonesia in developing appropriate laws andpolicies to respond to the protection needs of unaccompanied migrantchildren, including those enumerated by the UN Committee on the Rights ofthe Child in its General Comment No. 6.Provide financial and technical assistance to theIndonesian government in implementing new policies on migrants, asylumseekers, and unaccompanied migrant children.Provide increased financial assistance to UNHCR andnon-governmental organizations conducting refugee status determinations,so that these procedures can move more speedily, and so that people indetention, unaccompanied minors, and other vulnerable groups can beprioritized.Recognize the importance of education for migrantchildren, and support their education both outside detention and when theyare detained.To the Association of Southeast Asian NationsUphold refugee rights in the establishment of all policiesand practices on regional immigration enforcement.Prioritize children’s rights in immigrationenforcement, including by providing specialized protection forunaccompanied migrant children, and by urging states to cease thedetention of migrant children.To UNHCRWhile recognizing the parameters of the resourceconstraints faced by UNHCR in Indonesia, urgently speed up the very slowprocessing of refugee claims, if necessary by increasing the number ofUNHCR eligibility officers, interpreters, and support staff.Prioritize to an even greater degreeparticularly vulnerable groups, including unaccompanied migrant children, sothat the processing time on these claims is significantly reduced.Given the issues faced by those subject toprolonged detention, prioritize to an even greater degree claims made by thosedetained.End the system of giving “tokens” orappointment slips to asylum seekers who approach UNHCR, which leavespeople without legal protection for extended periods. Issue asylum seekercertificates as soon as that person is in touch with the office, tominimize the risk of arrest and other maltreatment.Promote fair practice standards in UNHCR’s refugeestatus determination process by permitting asylum seekers legalrepresentation and providing unaccompanied migrant children with freelegal assistance.Expand advocacy efforts with the government of Indonesiato ensure that unaccompanied migrant children have adequate care,including shelter and access to basic necessities.To the International Organization for MigrationIn the course of providing nutrition assistance to people underIOM’s care in detention, ensure that adequate food with appropriatenutritional standards is provided to all children in its care inimmigration detention facilities.Monitor conditions of confinement for all asylum seekersand children in its care in immigration detention facilities, and reportissues to the Directorate General of Immigration.Recognizing resource constraints, and while the governmentof Indonesia has failed to fulfill its responsibility to provide access toeducation, expand IOM’s educational programming for children bothinside and outside detention.Continue to work with the government of Indonesia toensure that unaccompanied migrant children have adequate care, includingshelter and access to basic necessities.Expand translation programs to ensure that asylum seekershave access to adequate translation in the course of their proceedingswith UNHCR.To UNICEFConsider migrant children, including asylum-seekingchildren and unaccompanied migrant children, as a core element of UNICEF’sprogramming in Indonesia. Prioritize advocacy that urges the government ofIndonesia to end the detention of migrant children.Support Indonesia in developing appropriate laws andpolicies to respond to the protection needs of unaccompanied migrant children,including those enumerated by the UN Committee on the Rights of the Childin its General Comment No. 6.Run programming and support programming run by others thatresponds to the protection needs of unaccompanied migrant children,including those enumerated by the UN Committee on the Rights of the Childin its General Comment No. 6.Work to ensure that all migrant children in Indonesia,whether detained or not, whether unaccompanied or with their families,have access to education.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched by Alice Farmer, researcher, andKyle Knight, Algrant fellow, in the Children’s Rights Division, in Augustand September 2012. Alice Farmer wrote the report.The report was edited by Zama Coursen-Neff, director of theChildren’s Rights Division; Andreas Harsono and Heather Barr, researchersin the Asia Division; Phelim Kine, deputy director of the Asia Division; BillFrelick, director of the Refugee Program; Dinah PoKempner, general counsel; andDanielle Haas, senior editor.Beneva Davies and Laura Schulke, associates, and AngelineTandiono, intern, provided research and production assistance. Grace Choi andFitzroy Hepkins provided additional production assistance. All maps were designed by John Emerson.We are grateful to the individuals who agreed to share theirpersonal stories, as well as all of the officials, service providers, andexperts who agreed to be interviewed. We thank all of the organizations andindividuals who supported this work, facilitated interviews, and providedinvaluable insight.[1] Human Rights Watchinterview with Barat Ali Batoor (real name), Cisarua, August 30, 2012.[2] Afghanistan hasfour major ethnic groups of which Hazara people are one. Hazara people havetraditionally been discriminated against in Afghanistan, deprived of access toservices and employment, and have periodically been the victims of ethnicviolence.[3] A minority Muslimgroup in Burma.[4] Convention on theRights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, GA Res. 44/25, annex, 44UN GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, UN Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into forceSeptember 2, 1990, ratified by Indonesia on September 5, 1990, art. 1.[5] UN Committee onthe Rights of the Child, “Treatment of Unaccompanied and SeparatedChildren Outside their Country of Origin,” General Comment NO. 6, UN Doc.CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005), paras. 7-8.[6] Email from StevenHamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization for MigrationIndonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[7] UNHCR,“Indonesia: Fact Sheet September 2012,” http://www.unhcr.org/50001bda9.html (accessedMarch 23, 2013).[8] UNHCR,“Indonesia: Fact Sheet September 2012,” http://www.unhcr.org/50001bda9.html (accessedMarch 23, 2013).[9] UNHCR,“UNHCR in Indonesia,” http://www.unhcr.or.id/en/unhcr-inindonesia(accessed April 23, 2013).[10] See, e.g.,“Asylum Seekers Risk All for Australian Dreamland,” Associated Press,July 6, 2012, http://dawn.com/2012/07/06/asylum-seekers-risk-all-for-australian-dreamland/(accessed April 9, 2013) (“Unwilling to languish for years here in detentioncenters while their cases are heard, many board smugglers’ boats toattempt the 500-kilometer trip to Australia’s Christmas Island.”).[11] Email from StevenHamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization for MigrationIndonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[12] Human RightsWatch group interview with Karim Ali S., Ciawi, September 7, 2012.[13] Human RightsWatch group interview with Fartuun A., Cisarua, September 7, 2012.[14] Human RightsWatch interview with Rafiq A., Medan, September 13, 2012.[15] Human RightsWatch interview with Ahmad Z., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[16] Human RightsWatch interview with Azim M., Cisarua, September 9, 2012.[17] Human RightsWatch interview with Madudeva N., Medan, August 23, 2012.[18] Human Rights Watchgroup interview with Karim Ali S., Ciawi, September 7, 2012.[19] Human RightsWatch interview with Ahmad Z., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012; Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012; Human Rights Watchinterview with Arif B., Cisarua, August 30, 2012.[20] Ben Bland, NeilHume, “Australia braces for seaborne refugees,” Financial Times,July 3, 2012, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/7bea2c5c-c4fa-11e1-b6fd-00144feabdc0.html(accessed April 9, 2013).[21] “IndonesianCrew of Wrecked Refugee Ship Jailed,” Agence France Press, September 26,2012, http://www.thejakartaglobe.com/home/indonesian-crew-of-wrecked-refugee-ship-jailed/546603(accessed April 9, 2013); Kathy Marks, “Boat Tragedy Reignites AustralianRefugee Debate,” National, December 9, 2010,http://www.thenational.ae/news/world/asia-pacific/boat-tragedy-reignites-australian-refugee-debate(accessed April 9, 2013).[22] See, e.g.,“Indonesian refugees return home after boat sinks en route toAustralia,” Reuters, August 31, 2012, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2012/aug/31/indonesian-refugees-boat-sinks-australia-video(accessed April 9, 2013).[23] See, e.g., LanaiVasek and Brendan Nicholson, “Refugees recoil at familydisappearance,” Australian, August 15, 2012.[24] Human RightsWatch interview with Arif B., Cisarua, August 30, 2012.[25] Both Australiaand Indonesia are signatories to International Convention on MaritFime Searchand Rescue, 1979, as Amended. State parties are obliged to extend aid withoutregard to nationality, status, or circumstances of the person or people indistress (Annex of the Convention Chapter 2.1.10,http://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/UNTS/Volume%201405/volume-1405-I-23489-English.pdf(accessed April 25, 2013); signatories listed at “Status of multilateralConventions and instruments in respect of which the International MaritimeOrganization or its Secretary-General performs depositary or otherfunctions,” March 2013, http://www.imo.org/About/Conventions/StatusOfConventions/Documents/Status%20-%202013.pdf(accessed April 25, 2013), p. 410.[26] The functions ofthe Ministry of Women Empowerment and Child Protection are stipulated inPresidential Regulation No. 24/2010, article 46. Neither this nor the Law onChild Protection No. 23/2002 clarifies responsibilities for migrant children.[27] InternationalConvention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Membersof Their Families (Migrant Workers Convention), adopted December 18, 1990, G.A,Res. 45/158, annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 262, U.N. Doc. A/45/49(1990), entered into force July 1, 2003, art. 16.[28] According to 2009data from the National Agency for the Protection and Placement of IndonesianMigrant Workers, there were approximately 4.3 million Indonesians living abroadfor work at that time, typically as laborers or domestic workers,InternationalLabour Organization, “Combating Forced Labour andTrafficking of Indonesian Migrant Workers,” http://www.ilo.org/jakarta/whatwedo/projects/WCMS_116048/lang--en/index.htm(accessed June 10, 2013). The population of undocumented migrants is estimatedto be two to four times that amount. Organizations such as Migrant Care, aJakarta-based NGO, put current estimates of documented and undocumented Indonesiansabroad at more than 10 million, Human Rights Watch interview with Anis Hidaya,Migrant Care, Jakarta, August 30, 2012.[29] Indonesia donatedUS$ 50,000 to UNHCR in 2012. UNHCR, “2013 UNHCR Regional OperationsProfile – South-East Asia,” http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49e488116.html(accessed April 23, 2013).[30] Email from StevenHamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization for MigrationIndonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[31] Bill Frelick andMichael Timmins, “Exporting Australia’s Asylum Policies,”Huffington Post, October 23, 2012.[32] “Deportboat migrants, Australian gov’t urged: Report adds fuel to bitterdebate,” Associated Press, August 13, 2012; “Australia: EndOffshore Transfer of Migrant Children,” Human Rights Watch news release,November 24, 2012,http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/11/24/australia-end-offshore-transfer-migrant-children.[33] “Australia:End Offshore Transfer of Migrant Children,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, November 24, 2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/11/24/australia-end-offshore-transfer-migrant-children.[34] Bill Frelick andMichael Timmins, “Exporting Australia’s Asylum Policies,”Huffington Post, October 23, 2012.[35] Ibid.[36] Email fromprofessional working with refugees to Human Rights Watch, April 4, 2013.[37] Ibid.[38] Ibid.[39] Ibid.[40] UN Committee onthe Rights of the Child, “Treatment of Unaccompanied and SeparatedChildren Outside their Country of Origin,” General Comment NO. 6, UN Doc.CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005).[41] General CommentNo. 6, para. 33.[42] General CommentNo. 6, para. 33.[43] Ibid.[44] Human RightsWatch interview with CWS staff, Jakarta, September 7, 2012.[45] Human RightsWatch interview with CWS staff, Jakarta, September 7, 2012.[46] Email from SteveHamilton, Deputy Chief of Mission, IOM Indonesia, to Human Rights Watch, April2, 2013.[47] Human RightsWatch interview with CWS staff, Jakarta, September 7, 2012; Human Rights Watchinterview with Steve Hamilton, deputy Chief of Mission, IOM Indonesia, Jakarta,September 12, 2012.[48] Human RightsWatch interview with CWS staff, Jakarta, September 7, 2012[49] Email fromprofessional working with refugees to Human Rights Watch, April 4, 2013.[50] Human RightsWatch interview with Ali H., Cisarua, September 9, 2012.[51] Human RightsWatch interview with Azim M., Cisarua, September 9, 2012.[52] Regional SupportOffice to The Bali Process, “Information Sheet: Mapping and Analyzing theProtection Situation of Unaccompanied and Separated Children in South EastAsia,” 2012, on file with Human Rights Watch.[53] Febionesta,“Indonesian Law and Refugee Protection,” presented at ASEAN CivilSociety Conference in Jakarta on 3-5 May 2011, on file with Human Rights Watch(no migrants, whether children or not, are granted the right to access to legalcounsel).[54] Human RightsWatch group interview with Sayed M., [location withheld], September 4, 2012.[55] Human RightsWatch interview with Ahmad Z., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[56] General CommentNo. 6, para. 21.[57] Human RightsWatch interview with Enayet H., Medan, August 24, 2012.He said he was 11 yearsold when we spoke to him and may have turned 12 by now.[58] Including directinterviews with children, interviews with adults who were children when theyentered Indonesia, and interviews with parents of very young children.[59] We sent lettersrequesting data and other information concerning immigration and detention inIndonesia, on December 21, 2012, and again on March 5, 2013, to the chief ofnational police, the minister of law and human rights, and the ambassadors tothe US and to the UN in Geneva and in New York..[60] Jessie Taylor,“Behind Australian Doors: Examining the Conditions of Detention of AsylumSeekers in Indonesia,” November 2009, http://www.law.monash.edu.au/castancentre/news/behind-australian-doors-report.pdf(accessed November 27, 2012), p. 12 (describing poorly transliterated andmissing names in a record log at Jakarta’s central immigration office).[61] Human RightsWatch interview with high-ranking police official, Tanjung Pinang City,September 12, 2012.[62] Email from StevenHamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization for MigrationIndonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[63] Ministerialinstructions in 2004 listed these detention facilities: Medan/Belawan (coveringthe provinces of Aceh and North Sumatra); Pekanbaru (covering Riau, Jambi, andWest Sumatra); Batam/Tanjung Pinang (covering the Riau Islands); Jakarta/Kalideres(covering Jakarta, West Java, Banten, Lampung, South Sumatra, Bangka Belitung,and Bengkulu); Semarang (covering Central Java, Yogyakarta, and CentralKalimantan); Surabaya (covering East Java, South Kalimantan); Pontianak(covering West Kalimantan); Balikpapan (covering East Kalimantan); Manado(covering North Sulawesi, Central Sulawesi, and Gorontalo); Makassar (coveringSouth Sulawesi, South East Sulawesi, North Maluku, and Maluku); Denpasar(covering Bali and West Nusa Tenggara); Kupang (covering East Nusa Tenggara)and Jayapura (covering Papua). Facilities listed at Direktorat JenderalImigrasi, “Rumah Detensi Imigrasi,” http://www.imigrasi.go.id/index.php/hubungi-kami/rumah-detensi-imigrasi(accessed February 25, 2013).[64] Human RightsWatch interview with Yunus Junaid, director of Tanjung Pinang IDC, TanjungPinang, September 12, 2012.[65] Human RightsWatch telephone interview with immigration security officer, Tanjung PinangIDC, September 12, 2012.[66] Human RightsWatch interview with Jairaj N., Medan, August 24, 2012.[67] Human RightsWatch interview with Saasvikan P., Medan, August 24, 2012.[68] Human RightsWatch group interview with Safia A., Medan, August 26, 2012.[69] Human RightsWatch group interview with Miriam A., Medan, August 26, 2012.[70] Human RightsWatch group interview with Raahitha H., [location withheld], September 12,2012.[71] Human RightsWatch group interview with Selva P., Cisarua, September 7, 2012.[72] Human RightsWatch interview with Ahmad Z., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[73] Human RightsWatch interview with Labaan A., Cisarua, September 7, 2012.[74] UNHCR, Guidelineson the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to the Detention ofAsylum-Seekers and Alternatives to Detention (Geneva, 2012) (“UNHCRGuidelines”), http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/503489533b8.html(accessed November 26, 2012), para. 48.[75] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[76] Pursuant toarticle 113 of Law No. 6 issued in 2011 on immigration, the criminal penaltyfor illegal entry or illegal exit, is maximum 1 year of imprisonment and/ormaximum 100 million rupiah (100 million Indonesia Rupiah, equivalent to US$10,315). (Setiap orang yang dengan sengaja masuk atau keluar Wilayah Indonesiayang tidak melalui pemeriksaan oleh Pejabat Imigrasi di Tempat PemeriksaanImigrasi sebagaimana dimaksud dalam Pasal 9 ayat (1) dipidana dengan pidanapenjara paling lama 1 (satu) tahun dan/atau pidana denda paling banyakRp100.000.000,00 (seratus juta rupiah)).[77] Bagian KeduaPelaksanaan Detensi Part Two Implementation of Detention Pasal 83, article 83(translation Human Rights Watch)[78] Ibid., article 85(translation Human Rights Watch)[79] Ibid., article 83(translation Human Rights Watch)[80] ICCPR, art. 9;Standard Minimum Rules, art. 7; Body of Principles, princ. 32.[81] Human RightsWatch interview with IOM staffer, Pontianak, September 5, 2012.[82]The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, General Assemblyresolution 2200A (XXI) of December 16, 1966, entry into force March 23, 1976.Indonesia acceded to the ICCPR on February 23, 2006. In 1999, the UN WorkingGroup on Arbitrary Detention developed criteria for determining whether thedeprivation of liberty of migrants and asylum seekers is arbitrary. Theprinciples mandate that a migrant or asylum seeker placed in custody“must be brought promptly before a judge or other authority,” andthat decisions regarding detention must be founded on criteria established bylaw. Moreover, migrants and asylum seekers in detention must be notified inwriting—in a language they understand—of the grounds for detentionand that remedy may be sought from a judicial authority empowered to decidepromptly on the lawfulness of detention and to order release if appropriate. UNCommission on Human Rights, Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention,E/CN.4/2000/4, December 28, 1999, Annex II, Deliberation No. 5,“Situation Regarding Immigrants and Asylum Seekers.”[83] Report of theWorking Group on Arbitrary Detention, Annex III, para. 8(d), January 17, 2011,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/16session/A-HRC-16-47.pdf,(accessed May 9, 2012).[84] InternationalConvention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Membersof Their Families (Migrant Workers Convention), adopted December 18, 1990, G.A,Res. 45/158, annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 262, U.N. Doc. A/45/49(1990), entered into force July 1, 2003, art. 16.[85] UNHCR, Guidelineson the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to the Detention ofAsylum-Seekers and Alternatives to Detention (Geneva, 2012) (“UNHCRGuidelines”), http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/503489533b8.html(accessed November 26, 2012), Guidelines 2 and 3.[86] CRC art. 37(b).[87] UN Committee onthe Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6, para. 62.[88] UN Committee onthe Rights of the Child, “Report of the 2012 Day of General Discussion onthe Rights of All Children in the Context of International Migration,”February 2013,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/discussion2012/2012CRC_DGD-Childrens_Rights_InternationalMigration.pdf(accessed March 21, 2013), para. 78.[89] UNHCR Guidelines,para. 53.[90] Matt Brown,“Asylum Seeker Beaten to Death in Detention,” ABC News, March 1,2012, http://www.abc.net.au/lateline/content/2012/s3443826.htm(accessed April 21, 2013) (referring to instances of two men allegedly beatenat Surabaya IDC in late February 2012).[91] “Ruthlesstorturing of asylum seekers continues,” Hazara Asylum Seekers, July 19,2012, http://hazaraasylumseekers.wordpress.com/2012/07/19/ruthless-torturing-of-asylum-seekers-continues-in-indonesia-by-indonesian-torturation-police-and-immigration-authorities-with-impunity/(accessed April 21, 2013).[92] “Buddhist,Muslims from Myanmar clash in Indonesia,” Miami Herald, April 4, 2013, http://www.miamiherald.com/2013/04/04/3324442/buddhist-muslims-from-myanmar.html#storylink=cpy(accessed April 21, 2013).[93] ICCPR art. 3;Standard Minimum Rules, art. 31.[94] UNHCR,“UNHCR deplores the death of an asylum seeker in Pontianak,Indonesia,” March 2, 2012, http://www.unhcr.org/4f509c726.html(accessed November 27, 2012).[95] Matt Brown,“Asylum Seeker Beaten to Death in Detention,” ABC News, March 1,2012, http://www.abc.net.au/news/2012-03-01/asylum-seeker-beaten-to-death-in-detention/3863582(accessed November 27, 2012).[96] Matt Brown,“Asylum seekers allegedly abused in Indonesia,” AustralianBroadcasting Corporation, March 3, 2012, http://www.abc.net.au/lateline/content/2012/s3449246.htm(accessed November 27, 2012).[97] “AfghanAsylum Seeker Allegedly Beaten to Death in Indonesia Detention Center,”Jakarta Globe, March 2, 2012, http://www.thejakartaglobe.com/news/afghan-asylum-seeker-allegedly-beaten-to-death-in-indonesia-detention-center/502002(accessed November 27, 2012).[98] UNHCR,“UNHCR deplores the death of an asylum seeker in Pontianak,Indonesia,” March 2, 2012, http://www.unhcr.org/4f509c726.html(accessed November 27, 2012).[99] Human RightsWatch interview with C.A., psychologist, Pontianak, September 5, 2012.[100] Human RightsWatch interview with Rudy Prasetyo, immigration officer, Pontianak IDC,September 4, 2012.[101] “49Pegawai Imigrasi Terkena Sanksi Disiplin di 2012,” Harian Pelita, December27, 2012, http://harian-pelita.pelitaonline.com/cetak/2012/12/27/49-pegawai-imigrasi-terkena-sanksi-disiplin-di-2012#.USwlUY42GrV(accessed April 25, 2013).[102] Human RightsWatch interview with Arif B., Cisarua, August 30, 2012.[103] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[104] Pseudonym. HumanRights Watch did not interview Mirza.[105] Human RightsWatch interview with C.A., psychologist, Pontianak, September 5, 2012.[106] Psychologicalrecords for Mirza provided by C.A. and on file with Human Rights Watch.[107] Human RightsWatch interview with Daoud T., Medan, August 25, 2012.[108] Human RightsWatch interview with Kannan A., Belawan IDC, September 12, 2012.[109] Pseudonym. HumanRights Watch did not interview Sadiq.[110] Human RightsWatch interview with Mohammad S., Medan, August 26, 2012.[111] Human RightsWatch interview with Mohammad S., Medan, August 26, 2012.[112] United NationsRules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (Rules for theProtection of Juveniles), adopted December 14, 1990, G.A. Res. 45/113, annex,45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 205, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990), art. 63.[113] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[114] Human RightsWatch interview with Ahmad Z., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[115] Human RightsWatch interview with Mohammad S., Medan, August 26, 2012.[116] Human RightsWatch interview with Daoud T., Medan, August 25, 2012.[117] Human RightsWatch interview with Nuwan D., Medan, August 23, 2012.[118] Human RightsWatch interview with Ravith N., Medan, August 23, 2012.[119] The intervieweedrew a picture that resembled an electroshock weapon.[120] Human RightsWatch interview with Khalid A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[121] Human RightsWatch interview with Khalid A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[122] Human RightsWatch interview with Mohammad S., Medan, August 26, 2012.[123] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[124] “Buddhist,Muslims from Myanmar clash in Indonesia,” Miami Herald, April 4, 2013, http://www.miamiherald.com/2013/04/04/3324442/buddhist-muslims-from-myanmar.html#storylink=cpy(accessed April 21, 2013).[125] Human RightsWatch interview with Arif B., Cisarua, August 30, 2012.[126] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[127] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[128] Human RightsWatch interview with Enayet H., Medan, August 24, 2012.[129] Human RightsWatch group interview with Nasir and Safia A., Medan, August 26, 2012.[130] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[131] We sent lettersrequesting data and other information concerning immigration and detention inIndonesia, on December 21, 2012 and again on March 5, 2013, to the Chief ofNational Police, the Minister of Law and Human Rights, and the Ambassadors tothe US and to the UN in Geneva and in New York.[132] Email fromSteven Hamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization forMigration Indonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[133] UNHCR,“Indonesia: Fact Sheet September 2012,” http://www.unhcr.org/50001bda9.html (accessedMarch 23, 2013).[134] Email to HumanRights Watch from NGO staff member, February 25, 2013.[135] Email to HumanRights Watch from NGO staff member, February 25, 2013.[136] Human RightsWatch interview with Rudy Prasetyo, immigration officer, Pontianak IDC,September 4, 2012.[137] Human RightsWatch group interview with Nazar M., Pontianak IDC, September 4, 2012.[138] Human RightsWatch group interview with Zabiullah B., September 4, 2012.[139] United NationsRules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (Rules for theProtection of Juveniles), adopted December 14, 1990, G.A. Res. 45/113, annex,45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 205, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990), art. 11.[140] United NationsStandard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Standard Minimum Rules),adopted by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and theTreatment of Offenders, held at Geneva in 1955, and approved by the Economicand Social Council by its resolution 663C (XXIV) of July 31, 1957, and 2076(LXII) of May 13, 1977, art. 8(d); ICCPR art. 2(b).[141] Human RightsWatch interview with Arif B., Cisarua, August 30, 2012.[142] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[143] Human RightsWatch interview with Shakairan A., Medan, August 23, 2012.[144] Human RightsWatch interview with Udaya V., Medan, August 23, 2012.[145] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with Ahmad Z., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[147]Human Rights Watch group interview with Sayed M., [location withheld],September 4, 2012.[148]CRC, art. 37(c), ICCPR, art. 10(b). The CRC only allows the joint detention ofchildren and adults if it is in the child’s best interest. Ibid.[149]“Special arrangements must be made for living quarters that areappropriate for children and that separate them from adults[.]” UNCommittee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6, para. 63.[150]Though immigration authorities failed toprovide education, some migrants organized classes for children. Enayet H., aBurmese Rohingya boy, who was 9 years old when he was detained, said, “Inthe jail, there was no school. People teach English … They areAfghan.” (Human Rights Watch interview with Enayet H., Medan, August 24,2012.) Saasvikan P., an 11-year-old Sri Lankan boy detained at Tanjung PinangIDC for eleven months, told us, “My mother acted as teacher for all ofthe children under 15.” (Human Rights Watch interview with Saasvikan P.,Medan, August 24, 2012).[151] Email fromSteven Hamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization forMigration Indonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[152] Human RightsWatch group interview with Miriam A., Medan, August 26, 2012.[153] Human RightsWatch interview with Madudeva N., Medan, August 23, 2012.[154] General CommentNo. 6, para. 63.[155] Rules for theProtection of Juveniles, arts. 38 and 39.[156] Human RightsWatch interview with Balanandini N., Medan, August 24, 2012.[157] Human RightsWatch interview with Steve Hamilton, deputy chief of mission, IOM Indonesia,Jakarta, September 12, 2012.[158] Standard MinimumRules, art. 21.[159] Human RightsWatch interview with Labaan A., Cisarua, September 7, 2012.[160] Human RightsWatch interview with Mohammad S., Medan, August 26, 2012.[161] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[162] Email fromSteven Hamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization forMigration Indonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[163] Human RightsWatch interview with Thivviya N., Medan, August 24, 2012.[164] Human RightsWatch interview with Delani K., Medan, August 24, 2012.[165] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[166] Human RightsWatch interview with Mohammad S., Medan, August 26, 2012.[167] Dr. Allan S.Keller et al, “Mental health of detained asylum seekers,” TheLancet, vol. 362, issue 9397 (November 22, 2003), pp. 1721-1723.[168] Human RightsWatch interview with C.A., psychologist, Pontianak, September 5, 2012.[169] Human RightsWatch interview with Mohammed A., Pontianak IDC, September 4, 2012.[170] Karen McVeigh,“Children made ‘sick with fear’ in UK immigration detentioncentres: Weight loss, difficulty sleeping, bed-wetting and sickness among symptomsfound at Yarl’s Wood,” Guardian, October 13, 2009.[171] InternationalDetention Coalition, Captured Childhood: Introducing a New Model to Ensure theRights and Liberty of Refugee, Asylum Seeker and Irregular Migrant ChildrenAffected by Immigration Detention (Melbourne, 2012), pp. 48-49.[172] Human RightsWatch interview with IOM doctor, Pontianak, September 5, 2012.[173] Human RightsWatch interview with IOM staffer, Pontianak, September 5, 2012.[174] Human RightsWatch interview with C.A., psychologist, Pontianak, September 5, 2012;psychological records for six unaccompanied migrant children provided by C.A.and on file with Human Rights Watch.[175] Pseudonym. HumanRights Watch did not interview Mirza.[176] Human RightsWatch interview with C.A., psychologist, Pontianak, September 5, 2012.[177] Standard MinimumRules, art. 44(3).[178] Body ofPrinciples, princ. 15.[179] General CommentNo. 6, para. 63.[180] Human RightsWatch interview with Madudeva N., Medan, August 23, 2012.[181] Human RightsWatch group interview with Sayed M., [location withheld], September 4, 2012.[182] Human RightsWatch interview with Nuwan D., Medan, August 23, 2012.[183] Human RightsWatch interview with Shakairan A., Medan, August 23, 2012.[184] Human RightsWatch interview with Ravith N., Medan, August 23, 2012.[185] Standard MinimumRules, preliminary observation 4 (“Part I of the rules … isapplicable to all categories of prisoners, criminal or civil[.]”); UNHCRGuidelines, para. 48.[186] United NationsRules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (Rules for theProtection of Juveniles), adopted December 14, 1990, G.A. Res. 45/113, annex,45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 205, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990), art. 11.[187] Human RightsWatch interview with Herdaus, director of Belawan IDC, September 12, 2012.[188] “Buddhist,Muslims from Myanmar clash in Indonesia,” The Miami Herald, April 4,2013, http://www.miamiherald.com/2013/04/04/3324442/buddhist-muslims-from-myanmar.html#storylink=cpy(accessed April 21, 2013).[189] Human RightsWatch interview with immigration official, Bali IDC, Denpasar, September 3,2012.[190] Human RightsWatch interview with Yunus Junaid, director of Tanjung Pinang IDC, Tanjung Pinang,September 12, 2012.[191] Human RightsWatch group interview with Nasir A. and family, Medan, August 25, 2012.[192] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[193] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[194] Human RightsWatch interview with Khalid A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[195] In 2010 inJakarta, Sher K. was “put in a cell fit for eight men—but we weresixteen men.”Human Rights Watch interview with Sher K., Medan,August 25, 2012. Khalid was held at the Polonia immigration office in December2011: “It was a very small room, just for five people, but sometimes tenof us were inside.”Human Rights Watch interview with Khalid A.,Medan, August 25, 2012.[196] Standard MinimumRules, art. 19 (“[e]very prisoner shall … be provided with aseparate bed, and with separate and sufficient bedding which shall be cleanwhen issued[.]”).[197] Human RightsWatch interview with Mohammad S., Medan, August 26, 2012.[198] Human RightsWatch group interview, Belawan IDC, September 12, 2012.[199] Human RightsWatch group interview with Raahitha H., Belawan IDC, September 12, 2012.[200] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[201] Human RightsWatch interview with Mustafa A., Yogyakarta, September 7, 2012.[202] Human RightsWatch interview with Shakairan A., Medan, August 23, 2012.[203] Human RightsWatch group interview, Belawan IDC, September 12, 2012.[204] Human RightsWatch interview with Thivviya N., Medan, August 24, 2012.[205] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[206] Human RightsWatch interview with Shakairan A., Medan, August 23, 2012.[207] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[208] Human RightsWatch interview with Daoud T., Medan, August 25, 2012.[209] Human RightsWatch group interview with Hariya P., Belawan IDC, September 12, 2012.[210] Human RightsWatch interview with Kannan A., Belawan IDC, September 12, 2012.[211] Human RightsWatch group interview with Nasir and Safia A., Medan, August 26, 2012.[212] Human RightsWatch group interview with Hussein A., [location withheld], September 12, 2012.[213] Human RightsWatch group interview with Hussein A., [location withheld], September 12, 2012.[214] Human RightsWatch interview with Azim M., Cisarua, September 9, 2012.[215] Human RightsWatch interview with Mustafa A., Yogyakarta, September 7, 2012.[216] Human RightsWatch interview with Daoud T., Medan, August 25, 2012.[217] Human RightsWatch interview with Ahmad Z., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[218] Human RightsWatch interview with Khalid A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[219] Human RightsWatch group interview with Sayed M., [location withheld], September 4, 2012.[220] Standard MinimumRules, art. 43.[221] Email fromprofessional working with refugees to Human Rights Watch, April 4, 2013.[222] Ibid.[223] Email fromprofessional working with refugees to Human Rights Watch, April 4, 2013.[224] Human RightsWatch interview with professional who works with refugees, September 7, 2012.[225] Email fromprofessional working with refugees to Human Rights Watch, April 4, 2013.[226] Human RightsWatch group interview with Fartuun A., Cisarua, September 7, 2012.[227] Email fromprofessional working with refugees to Human Rights Watch, April 4, 2013.[228] Ibid.[229] Ibid.[230] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[231] Human RightsWatch group interview with Nabi B., [location withheld], September 4, 2012.[232] Human RightsWatch interview with Baqir N., Pontianak IDC, September 4, 2012.[233] Human RightsWatch group interview with Karim Ali S., Ciawi, September 7, 2012.[234] Human RightsWatch interview with Shakairan A., Medan, August 23, 2012.[235] Human RightsWatch group interview with Kiriti T., Medan, August 26, 2012.[236] Human RightsWatch interview with Shajunan P., Medan, August 23, 2012.[237] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[238] Human RightsWatch group interview with Selva P., Cisarua, September 7, 2012.[239] Human RightsWatch interview with Ali H., Cisarua, September 9, 2012.[240] Human RightsWatch interview with Azim M., Cisarua, September 9, 2012.[241] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[242] Human RightsWatch interview with Kiriya J., Medan, August 24, 2012.[243] Human RightsWatch interview with staff member of NGO, Bogor, August 30, 2012.[244] Human RightsWatch group interview with Fartuun A., Cisarua, September 7, 2012.[245] Human RightsWatch interview with staff member of NGO, Bogor, August 30, 2012.[246] Conventionrelating to the Status of Refugees (1951 Refugee Convention), 189 UNTS 150,entered into force April 22, 1954, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/3be01b964.html(accessed April 23, 2013), art. 26.[247] Human RightsWatch interview with Udaya V., Medan, August 23, 2012.[248] Human RightsWatch interview with Khalid A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[249] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[250] Human RightsWatch interview with Ravith N., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[251] Human RightsWatch interview with Khalid A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[252] Human RightsWatch interview with Faizullah A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[253] Email fromSteven Hamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization forMigration Indonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[254] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[255] Human RightsWatch interview with Shakairan A., Medan, August 23, 2012.[256] Human RightsWatch interview with Delani K., Medan, August 24, 2012.[257] Human RightsWatch interview with Jairaj N., Medan, August 24, 2012.[258] Human RightsWatch group interview with Mirza S., Medan, September 13, 2012.[259] Email fromSteven Hamilton, deputy chief of mission, International Organization forMigration Indonesia, to Human Rights Watch, March 13, 2013.[260] Convention onthe Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, GA Res. 44/25, annex,44 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, UN Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into forceSeptember 2, 1990, ratified by Indonesia on September 5, 1990, art. 2.1; UNCommittee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, “Non-discriminationin economic, social and cultural rights,” General Comment No. 20, UN Doc.E/C.12/GC/20 (2009), para. 30 (“The ground of nationality should not baraccess to Covenant rights, e.g. all children within a State, includingthose with an undocumented status, have a right to receive education and accessto adequate food and affordable health care. The Covenant rights apply toeveryone including non-nationals, such as refugees, asylum-seekers, statelesspersons, migrant workers and victims of international trafficking, regardlessof legal status and documentation.”)[261] Human RightsWatch interview with Ahmad Z., Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[262] Human RightsWatch interview with Daoud T., Medan, August 25, 2012.[263] Email fromprofessional working with refugees to Human Rights Watch, April 4, 2013.[264] Ibid.[265] UNHCR,“UNHCR in Indonesia,” http://www.unhcr.or.id/en/unhcr-inindonesia(accessed April 23, 2013).[266] Email from professionalworking with refugees to Human Rights Watch, April 4, 2013.[267] Human RightsWatch group interview with Kiriti T., Medan, August 26, 2012.[268] Human RightsWatch interview with Labaan A., Cisarua, September 7, 2012.[269] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[270] Human RightsWatch interview with Khalid A., Medan, August 25, 2012.[271] Human RightsWatch interview with NGO staffer [who chose to remain anonymous to protectaccess to clients], Yogyakarta, September 18, 2012.[272] “Majorasylum boat tragedies in last decade,” Al Jazeera, August 31, 2012,http://www.aljazeera.com/news/asia-pacific/2012/08/201283017524760561.html(accessed June 10, 2013).[273] Human RightsWatch interview with Sher K., Medan, August 25, 2012.[274] Human RightsWatch interview with Ali H., Cisarua, September 9, 2012.[275] Human RightsWatch interview with Arif B., Cisarua, August 30, 2012.[276] Human RightsWatch interview with Barat Ali Batoor (real name), Cisarua, August 30, 2012.Related ContentJune 24, 2013News ReleaseIndonesia: Children Seeking Refuge Find Abuse, NeglectDetained, Beaten in Squalid Facilities, or Left to Fend for ThemselvesJune 24, 2013News ReleaseIndonesia: Children Seeking Refuge Find Abuse, NeglectRegion / CountrySomalia Asia Afghanistan Myanmar (Burma) Indonesia PakistanProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch