In The Extreme
Women Serving Life Without 
Parole and Death Sentences 
in the United States
 2  The Sentencing ProjectIn the Extreme: Women Serving Life without Parole and Death Sentences 
in the United States  is authored by Ashley Nellis, Ph.D., Senior Research 
Analyst at The Sentencing Project. Research assistance was provided 
by Skye Liston and Savannah En, Research Fellows at The Sentencing 
Project. The report is a joint publication of The Sentencing Project, 
National Black Women’s Justice Institute and the Cornell University 
Center on the Death Penalty Worldwide who together in 2020 formed 
the Alice Project. The collaboration seeks to highlight the experiences 
of incarcerated women and girls, to eliminate extreme sentences, and 
to reduce the influence of racial and gender bias in the criminal legal 
system.
We are deeply grateful for the contributions of Sara Bennett, whose 
professional photography focuses on dozens of women serving life 
sentences in New York. Her online exhibit, including the cover image, is 
available to the public .
The Sentencing Project promotes effective and humane responses to 
crime that minimize imprisonment and criminalization of youth and 
adults by promoting racial, ethnic, economic, and gender justice.
Copyright © 2021 by The Sentencing Project. Reproduction of this 
document in full or in part, and in print or electronic format, only by 
permission of The Sentencing Project.For more information, contact:
The Sentencing Project
1705 DeSales Street NW
8th Floor
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 628-0871
sentencingproject.org
twitter.com/sentencingproj
facebook.com/thesentencingproject
In The Extreme 3TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. Prevalence of Extreme Sentences Served by Women 5
II. Characteristics of Women Serving Extreme Sentences 7
Race and ethnicity 7
Age at offense 7
Aging in prison 8
III. Crime of Conviction 9
IV. Sentencing Trends 11
V. Trauma Plays a Pivotal Role 12
VI. Conclusion 14 4  The Sentencing ProjectSentenced to life without parole and incarcerated at the age of 34 in 2009. Her image is featured 
on the cover of this report outside her housing unit at Bedford Hills Correctional Facility in 2019. 
Photo courtesty of Sara Bennett.
— KATIn The Extreme 5Extreme punishments, including the death penalty 
and life imprisonment, are a hallmark of the United 
States’ harsh criminal legal system. Nationwide 
one of every 15 women in prison — over 6,600 
women — are serving a sentence of life with parole, 
life without parole, or a virtual life sentence of 50 
years or more. The nearly 2,000 women serving 
life-without-parole (LWOP) sentences1 can expect 
to die in prison. Death sentences are permitted by 
27 states and the federal government, and currently 
52 women sit on death row.2 This report presents 
new data on the prevalence of both of these 
extreme sentences imposed on women.3 
Across the U.S. there are nearly 2,000 women serving 
life-without-parole (LWOP) sentences and another 52 
women who have been sentenced to death. The majority 
have been convicted of homicide. Regarding capital 
punishment, women are sitting on death row in 15 
states (Table 1). As shown in Figure 1, women are 
serving LWOP sentences in all but six states.4 Three 
quarters of life sentences are concentrated in 12 states 
and the federal system. It is notable that in all states 
with a high count of women serving LWOP , there is at 
least one woman on death row as well. Two exceptions 
to the overlap are Colorado and Michigan which do not 
have anyone serving a death sentence because it is 
not statutorily allowed.PREVALENCE OF EXTREME 
SENTENCES SERVED BY WOMEN
State Women on Death Row
California 21
Texas 6
Alabama 5
Florida 4
Arizona 3
North Carolina 3
Ohio 2
Georgia 1
Idaho 1
Kentucky 1
Louisiana 1
Mississippi 1
Oklahoma 1
Pennsylvania 1
Tennessee 1Table 1. Women Serving Death Sentences
Source: Cornell Center on the Death Penalty Worldwide, 2021.
The nearly 2,000 women serving life-without-
parole sentences  can expect to die in prison. 6  The Sentencing ProjectMontanaConnecticutSouth DakotaNew HampshireDelawareIdahoMinnesotaWisconsinOregonKentuckyNew YorkTennesseeNebraskaMarylandNevadaWest VirginiaWashingtonMassachusettsArkansasOhioMissouriArizonaSouth CarolinaIowaIllinoisAlabamaColoradoGeorgiaOklahomaFederalTexasNorth CarolinaMississippiLouisianaMichiganCaliforniaPennsylvaniaFlorida 241
193
179
173
129
91
81
72
67
58
56
50
49
48
42
41
34
34
32
28
25
21
21
19
16
15
12
11
9
9
8
7
6
5
5
4
3
3Figure 1. Women Serving Life without Parole in the United States
Source: Nellis, A. (2021). No end in sight: America’s enduring reliance on life imprisonment . The Sentencing Project.In The Extreme 7RACE AND ETHNICITY
Women of color are disproportionately subjected to 
extreme sentences compared to their white peers. 
Nationally, one of every 39 Black women in prison is 
serving life without parole compared with one of every 
59 imprisoned white women.5 In Pennsylvania, one in 
9 Black women in prison is serving LWOP; in Michigan 
it’s one in 11, in Mississippi it’s one in 12, and in Louisiana 
one in 14 Black women in prison have an LWOP sentence. 
Latinx women comprise 6% of the total number of LWOP 
sentences being served by women. States with 
substantial proportions of Latinx women serving LWOP 
sentences are New York (36%), Texas (26%), California 
(20%), and Arizona (15%). Among the 52 women serving 
death sentences, 58% are white, 25% are Black, and 
11% are Latinx.6 Forty-two percent of women on death 
row are women of color.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Supplemental 
Homicide Report provides incident-based details 
regarding the race of persons arrested for homicide. 
According to this data source, Black women account 
for 49% of reported homicides committed by women 
and white women account for 48%.7 Therefore while 
Black women serving extreme sentences are 
overrepresented in relation to the general population 
(13%), they appear to be underrepresented in relation 
to the representation in homicides reported to law 
enforcement. Black women also represent a declining 
proportion of women in prison in recent years because 
of an increase in imprisonment among white women.8  
However, there is evidence of disproportionately longer 
prison sentences being served by Black people.9AGE AT OFFENSE
Analysis of homicide arrest data finds that women who 
commit homicide do so somewhat later in life than 
men. Whereas 48% of men who reportedly commit 
homicide are under age 25 at the time of their offense, 
nearly two thirds of women are at least 25 years old 
when they commit homicide.10 
The Sentencing Project received individual-level data 
on persons serving life sentences, including LWOP , from 
16 states and conducted a separate analysis of women 
serving LWOP using this information. The states 
included in the sample include 75% of the women 
serving LWOP nationwide.11 States included in the 
sample are Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, 
Louisiana, Massachusetts, Mississippi, Montana, New 
York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, 
South Carolina, and Wisconsin.
Our analysis shows that on average women commit 
offenses that result in extreme sentences of LWOP or 
the death penalty in their early to mid thirties. The 
average age at offense for people on death row was 36 
years old12 and the average age at offense among 
women serving LWOP sentences is 33 years old.
Thirty-two women serving LWOP sentences were under 
18 at the time of their crime.13 One woman is serving 
an LWOP sentence for a murder she committed at 14 
years old. While the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the death 
penalty unconstitutional in 2005 for people who 
committed their offense under 18,14 two women - Christa 
Pike in Tennessee and Maria Alfaro in California are 
awaiting execution for offenses they committed when 
they were 18.CHARACTERISTICS OF WOMEN 
SERVING EXTREME SENTENCES 8  The Sentencing ProjectOur sample of more than 1,000 women’s detailed 
demographic and offense data reveals that 20% were 
under 25 at the time of the crime.15 This age delineation 
is important because science on adolescent development 
commonly identifies 25 as the point at which the brain 
is fully developed. Before this point, individuals are less 
able to regulate their behaviors and foresee 
consequences from their actions.16 Though a series of 
United States Supreme Court rulings has distinguished 
youth under 18 as categorically different in terms of 
culpability for violent crime, emerging science suggests 
a more accurate age for this cutoff should be 25.17 
One third of the women serving LWOP are Black. Among 
women in our sample of over 1,000 women across 16 
states we find that Black women were on average 4.5 
years younger at sentencing compared to white 
women.18 Recent research on misperceptions of the 
age and culpability of Black people may shed light on 
this disparity. For example, using a college-age sample 
of survey respondents, researcher Phillip Goff and 
colleagues tested his theory that young people are not 
all afforded a level of leniency by the legal system and 
that Black youth specifically are excluded from this 
leniency. They hypothesized that Black youth would be 
perceived as both older than their chronological age 
and more culpable for crimes than similarly situated 
white youth. Their findings revealed strong empirical 
support for both of these claims.19 Though restricted 
to analyzing males, it is possible based on the data 
trends we observe that Black women are perceived as 
more culpable and older as well.AGING IN PRISON
The average current age of women serving LWOP is 52. 
Alice Green, 91, is the oldest female lifer.  She has been 
imprisoned for 45 years in Pennsylvania for her role in 
a 1977 murder. The oldest woman on death row is 
Blanche Moore in North Carolina, who is 88 years old.
The number of people in prison today who are age 55 
or older has tripled since 2000.20 The tough-on-crime 
policies that expanded life sentencing, prolonged the 
time to review cases for possible parole releases, or 
abolished parole altogether, have accelerated the build-
up of elderly people in prison.21 The Sentencing Project’s 
national census of people serving life sentences found 
that 27% of people serving LWOP are at least 55 years 
old, part of a growing trend of elderly imprisoned 
Americans. Among the sample of women we analyzed,  
a shocking 44% are currently at least 55 years old.
Preeminent scholars on the worldwide use of life 
imprisonment Dirk van zyl Smit and Catherine Appleton 
argue that the United States’ general acceptance of 
sentencing people to die in prison contradicts 
international human rights standards and practices.22  
Indeed, several countries prohibit life sentences for 
elderly persons and most countries place limits on 
elderly persons being sentenced to prison.23 
Figure 2. Age at Offense among Women Serving Life without Parole Sentences
050100150200250300
65 and older 55-64 45-54 35-44 25-34 under 25In The Extreme 9All women on death row have been convicted of a first 
degree or capital murder. Though a high standard of 
involvement must be met before a death sentence is 
imposed, several women have been sentenced to death 
for crimes in which they did not personally kill the 
victim.24 This circumstance is even more common 
among women sentenced to LWOP . The number of 
cases for which a defendant pled guilty to a lesser crime 
in order to receive LWOP instead of a death sentence 
is unknown at this time.CRIME OF CONVICTION
Offense Frequency Percent of Total
First Degree Murder/Capital 
Murder828 76%
Second Degree Murder 181 17%
Murder (Other, Non-Negligent) 35 3%
Sexual Assault 23 2%
Aggravated Assault 13 1%
Drug Offense 4 0%
Robbery/Aggravated Robbery 2 0%
Property Offense 1 0%
Kidnapping 1 0%Table 2. Crime of Conviction among  Sample of Women Serving Life Without ParoleWithin the sample of women serving LWOP , we find that 
three quarters of the women have been convicted of 
first degree murder and 95% have been convicted of 
some type of murder (Table 2). One in 5 women serving 
LWOP has been convicted of a homicide category below 
the most egregious one available in the state’s criminal 
statutes. Detailed homicide data show that approximately 
half of victims killed by women between 2000 and 2015 
were family members or intimate partners. By way of 
comparison, 20% of homicides by men involve family 
members or intimate partners.25 10  The Sentencing ProjectAllegedly gender-neutral sentencing policies, such as 
mandatory minimums that do not account for differential 
involvement in crime between major participants and 
minor participants place women at an extreme legal 
disadvantage.27 For instance, sentencing laws require 
the same punishment regardless of a defendant’s role 
in the crime, but women are frequently responsible for 
a comparatively smaller role in certain violent crime 
scenarios such as being a getaway driver.28 Because 
they are sometimes coerced into involvement in such 
crimes by romantic partners or husbands, they are also 
often disproportionately punished where laws require 
identical punishments for all defendants regardless of 
their role in the crime.
Naomi Blount Wilson is a Commutations Specialist 
for the Pennsylvania Board of Pardons, the arm of 
the state that hears clemency pleas. She served 
37 years of an LWOP sentence for a 1982 homicide. 
In 2019 she was commuted by Governor Tom Wolf 
after forensic evidence revealed that the victim had 
been killed by someone else.26
Consider so-called “felony murder” laws, which account 
for situations where a death occurs during the 
commission of a felony and as a result, all persons 
involved in the underlying felony can be convicted of 
homicide regardless of their role or even presence at 
the crime.
In Michigan, 57 of the 203 women serving LWOP - over 
one-quarter -  have been convicted under the state’s 
statute requiring this sentence for felony murder in the 
first degree statute. In Pennsylvania, 40 of the 201 
women reported to be serving LWOP have been convicted 
of felony murder, amounting to one of every five women 
serving LWOP .NAOMI BLOUNT WILSON
Photo Credit: Joshua VaughnIn The Extreme 11Between 2008 and 2020 there was a 2% increase in the 
number of women imprisoned for a violent crime, and 
a 19% increase in the number of women serving a life 
sentence. This includes a 10% increase in the life with 
parole (LWP) population and a staggering 43% rise in 
the number of women serving LWOP sentences.29
Death sentences imposed on women reached their 
highest level to date in 1990 and have declined since.30  
Today 52 women sit on death row awaiting execution. 
In January 2021 federal death row prisoner Lisa 
Montgomery was executed despite pleas worldwide to 
stop her execution on the grounds of well-documented 
evidence of severe mental health issues related to a 
long history of trauma and abuse.31SENTENCING TRENDS
LWOP sentences reached their peak in 2013, the year 
in which 48 new LWOP sentences were imposed on 
women.32 Yet even though new LWOP sentences 
imposed on women have declined since 2013, the 
cumulative nature of these death-in-prison sentences 
means there were more women serving LWOP in 2020 
than ever recorded. Some states, like Florida, have 
imposed LWOP on women at an alarming annual average 
of 11 per year since 2007. In 2018 alone Florida 
sentenced 15 women to LWOP .
Figure 3. Extreme Sentences Imposed on Women, 1972-2018
Note: The LWOP sentences included in this figure represent 15 states and 75% of the national population of women serving LWOP . Readers should note 
that California, which accounts for 20% of the national population, is not included her e because data were not obtained from this state.
LWOP Population 12  The Sentencing ProjectThe circumstances that lead women to commit violent 
crimes are often complicated by a history of sexual 
and/or physical trauma.33 Women serving life sentences 
report high levels of psychiatric disorders, histories of 
physical and sexual violence, and previous suicide 
attempts. One study finds that more than one third of 
women serving life sentences have attempted suicide.34 
“Every prosecutor describes women convicted of 
murder as cunning, diabolical, monster, and evil, ” 
[Kwaneta Harris] wrote. “I’ve yet to encounter these 
‘monsters, ’ although I’ve met plenty of women with 
mental illness, untreated and undiagnosed. ”35
Some women commit violence in response to intimate 
partner victimization. A seminal study of 42 survivors 
of intimate partner abuse convicted of murder in 
California found that all but two had received life 
sentences: six were sentenced to life without parole, 
and the remaining 34 received life sentences with 
minimums that ranged from seven to 15 years, but at 
the time of the study all these women had already served 
25 years.36 Additionally, interview data from 99 women 
serving life sentences showed that 17% had been 
convicted of killing their former or current intimate 
partner.
Today we know more about the short- and long-term 
impact of physical, sexual, and verbal abuse on criminal 
conduct. We know, for instance, that almost all who 
commit violence have first experienced it.37 
Yet allowance for trauma as a mitigating factor in 
culpability and punishment is still rarely recognized in 
court. Lawmakers in New York have attempted to correct 
for this omission with the 2019 passage of its Domestic 
Violence Survivors Justice Act (DVSJA), Penal Law 
Section 60.12. The law allows relief for defendants and 
currently incarcerated persons who have been sentenced TRAUMA PLAYS A PIVOTAL ROLE
to at least eight years in prison for a crime in which 
domestic abuse was a significant contributing factor 
to the crime. Some crimes are excluded, including first-
degree murder, certain forms of second-degree murder,38  
aggravated murder, terrorism, or any attempt or 
conspiracy to commit these offenses. People who are 
required to be on the state’s sex offense registry are 
also excluded from applying for review. Though the law 
is flawed in its restrictions, it is a first step in the legal 
acknowledgement that trauma and abuse correlate 
with violent crime, a fact which has been demonstrated 
clearly by many government and academic reports.
Scholar Beth Richie documents the higher incidence 
of abuse endured by Black women and comments that 
some of the unique vulnerabilities of being both Black 
and female include reduced access to crisis intervention 
programs, a greater likelihood that a weapon will be 
used in an assault, and legitimate distrust in police to 
respond effectively to violence by an intimate partner.39  
The well-documented outcomes of the domestic 
violence movement, including pressing for law 
enforcement solutions such as mandatory arrest and 
sentencing enhancement policies,40 also extend to 
extreme punishments imposed on individuals who 
commit homicide to escape domestic violence. These 
limited approaches have likely contributed to a 
disproportionate share of women of color receiving 
extreme punishments in response to homicides 
committed in order to escape domestic violence.
Richie also asserts that Black women’s arrest and 
incarceration is often the result of gender entrapment, 
a concept she uses to theorize how Black women’s 
experiences of intimate partner violence, racism, sexism, 
economic marginalization, and stigma led them to 
participate in illegal activities. Black women’s 
circumstances heighten their risk of contact with the 
criminal legal system.41 In The Extreme 13Erica’s childhood was characterized by unrelenting poverty and savage violence. Her father was an 
alcoholic who beat her mother in front of the children. Her mother physically assaulted the children as 
well. Sheppard’s teenage pregnancy was a result of a rape and forced her to drop out of high school. A 
series of romantic relationships followed that were dominated by emotional, sexual, and physical abuse. 
In 1993, at the age of 19, she was coerced by a friend of her brother’s to take part in a burglary in which 
a woman was killed. At the time of Erica’s prosecution, the Harris County, Texas prosecutor’s office was 
imbued with racism, and had a well-documented history of seeking the death penalty more frequently 
in cases involving a Black defendant and white victim. As a Black teenager accused of killing a white 
woman, her death sentence appeared to be a forgone conclusion. Her lawyer was inexperienced and 
unprepared. He declined to present evidence about Erica’s extensive history of rape and domestic 
violence, and failed to explain the effects of trauma on her mental health. 
Sheppard is now 47 years old and has been on death row for 26 years. She is physically disabled and 
needs a walker to move around her cell. A grandmother now, she maintains connection to her children 
as well as she can.  Her death sentence serves no purpose but to perpetuate the cycle of trauma and 
discrimination that led to her involvement in the criminal legal system.All women who encounter the criminal legal system 
face institutions that are designed principally by men 
and for men. Stephanie Covington, an internationally-
recognized clinician on trauma-informed responses to 
violence, writes the following with Professor Emeritus 
Barbara Bloom in their research on women who commit 
violence: “Women offenders are being swept up in a 
system that appears to be eager to treat women equally, 
which actually means as if they were men. Since this 
orientation does not change the role of gender in prison 
life or corrections, female prisoners receive the worst 
of both worlds. ”42 
Erica Sheppard is facing execution 
in Texas. Like many women 
embroiled in the criminal legal 
system, her past consists of child 
abuse, domestic violence, rape, and 
chronic neglect.
ERICA SHEPPARD
Erica Sheppard (right) pictured here at age 24 with long-time death penalty abolitionist 
Sister Helen Prejean (left). 14  The Sentencing ProjectWomen represent a small but growing portion of the 
prison population facing extreme sentences. Reforms 
advanced to end the use of extreme sentences will need 
to pay attention to the nuanced life experiences of 
women serving life in prison, as these have shaped their 
behaviors as well as their prison experiences. 
Monica Szlekovics arrived at Bedford Correctional Center in New York when she was 20 years old 
to serve a life sentence for contributing to crimes for which she had been forced to participate by 
her abusive husband. 
In her two decades of imprisonment, she committed a life of purpose and underwent a profound 
internal transformation. Her accomplishments include earning her college degree (with honors), 
immersing herself in counseling, and maintaining a near spotless disciplinary record. Former New 
York Governor Andrew Cuomo commuted her sentence in 2019 and she was released. CONCLUSION
A wealth of evidence suggests that women encounter 
gender-based stigma and bias that negatively affects 
their court outcomes. Their experience of violence--both 
as victims and as perpetrators--are distinct from the 
experiences of men, but women are subjected to a 
criminal legal system that does not acknowledge these 
important differences.
MONICA SZLEKOVICS
Monica in the college office at Bedford Hills Correctional Facility in 2018. Photo courtesy of Sara Bennett.In The Extreme 15ENDNOTES
1. Nellis, A. (2021). No end in sight: America’s enduring reli-
ance on life imprisonment. The Sentencing Project.
2. Cornell Center on the Death Penalty Worldwide (2021). 
Country reports.  Cornell University; Death Penalty Informa-
tion Center (n.d.) State by state: States with and without the 
death penalty-2021 .  DPIC.
3. Data used in this report include data collection by The Sen-
tencing Project from state departments of corrections as 
part of its quadrennial census of people serving life sen-
tences. In addition, The Sentencing Project has obtained 
detailed data from departments of corrections in 16 states 
on 1,098 women serving life without parole. Combined 
these data represent 75% of the total population of wom-
en serving LWOP but do not include California which is 
20% alone. Data on the number of women serving death 
sentences was obtained through the Death Penalty Infor-
mation Center as well as the Cornell Center on the Death 
Penalty Worldwide.
4. The six states where there are no women currently serving 
LWOP are Alaska, Hawaii, New Jersey, New Mexico, Rhode 
Island, and Wyoming. Virginia did not provide data on its 
life-sentenced population but is known to have women 
serving LWOP . LWOP is not authorized in Alaska.
5. The federal system, Bureau of Prisons, did not provide race 
or ethnicity data disaggregated by sex for its life-sentenced 
population. Virginia did not provide data for this report. 
6. Four percent are Asian American and 2% are American In-
dian.
7. Puzzanchera, C., Chamberlin, G., & Kang, W. (2020). Easy 
access to the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1980-
2019.  National Center for Juvenile Justice. The FBI data-
base does not track data according to ethnicity.
8. Sabol, W. J., Johnson, T . L., & Caccavale, A. (2019). Trends 
in correctional control by race and sex. Council on Criminal 
Justice
9. Johnson, B., Spohn, C. & Kimchi, A. (2021). Life lessons: 
Examining sources of racial and ethnic disparity in feder-
al life without parole sentences. Criminology , 59, 4, 1-35; 
Sabol, W. J., Johnson, T . L., & Caccavale, A. (2019). Trends 
in correctional control by race and sex. Council on Criminal 
Justice
10. Fox, J. A. & Fridel, E. E. (2017). Gender differences in pat-
terns and trends in U.S. homicide. Violence and Gender, 
4(2), 37-43.
11. California, which accounts for 20% of the life-sentenced 
population, is not included in this sample because data 
were not obtained from this state.
12. To our knowledge age at offense for the women serving 
death sentences has not been published.
13. Nellis, A. (2021). No end in sight: America’s enduring reli-
ance on life imprisonment . The Sentencing Project.
14. The U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Roper v Simmons , 543 
U.S. 551 (2005) invalidated all death sentences imposed 
on individuals who were under age 18 at the time of the 
crime.
15. When age at offense is not available we substitute age at 
sentencing with a 6-month extension to approximate the 
age at offense. This is a very conservative estimate of age 
considering that many trials or plea negotiations take up -wards of one year to be finished.
16. Steinberg, L. Around the world, adolescence is a time of 
heightened sensation seeking and immature self-regula-
tion. Developmental Science , 21,2, 1-26.
17. Bersani, B., Western, B., & Laub, J. (2019). Thinking about 
emerging adults and violent crime . Columbia University Jus-
tice Lab.
18. To conduct this analysis, we used a representative sam-
ple of 1,908 women serving LWOP sentences. The aver-
age age at sentencing to LWOP for White women was 35 
years old. The average age for Black women was 31 years 
old. An independent samples t-test was conducted and re-
vealed these differences to be statistically significant at the 
p=.001 level (F=14318, t=6.007).
19. Goff, P . et al. (2014). The essence of innocence: Conse -
quences of dehumanizing Black children. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology , 106, 4, 526-545.
20. Li, W. & Lewis, W. (2020, March 19). This chart shows why 
the prison population is so vulnerable to COVID-19.  The 
Marshall Project .
21. Ghandnoosh, N. (2017). Delaying a second chance: The de -
clining prospects for parole on a life sentence . Washington: 
DC: The Sentencing Project.
22. Van Zyl Smit, D. and Appleton, C. (2019). Life imprisonment 
worldwide: A global human rights analysis. Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press.
23. Van Zyl Smit, D. and Appleton, C. (2019). Life imprisonment 
worldwide: A global human rights analysis. Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press.
24. Death Penalty Information Center (n.d.) Executions over-
view: Executed but did not directly kill victim . DPIC.
25. Fox, J. A. & Fridel, E. E. (2017). Gender differences in pat-
terns and trends in U.S. homicide. Violence and Gender, 
4(2), 37-43.
26. Vaughn, J. (2020, December 7). Facing Life. The Appeal .
27. DeCourcy, E. (2020). The injustice of formal gender equality 
in sentencing. Fordham Urban Law Journal, 47(2), 395-430.
28. Fox, J. A. & Fridel, E. E. (2017). Gender differences in pat-
terns and trends in U.S. homicide. Violence and Gender, 
4(2), 37-43.
29. Nellis, A. (2021). No end in sight: America’s enduring reli-
ance on life imprisonment . The Sentencing Project
30. Death Penalty Information Center (n.d.) Womens death sen -
tences since 1973: number and geography .
31. Winter, H. M. (2021). Lisa Montgomery suffered years of  
abuse and trauma. The United States killed her anyway. 
Rolling Stone.
32. Additional research is necessary to determine the cause(s) 
for this decline. With the exception of Florida, states re-
duced their LWOP sentences applied to women beginning 
in 2013.
33. Covington, S. and Bloom, B. (2003). Gendered justice: Wom-
en in the criminal justice system. In Gendered Justice: Ad -
dressing Female Offenders.  1. Richie, B. (2012). Arrested 
justice: Black women, violence, and America’s prison nation . 
New York University Press.
34. Lempert, L. B. (2016). Women doing life: Gender punish -
ment, and the struggle for identity . New York University  16  The Sentencing ProjectPress.
35. Van Der Leun, J. (June 29, 2020). “I hope our daughters will 
not be punished. ” Dissent .
36. Lempert, L. B. (2016). Women doing life: Gender punish -
ment, and the struggle for identity . New York University 
Press
37. Nellis, A. (2013). The lives of juvenile lifers: Findings from a 
national survey. The Sentencing Project; Sered, D. (2019). 
Until we reckon: Violence, mass incarceration, and a road to 
repair . The New Press.
38. Those under P .L. Section 125.25(5).
39. Richie, B. (2012). Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence, 
and America’s Prison Nation. NYU Press.
40. Goodmark, L. (2018). Decriminalizing domestic violence . 
University of California Press; Kim, M. E. (2020). The 
carceral creep: Gender-based violence, race, and the expan -
sion of the punitive state, 1973-1983 . Social Problems, 67, 
251-269. Goodmark, Kim, and others argue that law en-
forcement responses to domestic violence have not been 
without controversy.  At the time of the passage of the Vi-
olence Against Women Act (VAWA), it was widely believed 
that mandatory arrest  policies were an ideal solution for 
interrupting domestic violence and keeping victims safe. 
Later studies showed that arrests actually had no signif -
icant influence on helping victims in the long-term and in 
some instances they were even shown to increase future 
violence and sink low-income families into poverty. The 
laws also reduced victim reporting rates due to the fear 
of retaliation and caused the abusive relationships to last 
longer.  Advocates warn against the “carceral creep” of a 
law enforcement response to domestic violence, favoring 
optional arrest policies combined with community-led re-
sponses that invest in social services to assist both victims 
and perpetrators.
41. Richie, B. (2006). Compelled to crime: The gender entrap -
ment of battered Black women. Routledge.
42. Covington, S. & Bloom, B. (2003). Gendered justice: Wom-
en in the criminal justice system. In Gendered Justice: Ad -
dressing Female Offenders, 4.
In The Extreme 17In The Extreme: Women Serving Life 
Without Parole and Death Sentences 
in the United States
Ashley Nellis, Ph.D.
September 2021
The report is a joint publication of The Sentencing Project, National Black 
Women’s Justice Institute and the Cornell University Center on the Death 
Penalty Worldwide who together in 2020 formed the Alice Project. The 
collaboration seeks to highlight the experiences of incarcerated women 
and girls, to eliminate extreme sentences, and to reduce the influence of 
racial and gender bias in the criminal legal system.
Related publications by The Sentencing Project:
• No End In Sight: America’s Enduring Reliance on Life Imprisonment (2021)
• A Second Look at Injustice (2021)
• The Next Step: Ending Excessive Punishment for Violent Crimes (2019)
