Uffi('~ of me. ASSlJj1m11 Allomt'} Gf'n~ml 
The Honorable Robert Bentley 
Govemor 
State Capitol 
600 Dexter Avenue 
Montgomery, AL 36130 .S. Department of Justice 
Civil Rights Division 
JAN 1 72014 
Re: Investigation of the Julia Tutwiler Plison for Women and Notice of Expanded 
Investigation 
Dear Govemor Bentley: 
The Special Litigation Section of the Civil Rights Division has concluded its 
investigation of allegations of sexual abuse and sexual harassment at the Julia Tutwiler Prison for 
Women pursuant to the Civil Rights of Institutionalized Persons Act ("CRIP A"), 42 U.S.c. 
§ 1997. CRIPA authorizes the Department of Justice ("001") to seek equitable relief where 
prison conditions violate the constitutional rights of prisoners in state conectional facilities. 
Consistent with the statutory requirements of CRJP A, we write to infonn you of our findings, the 
facts supporting them, and the minimum remedial steps necessary to address the identified 
deficiencies. We conclude that the State of Alabama violates the Eighth Amendment of the 
United States Constitution by failing to protect women prisoners at Tutwiler from hann due to 
sexual abuse and harassment from conectional staff. 
Tutwiler has a history of unabated staff-on-prisoner sexual abuse and harassment. The 
women at Tutwiler universally fear for their safety. They live in a sexualized enviromnent with 
repeated and open sexual behavior, including: abusive sexual contact between staff and 
prisoners; sexualized activity, including a strip show condoned by staff; profane and 
unprofessional sexualized language and harassment; and deliberate cross-gender viewing of 
prisoners showering, urinating, and defecating. The inappropliate sexual behavior, including 
sexual abuse, continues, and is grossly underreport ed, due to insufficient staffing and 
supervision, inadequate policies and procedure s, a heightened fear of retaliation, and an 
inadequate investigative process. 
Officials at the Alabama Department of Conections ("ADOC") and Tutwiler have failed 
to remedy the myriad systemic causes ofhann to the women plisoners at Tutwiler despite 
repeated notification of the problems. ADOC and Tutwiler have demonstrated a clear deliberate 
indifference to the hann and substantial risk of harm to women prisoners. They have failed to 
take reasonable steps to protect people in their custody from the known and readily apparent 
threat of sexual abuse and sexual harassment. Officials have been on notice for over eighteen 
years of the risks to women prisoners and, for over eighteen years, have chosen to ignore them. - 2 - 
 
During the course of our inve stigation, we reviewed information suggesting that the 
systemic deficiencies at Tutw iler that facilitated staff sexua l misconduct may also lead to 
excessive use of force, constitutionally inadequa te conditions of confinement, constitutionally 
inadequate medical and mental health care, and discriminatory treatment based on national 
origin, sexual orientation, and gender identity.  Therefore, in addition to informing you of our 
findings, this letter serves as notice of our intent to expand our  investigation into these areas.1  
Alabama Department of Corrections Co mmissioner Kim T. Thomas, Warden Bobby 
Barret, and Warden II Karla Jones have fully co operated with our investigation.  We recognize 
that Warden Barret has recently assumed the position, and was not present at the Facility when much of the alleged misconduct took place.  We  commend ADOC and Tutwiler leadership for 
recognizing the need for reform at  Tutwiler, and appreci ate their receptivene ss to our suggestions 
for change thus far.  We look forward to conti nuing to work cooperatively  with all interested 
parties.  
I. Summary of Findings 
 
We have made the following factual determinations: 
 For nearly two decades, Tutwiler staff ha ve harmed women in their care with 
impunity by sexually abusing and sexually harassing them.
2   Staff have raped, 
                                                 
1 Because our expanded investigation will evaluate Tutwile r’s overall provision of medical  and mental health care, 
we do not issue findings at this time with regard to our investigation into whether women who have alleged that they are subject to sexual abuse receive adequate  medical and mental health care.  This is, in part, due to the fact that the 
inquiries and remedies will overlap to such an extent that it will be more efficient to issue them all at once so that the 
state can implement broad based remedies in a coordinated fashion.  In addition, our investigation of the medical and mental health system with regard to sexual abuse victims could not be co mpleted satisfactorily because we were 
prevented from interviewing prisoners ou tside of the presence of counsel for th e mental health provider.  We trust 
that this dispute will be resolved by our next site visit.  
2 The terms sexual abuse, sexual harassment, and sexual misco nduct have varied in definition depending on context.  
In this letter, we define the term sexual misconduct to include both sexual abuse and sexual harassment.  For the terms sexual abuse and sexual harassment, we adopt the definitions set forth in the National Standards to Prevent, 
Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, 28 C.F.R. § 115.6 (2012): 
 
Sexual abuse of an inmate, detainee, or resident by a staff member, contractor, or volunteer includes any of 
the following acts, with or without consen t of the inmate, detainee, or resident:  
 (1) Contact between the penis and the vulva or the penis and the anus, including penetration, however 
slight;  
(2) Contact between the mouth and the penis, vulva, or anus;  
(3) Contact between the mouth and any body part where the staff member, contractor, or volunteer has the 
intent to abuse, arouse, or gratify sexual desire;  (4) Penetration of the anal or genital opening, however slight, by a hand, finger, object, or other instrument, 
that is unrelated to official duties or where the staf f member, contractor, or volunteer has the intent to 
abuse, arouse, or gratify sexual desire;  (5) Any other intentional contact, either directly or through the clothing, of or with the genitalia, anus, 
groin, breast, inner thigh, or the buttocks, that is unrelated to official duties or where the staff member, 
contractor, or volunteer has the intent to abuse, arouse, or gratify sexual desire;  (6) Any attempt, threat, or request by a staff member , contractor, or volunteer to engage in the activities 
described in paragraphs (1)-(5) of this section;  - 3 - 
 
sodomized, fondled, and exposed themselves to prisoners.  They have coerced 
prisoners to engage in oral sex.  Staff enga ge in voyeurism, forcing women to disrobe 
and watching them while they use the shower  and use the toilet.  Staff sexually harass 
women, subjecting them to a daily barrage of sexually explicit verbal abuse. 
 
 Tutwiler staff also harm women prisoners through a constant threat of sexual 
violence.  Because women prisoners typica lly experience a high incidence of sexual 
victimization prior to incarceration, subjecting them to a constant fear of sexual abuse 
and repeated sexual harassment is particular ly injurious.  This risk is well known to 
correctional leadership and staff.  The t oxic, sexualized envi ronment of Tutwiler, 
coupled with aggressive and threatening be havior by staff, increases emotional harm 
inflicted on prisoners and reinfo rces the cycle of abuse.   
 
 Tutwiler has a toxic, sexualized environm ent that permits staff sexual abuse and 
harassment. 
 
o Prisoners are compelled to submit to unl awful sexual advances to either obtain 
necessities, such as feminine hygiene products and laundry service, or to 
avoid punishment.  Inconsistent applicat ion of facility ru les and disciplinary 
sanctions causes many prisoners to belie ve that acceding to staff sexual abuse 
will engender improved treatment.  
o Tutwiler staff encourage and particip ate in sexual activities by and among 
prisoners. 
 
 Prison officials have failed to curb the sexual abuse and sexual harassment despite 
possessing actual knowledge of the harm, in cluding a federal statistical analysis 
identifying sexual misconduct at Tutwiler as occurring at one of the highest rates in 
the country.   
 
                                                                                                                                                            
 
(7) Any display by a staff member, contractor, or volunteer of his or her uncovered genitalia, buttocks, or 
breast in the presence of an inma te, detainee or resident, and  
(8) Voyeurism by a staff member, contractor or volunteer. 
  
Voyeurism by a staff member, contractor, or volunteer means an invasion of privacy of an inmate, detainee, 
or resident by staff for reasons unrela ted to official duties, such as peering at an inmate who is using a toilet 
in his or her cell to perform bodily functions; requiring an inmate to expose his or her buttocks, genitals, or 
breasts; or taking images of all or part of an inmate’s naked body or of an inmate performing bodily 
functions. 
 Id.  Sexual harassment includes:   
 
Repeated verbal comments or gestures  of a sexual nature to an inmate, detainee, or resident by a staff 
member, contractor, or volunteer, including demeaning references to gender, sexually suggestive or 
derogatory comments about body or clothing, or obscene language or gestures. 
 Id. 
 - 4 - 
 
 Prison officials discourage prisoner reporti ng of sexual abuse due to actual and 
perceived retaliation against individual s who make allegations.  For example, 
immediately after making allegations, Tutw iler often places women in segregation 
and gives them lie detector tests.  In some  instances, reporting the sexual abuse of one 
staff member results in additional abuse from other staff members. 
 When confronted with allegations of sexua l abuse and harassment, Tutwiler fails to 
adequately respond or investigate.  For example: 
o Sexual misconduct investigations are cu rsory and do not follow clear leads; 
and 
o Tutwiler does not properly discipline officers for subs tantiated sexual abuse. 
 Systemic deficiencies at Tutwiler directly  contribute to sta ff and prisoner sexual 
abuse and staff sexual harassment that injure s prisoners, and creates a substantial risk 
of further harm.   These systemic deficiencies include:  
 
o A lack of gender-responsive  strategies in Tutwiler’s  operational practices and 
internal policies that could addres s the sexual abuse and harassment at 
Tutwiler and remedy the se xualized environment; 
o Failure to adequately collect and analy ze existing data to identify potential 
misconduct, thus subjecting women to c ontinued sexual abuse and harassment 
that could have been prevented; 
o The complete absence of a grievan ce system, thus limiting alternative 
reporting options for women prisoners who fear retaliation for using the 
facility’s Prison Rape Elimination Act (“PREA”) hotline; 
o Dangerously low staffing levels, includi ng a dearth of female officers, thus 
placing women prisoners at serious risk  of harm from other prisoners and 
staff; 
o An architectural structure that is not suited for housing women offenders 
including a floor plan that affords little privacy to women prisoners to 
undress, shower, or use the toilet an d numerous blind spots throughout the 
facility that allow sexual ac tivity to occur undetected; and 
o A classification system that does not iden tify or protect potential victims from 
abuse, thus subjecting vu lnerable prisoners to se xual and physical abuse. 
These factual determinations pr ovide us with reasonable cause to conclude that Tutwiler 
violates prisoners’ Eighth Amendment rights to be protected from harm, Farmer v. Brennan , 511 
U.S. 825, 833 (1994), and se rious risk of harm, Helling v. McKinney , 509 U.S. 25, 33-35 (1993), 
as well as the constitution al right to bodily privacy, Fortner v. Thomas,  983 F.2d 1024, 1029-30 
(11th Cir. 1993).   - 5 - 
 
II. Investigation 
On February 26, 2013, we notified you of our in tent to conduct an i nvestigation of the 
Julia Tutwiler Prison for Women in Wetumpka, Al abama, pursuant to CRI PA.  Specifically, we 
notified you that we would focus our investigation on whether pris oners confined at Tutwiler are 
subject to sexual abuse by staff, and whether wo men who have alleged that  they are subject to 
sexual abuse are provided with adequate  medical and mental health care.   
 
From April 1 to April 4, 2013, we conducted an  on-site inspection at  Tutwiler with an 
expert consultant in custodial  sexual abuse and sexual harassme nt.  During the inspection, we 
interviewed administrative staff, security staff,  medical and mental health staff, facilities 
management staff, training staff, and prisoners.  Additionally, we received and analyzed a broad 
array of documents, including policies and proce dures, incident reports, investigative reports, 
disciplinary reports, logs, or ientation materials, and st aff training materials.   
We also interviewed dozens of prisoners and received 233 letters from current Tutwiler 
prisoners –roughly a quarter of Tu twiler’s prison population at the time of our tour– detailing a 
variety of concerns including sexual abus e and harassment; unprof essional and profane 
language; dehumanizing behavior; an d discriminatory treatment on the basis of national origin, 
gender identity, and sexual orient ation or perceived sexual orient ation.  Prisoners also reported 
inadequate medical care; excessive use of force and threats of force; and inadequate access to 
clean clothes, uniforms, and hygiene products, in cluding tampons and sanitary pads (especially 
for indigent prisoners).   
We based the findings in this letter on each of these sources.  Internal incident and 
investigation reports, external organizations’ report s, and interviews of cu rrent and former staff 
corroborate many prisoner allegations.  Further, th e internal corroboration of prisoner reports has 
been unprecedented:  multiple women over the pe riod of several years, with no opportunity or 
basis to collaborate, told a markedly similar story, often with sim ilar details or repeat 
perpetrators.  Thus, even assuming that an isolated  prisoner allegation recount ed in this letter is 
untrue, the extent of corroboration ma kes us confident in our conclusions. 
In keeping with our pledge to be transparen t and to provide technical assistance where 
appropriate, at the close of our  site visit we conveyed our pr eliminary findings to ADOC and 
Tutwiler officials, including Commissioner Thomas , Warden Barret, and Warden II Jones.  We 
thank Warden Barret and his staff, as well as ADOC’s officials and attorneys with whom we 
have worked, for their conduc t throughout the course of  the investigation.   
III.  Background 
 
Julia Tutwiler Prison for Women is a maximum- security prison in Wetumpka, Alabama.  
Opened in 1942, Tutwiler was orig inally designed to house 417 pr isoners.  As of April 4, 2013, 
however, the facility housed 928 prisoners, including 248 prisoners in the Annex.  For nearly two 
decades, Tutwiler has had a sordid history of sexual abuse and harassment of prisoners that has included rape and pregnancies.  Although official s have known since at least 1995 of the risks of 
sexual abuse and harassment that prisoners at Tutwiler face, ADOC and Tutwiler officials have 
failed to take reasonable steps to protect the women in their cu stody from these abuses.     - 6 - 
 
This is not the first time that we have notified Tutwiler and ADOC of unconstitutional 
conditions of confinement at Tutwiler.3  In 1995, we issued a fi ndings letter detailing 
unconstitutional medical and mental health care tr eatment at Tutwiler.  Although not a subject of 
the investigation, th e 1995 letter also noted inappropriate sexual contact between prisoners and 
staff.4  Specifically, we informed offi cials that “[o]ur penologist . . . received credible reports of 
sexual relations between inmates and staff,” a nd that the “offending st aff members reportedly 
reward inmates with food, cosmetics, and money fo r their participation” in sexual activity with 
staff.5  Eighteen years since notifying ADOC and Tutwiler officials of inappropriate sexual 
activity between staff and prisoners, problems in the area of sexual abuse and harassment have 
only worsened. 
In 2007, the DOJ’s Office of Justice Programs,  Bureau of Justice Statistics (“BJS”) 
published a report revealing Tutw iler as the women’s prison with the highest rate of sexual 
assaults in the nation.  The report ranked Tutwile r eleventh out of 146 pris on facilities, including 
men’s facilities.6  In 2013, BJS published an updated statis tical report and Tutwiler remains one 
of the women’s facilities with a high rate of sexual abuse; in fact incidents of sexual misconduct 
have increased substantially sin ce the release of the 2007 report.7     
 
In May 2012, the Equal Justice Initiativ e (“EJI”), a Montgomery, Alabama based 
organization that provides legal representation to  indigent defendants a nd prisoners, issued a 
public report detailing sexua l violence at Tutwiler.8   The report,  Investigation into Sexual 
Violence at Tutwiler Prison for Women , detailed pervasive sexual mi sconduct at the Facility and 
confirmed that little had changed since BJS’s 2007 findings.  Following an extensive 
investigation that includ ed interviews with over fifty curren t and former prisoners, EJI found that 
corrections staff were raping, sexually assa ulting, and sexually harassing prisoners.  
Additionally, EJI found that punitive responses to prisoners’ reports of sexual abuse created an 
atmosphere of intimidation and effectively silenc ed prisoners from reporting abuse.  They also 
found that ADOC and Tutwiler officials underrepor ted the number of sexual assaults at the 
facility.  Finally, EJI found that Tu twiler’s continued failure to rest rict male correctional officers’ 
ability to view naked prisoners had created an unnecessary risk of sexual misconduct.   
                                                 
3 Notice of Findings from Investigation of Julia Tutwiler Prison for Women , U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Civil Rights 
Division, Special Litigation Section, Mar. 27, 1995.  
 
4 Id. at 7. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 ALLEN J. BECK, PH.D., PAIGE M. HARRISON , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION IN STATE AND FEDERAL PRISONS REPORTED 
BY INMATES 2007, at 5 (Bureau of Justice Statistics 2007), available at  
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1149 . 
  
7 ALLEN BECK, PH.D., MARCUS BERZOFSKY , DR.P.H.,  RACHEL CASPAR , CHRISTOPHER KREBS , PH.D., RTI  
INTERNATIONAL , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION IN PRISONS AND JAILS REPORTED BY INMATES 2011-12, at 13 (Bureau of 
Justice Statistics 2013), available at  http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4654. 
 
8 EQUAL JUSTICE INITIATIVE INVESTIGATION INTO SEXUAL VIOLENCE AT TUTWILER PRISON FOR WOMEN  (Equal 
Justice Initiative, May 22, 2012), available at http://www.eji.org/node/637. 
 - 7 - 
 
 
Following the receipt of EJI’s report, ADOC requested that the National Institute of 
Corrections (“NIC”) review th eir operations with a specifi c focus on sexual misconduct.  
Engaging with NIC is a voluntary, largely polic y-driven process that seeks to strengthen 
administrative systems.9   On November 1, 2012, the NIC issued a technical assistance letter that 
identified deficiencies contributing to the sexualiz ed environment at Tutwiler.  The deficiencies 
included staff reluctance to repor t on the activity of their peers;10 no commitment to gender-
informed and gender-responsive strategies;11 and a physical plant layout that is not conducive to 
“promoting privacy, safety and security.”12  In January 2013, ADOC announced an action plan to 
address deficiencies identified by NIC.  Th ese proposed changes included specific policy 
changes, increased training, a promise to seek an  increased budget, and plans to recruit more 
women.  However, as illustrated below, little ap peared to have changed in practice when we 
were on-site in April 2013.  Further, the Special  Litigation Section’s analysis revealed deeper 
and more expansive problems that Tutwiler must  address in order to meet constitutional 
standards.  
IV. Findings 
We find that ADOC and Tutwiler violate pris oners’ constitutional rights by violating 
their right to bodily safety and privacy and con tinuing to expose them to actual harm and the 
serious risk of harm from sexua l abuse and harassment by correctiona l staff and other prisoners.  
Despite the various reports and i nvestigative findings detailing unconstitutional treatment and the 
obvious defects in operational pr actices, ADOC and Tutwiler offici als have simply failed to 
address these deficiencies and have remained delib erately indifferent to th e constitutional harms 
to prisoners in their care.  Given the dysfunctiona l systems in place at Tutwiler, the harm we find 
and describe in this letter is likely far deeper than documented and reported. 
A. Staff Sexual Abuse and Sexual Harassment  Subjects Prisoners to Harm and the Serious 
Risk of Harm  
Tutwiler staff sexually abuse and sexually harass prisoners in their care in violation of the 
Eighth Amendment and constitutional right to priv acy.  Of the 233 prisoner  letters we received, 
forty-four alleged pervasive sexual abuse and harassment.  Throughout the course of our 
investigation, we received numerous reports of st aff engaging in prohibited sexual contact with 
                                                 
9   SUSAN E. POOLE , JEFF SHORBA , DAVID M. MARCIAL , BIANCA HARRIS , ONSITE ASSESSMENT RE : CROSS -GENDER 
SUPERVISION IN CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES 2 (U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Nat’l Inst. of Corr. Technical Assistance Report 
November 1, 2012) (“The assessment was not an audit, but rather an opportunity to document strengths, challenges 
and observations as it relates to sexua l safety and gender informed practi ces.”).  Notably, the current CRIPA 
investigation conducted by the Special Litigation Section examines constitutional violations and related systemic 
deficiencies.  Thus, the review and constitutional analysis conducted by the Special Litigation Section substantially 
differs from the assessment conducted by the NIC in methodology, scope, and inquiry. 
 
10 Id. at 15. 
 
11 Id. at 11. 
 
12 Id. at 8. 
 - 8 - 
 
prisoners.  At least thirty-six of  the ninety-nine total employees were identified as having had sex 
with prisoners—approximately 36% of  current staff.  If we include  staff that were identified for 
other forms of sexual abuse and sexual harassm ent, the number of staff involved in sexually 
inappropriate behavior nearly doub les.  In some cases, prisoners  describe the misconduct as   
non-consensual, unwelcome, and/or the result of phys ical force.  In other cases, women describe 
their sexual contacts with staff as “consensual,” despite the fact that staff are prohibited from 
engaging in such contact under Alabama law, and despite the fact that women are compelled to 
submit to staff demands in order to obtain necessities or avoid punishment.   
The literature shows that men and wome n respond differently to incarceration.13  Women 
prisoners have a higher rate of prior victimization, sexual assault,  and domestic violence.  Many 
of these women also suffer from mental illness th at is traceable to prio r physical and/or sexual 
abuse.14  This history makes women more vulnerable.  As one prisoner explained, “victims of 
domestic violence are subjected to  more abuse [and] victims of se xual violence - are subjected to 
more sexual abuse whether by implication or more bluntly ….”  [sic].   In one illustrative 
example, in May 2011, a prisoner reported that Se rgeant A touched her thigh, caressed her back, 
and entered a storage area wher e she was working.  According to the prisoner, Sergeant A’s 
actions affected her particularly pr ofoundly due to her prior victimization.15  Studies have 
repeatedly shown that women with histories of being subjected to sexual abuse—including 
women in prison—are particular ly traumatized by becoming a victim of or witnessing 
subsequent abuse.16  These studies must be considered when evaluating the harm inflicted by 
Tutwiler staff’s actions.   
                                                 
13  BARBARA BLOOM , BARBARA OWEN, & STEPHANIE COVINGTON , NAT’L INST. OF CORR., GENDER -RESPONSIVE 
STRATEGIES : RESEARCH , PRACTICE , AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR WOMEN OFFENDERS  64 (2002), available at  
http://nicic.org/pubs/2003/018017.pdf (“Research on female offenders has established conclusively that women 
enter the criminal justice system” in differ ent ways as compared to male offenders.).  
 
14  A 2004 Bureau of Justice Statistics survey found that  42% of women prisoners reported that they had been 
sexually abused before their incarceration.  National Standards to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, 77 
Fed. Reg. 37106, 37131 (June 20, 2012) (codified in 28 C.F. R. §115.15  (2012)) (citing Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
unpublished data, 2004 Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities  and 2002 Survey of Inmates 
in Local Jails) ; see also  BLOOM ET AL ., supra  note 13, at 64 (“According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (1999a), 
nearly eight in ten female offenders with a mental illne ss reported having experienced prior physical or sexual 
abuse.”)  
 
15   In this example, ADOC concluded that Sergeant A was guilty of violating institutional policy on sexual 
harassment.  Sergeant A’s actions actually constitute sexual abuse.  See supra  note 2. 
 
16  See OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL , U.S.  DEP’T OF JUSTICE , THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ’S EFFORTS TO 
PREVENT STAFF SEXUAL ABUSE OF FEDERAL INMATES 1 (2009) (“[B]ecause female pr isoners in particular often 
have histories of being sexually abused, they are even more traumatized by further abuse inflicted by correctional staff while in custody”); Catherine C. Classe n, Oxana Gronskaya Palesh, & Rashi Aggarwal, Sexual 
Revictimization:  A Review of the Empirical Literature , 6 T
RAUMA , VIOLENCE , & ABUSE  103, 117 (2005) (“There is 
considerable evidence that sexual revictimization is associ ated with more distress comp ared to one incident of 
sexual victimization . . . The general finding appears to be that women who are revictimized suffer more PTSD 
symptoms.”); Danielle Dirks, Sexual Revictimization and Retr aumatization of Women in Prison , 32 W OMEN ’S 
STUD. Q. 102, 102 (2004) (“For women with previous histories of  abuse, prison life is apt to simulate the abuse 
dynamics already established in these women’s lives, thus perpetuating women’s further revictimization and 
retraumatization while serving time.”); B LOOM ET AL ., supra  note 13, at 37 (“In addition, standard policies and - 9 - 
 
1.   Tutwiler Staff Members Are Harming Prisoners by Sexua lly Abusing Them 
The Eighth Amendment’s ban on cruel and unusua l punishment requires  that corrections 
officials not be deliberately in different to the risk of sexua l abuse in prisons and jails.  Farmer , 
511 U.S. at 834 (noting that sexual abuse is not part  of the penalty that criminal offenders pay for 
their offenses against society); see also Boxer X v. Harris , 437 F.3d 1107, 1111 (11th Cir. 2006) 
(noting that “[s]evere or repeti tive sexual abuse of a prisoner by a prison official can violate the 
Eighth Amendment”)17; Dixon v. Sutton , No. 2:08-CV-745-WC, 2011 WL 1770295, *14 (M.D. 
Ala. May 9, 2011) (citations omitted)  (holding, in a case involving a woman prisoner at Tutwiler, 
that “[i]f an inmate is forced to perform oral  sex, it is objectively harmful” under an Eighth 
Amendment analysis); Women Prisoners of the District of Colu mbia Dep’t of Corr. v. District of 
Columbia , 877 F. Supp. 634, 665 (D.D.C. 1994) (staff se xual assaults of women prisoners 
“unquestionably violate the Eighth Amendment”), vacated and modified in part  on other 
grounds , 899 F. Supp. 659 (D.D.C. 1995), vacated in part and remanded on other grounds , 93 
F.3d 910 (D.C. Cir. 1996).   
The Eleventh Circuit also recognizes a prisone r’s right to “bodily privacy” separate and 
apart from Eighth Amendment guarantees.  See Boxer X , 437 F.3d at 1110 (holding that 
compelled masturbation in front of a woman correcti ons officer violated male  prisoner’s right to 
privacy); see also Fortner,  983 F.2d at 1027 (finding a priv acy violation where women 
correctional officers “solicit[ed] ... [male prisone rs] to masturbate and otherwise exhibit their 
genitals for the female officers’ viewing”).  Under the Fourth Amendment, a prisoner has the 
right “to shield . . . [her] unclothed figure from [t he] view of strangers, an d particularly strangers 
of the opposite sex.”  Byrd v. Maricopa Cnty. Sheriff’s Dep’t , 629 F.3d 1135, 1141-43 (9th Cir. 
2011) (quoting York v. Story , 324 F.2d 450, 455 (9th Cir. 1963)) (holding that a woman cadet 
touching a male pretrial detainee’s genitals a nd buttocks during a pat do wn while the detainee 
was only wearing boxer shorts viol ated his right to privacy); see also, e.g. , Kent v. Johnson , 821 
F.2d 1220, 1226 (6th Cir. 1987) (noting that “there mu st be a fundamental constitutional right to 
be free from forced exposure of one’s person to strangers of the oppos ite sex”).  Moreover, 
corrections officials may not subject prisoners to  invasive, demeaning, and humiliating treatment 
that is not justified by legitimate penological purposes.  See, e.g. , Canedy v. Boardman , 16 F.3d 
183, 184-88 (7th Cir. 1994) (holding that an inma te was entitled to reas onable accommodation to 
prevent unnecessary observations of his naked body by female guards); Lee v. Downs , 641 F.2d 
                                                                                                                                                             
procedures in correctional settings (e.g., searches, restra ints, and isolation) can have profound effects on women 
with histories of trauma and abuse, and often act as triggers to retraumatize women who have post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).”).  
 
17 Although the Boxer X  Court held that “a female prison guard’ s solicitation of a male prisoner’s manual 
masturbation . . . does not present more than de minimis inju ry” and that “an injury can be ‘objectively, sufficiently 
serious [as required to establish a Eighth Amendment violation] only if there is more than a de minimis  injury,” 437 
F.3d at 1111 (citing Johnson v. Breeden , 280 F.3d 1308, 1321 (11th Cir. 2002), the viability of this holding in light 
of recent Supreme Court pr ecedent is in doubt.  Boxer X  relied on Johnson ,  which involved an excessive force 
claim under the Eighth Amendment and the de minimis  injury proposition set forth therein has since been overruled 
because the de minimis  nature of an inmate’s injuries is not dispositive of an Eighth Amendment claim.  Wilkins v. 
Gaddy , 559 U.S. 34, 34 (2010) (reversing dismissal of “a prisoner’s excessive force claim based entirely on . . . [a] 
determination that his injuries were ‘ de minimis ’” because such a holding “is at  odds with” the Supreme Court’s 
“direction to decide excessive force clai ms based on the nature of the force rather than the extent of the injury”).  
 - 10 - 
 
1117, 1120 (4th Cir. 1981) (finding a privacy viola tion where male guards remained in the room 
and restrained a woman inmate while he r underclothing was fo rcefully removed). 
       We found repeated documented instances of st aff sexual abuse of Tutwiler prisoners over 
the last three years.  Individual prisoner allega tions have been corroborat ed by paternity tests, 
polygraph examinations, staff admissions, ADOC inve stigations, and intern al corroboration from 
other prisoners with no opportunity to coordinate stories.  The following are a few of the many 
instances of sexual abuse at Tutwiler:   
 Several prisoners report that Officer B solicits and receives oral sex from prisoners in 
exchange for gifts or new uniforms and underwear.  He has a reputation for being 
aggressive and threatening, and one prisoner de scribed him as a “sexual predator.”  In 
2012 and 2013, several women reported that he  touches prisoner s inappropriately, 
licks his lips at them, and watches them shower at the Tutwiler Annex.    
 More than one prisoner reported being sexually abused by Sergeant C in 
2010 and 2011, including being forced to  touch his penis and engaging in 
sex with him.  Sergeant C, while denying some allegations, admitted kissing one prisoner on two separate occasio ns and receiving several sexually 
explicit letters from another prisoner that he did not report and allegedly 
destroyed.   
 
 In late 2010, a prisoner reported that  Officer D had ex changed sexually 
explicit letters with her and ultimatel y engaged in sexual intercourse with 
her while another prisoner stood wa tch.  The prisoner submitted to a 
polygraph regarding these incidents and showed no signs of deception. 
 
 In May 2010, Officer E raped a prisoner.  In  2011, the prisoner gave birth to a child, 
and subsequent testing confir med Officer E was the father.  Officer E served 180 days 
in jail.
18 
A specific type of sexual abuse that occurs  frequently at Tutwiler is male officers 
unnecessarily viewing prisoners who are naked or  performing bodily functions.  As discussed 
further below, Tutwiler provides no guidan ce on cross-gender view ing in showers and 
bathrooms, and male officers at Tutwiler have unre stricted access to shower and bathroom areas.  
Many of the showers are open at Tutwiler, withou t curtains or saloon doors, exposing the women 
prisoners’ naked bodies.  During our April 2013 t our, we witnessed male officers entering 
bathroom and shower areas unannounced.  The NIC also reported19 similar violations to the 
unofficial policy requiring cross-ge nder officers to announce their presence before entering an 
                                                 
18  According to the statistical data provided, there was on ly one pregnancy at Tutwiler in the last three years.  
However, the inadequate investigative process (discussed  below), and the notable discrepancies in the pregnancy 
data received, call this figure into d oubt.  Prison officials should examine th e data to ensure that the pregnancies 
occurred outside of the facility and promptly address any discrepancies in the information discovered. 
 
19 ONSITE ASSESSMENT RE : CROSS -GENDER SUPERVISION IN CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES , supra  note 9, at 9.  NIC 
inspectors also witnessed male staff entering the shower and toilet areas without announcing himself.   - 11 - 
 
area where prisoners are likely to be in a state of undress.20  We received numerous reports from 
current and former prisoners that male offi cers enter these areas unannounced and linger— 
watching prisoners as they shower or  engaging them in conversation.   
Based on our expert consultant’s first-ha nd observations and other information we 
collected, we conclude:  
 there is no privacy in the bathroom or showers ; 
 male officers come into the bathroom  unannounced and carry on conversations 
while prisoners were on the toilet or in the shower; 
 male officers make prisoners feel uncomfortable  during count when they are in 
the showers.  One prisoner noted:  “I really don’t feel comf ortable when a man 
comes in and yells count and stands at the s hower door then later I feel as if he is 
disgusted with what he saw;”  
 officers routinely come into the shower  during count and te ll the prisoners to 
reposition themselves to face the officers,  causing the prisoners to expose their 
naked bodies.  According to the prisoner, “[ a]s tall as [the guards] are they should 
be able to count us by our hands, like the other officers does”; [sic] 
 male officers sit in the cubes and watch prisoners shower;  and 
 male officers enter the shower throughout the evening presumably as a site check, 
but only when certain women are showering.   
PREA limits cross-gender viewing of prisoners  in shower and bathroom areas to exigent 
circumstances or when viewing is incidental to routine cell checks.   See 28 C.F.R. § 115.15(d).  
Tutwiler officials stated that staff actions in th e shower and bathroom areas were justified based 
on Tutwiler’s belief that sexual contact between prisoners occurs more often in the shower.  
Even assuming that Tutwiler staff based this beli ef on the statistical suppo rt in their incident 
reports, the circumstance is predictable and permanent and thus not exigent by definition.21  
Neither is deliberately scheduli ng prisoner count when prisoners are showering—an activity that 
frequently occurs at Tutwiler.  According to one prisoner, some offi cers purposefully miscount 
so that they can stay in the shower longer.  Pr ior to count, most institutions suspend movement, 
including shower time and restr oom usage.  According to Tutwiler’s institutional rules that 
prisoners receive upon intake, prisoners are required  to “[s]it on [their] be d[s] and … [W]ait until 
count is announced cleared by the dorm Officer  of the Shift Commander” before resuming 
movement.  However, in response to a prisoner’s complaint that a male officer was watching her 
in the shower, a Lieutenant re plied, “counting the inmates in th e shower was a part of [the] 
                                                 
20 While this requirement is not officially memorialized in Tutwiler policy, it is generally accepted correctional 
practice and required by the PREA regulations, 28 C.F.R. § 115.15 (2012).  
 
21 The National Standards to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, 28 C.F.R. § 115.5 (2012), define exigent 
circumstances as “any set of temporary and unforeseen ci rcumstances that require i mmediate action in order to 
combat a threat to the security or institutional order of a facility.” - 12 - 
 
Officer[’s] job and he is only doing his job not watching inmates. ”  This level of cross-gender 
viewing for an administrative purpose is unacceptable and constitutes sexual abuse.  Further, it emboldens officers to engage in other sexual cont act, thus placing prisoners at further risk of 
sexual abuse and sexual harassment.   
In total, nearly twenty-five percent of the prisoner letters we recei ved reported sexual 
abuse by staff.  Fifteen percent of all prisoner letter s received reported unrestricted viewing in 
the shower and bathroom area making them feel uncomfortable and concerned for their privacy.  
Twenty percent of ADOC’s own incident report s involved sexual abuse by staff.  These 
examples show the pervasive sexu al abuse of prisoners in a vari ety of ways, from voyeurism and 
sexual contact, to sexual intercour se, violating their ri ght to privacy and the Eighth Amendment. 
2. Tutwiler Staff Members Sexually Harass Prisoners  
In addition to sexual abuse, we found doc umented instances of sexual harassment by 
male staff at Tutwiler.  A malicious level of  sexual harassment in a prison can violate 
contemporary standards of decency.  Women Prisoners , 877 F. Supp. at 665.  “There is a 
substantial risk of injury when officers make  sexual remarks in an environment where sexual 
assaults of women prisoners by officers ar e well known and inadequately addressed.”  Id.  In 
other words, “vulgar comments” a nd “sexual remarks” must be eval uated in the context in which 
they occur:  a prison environment with an ex treme lack of privacy and pervasive sexual 
misconduct.  Id.  Repeated sexually explicit and threat ening language, coupled with pervasive 
sexual misconduct, “mutually heighten the psyc hological injury of women prisoners.”  Id.  The 
health problems created by sexual harassment incl ude significant depression, nausea, frequent 
headaches, insomnia, fatigue, anxiety, irritabil ity, nervousness, and a lo ss of self-esteem.  Id.  As 
one Tutwiler prisoner explained:  “[officers] call us bitches, stupid bitches, and hating ass bitches 
. . . Verbal abuse & mentally . . . I need to s ee mental health on occasions.  My depression has 
gotten worse.  This place . . . has stressed me out badly.”      
Nearly fifteen percent of all the reports we reviewed, including those from former 
prisoners and ADOC’s own files, involved sexual harassment.  Years of ignoring the issue of 
sexual misconduct at Tutwiler have emboldened its st aff to continue to sexually harass women.  
As a result, unchecked sexual harassment at Tutw iler has often escalated to  sexual abuse.  Some 
examples of sexual harassment that occu rred in 2012 and 2013 at Tutwiler include: 
 Officer F sexualized a prisoner’s everyday water bottle by telling her that he “thought 
the water bottle would be too small for him and he liked being ‘fucked’ up the ass 
with bigger things.”  When asked by an ADOC investigator, Officer F admitted to 
only discussing objects that could be turned into dildos or sexu al tools.  The ADOC 
investigator noted that the matter should be  referred to ADOC offi cials to address the 
officer’s lack of professionalism and inappr opriate sexual discussi ons with prisoners, 
but ADOC provided no evidence that any such follow-up occurred.  
 
Several women have complained that Steward G sexually harassed them.  For 
example, in January 2012, a prisoner allege d that Steward G made sexual gestures, 
informed her of his home address, and inform ed her that he wanted to see her when 
she was released from Tutwiler.  Steward G admitted to an ADOC investigator that - 13 - 
 
he had discussed where he lived and calle d another prisoner “too cute to be in 
prison,” yet investigators c oncluded that the allegati on was unfounded.  Later in 
2012, Tutwiler discovered another prisoner ha d sent mail to Steward G’s personal 
post office box.  Steward G resigned in April 2012.  
 On May 23, 2011, a prisoner reported that Se rgeant A was sexually harassing her.  
She reported that Sergeant A made her f eel uncomfortable on several occasions, 
telling her that “she was fine, she had nice legs, that he likes medium build women” 
and making other sexual comments.  She also  reported that he took her ID card to 
obtain personal information about her and asked her whether sh e had a boyfriend.  
Sergeant A admitted to an ADOC investigat or that he had lo oked up the prisoner’s 
personal information and sang sexually ex plicit rap songs around prisoners.   
In total, fifty-five percent of the prisoner letters we received repor ted vile and degrading 
language directed at prisoners.  Several women repor ted that an officer yelle d at a prisoner to get 
her “cum sucking mouth over here.”  Women repor ted being called “bitches ,” “hoes,” and “crack 
whores” at a staggering rate.22  The verbal abuse at Tutwiler is  so pervasive that prisoners 
identified at least thirty-four officers who are verbally abusive and threatening.  For example, 
several prisoners identified Officer I as verba lly abusive and physica lly threatening.  We 
received at least twenty  prisoner letters identifying Officer I as  one of the officers who verbally 
abuses prisoners the most.  According to the lett ers we received, Officer I referred to women in 
the drug rehabilitation dorm as “dope whores,” to ld a prisoner who wanted to speak to him to 
“shut her ‘cum-catcher’” and to “get the fuck out of his face.”23  Another prisoner reported that 
when Officer I is assigned to the medication li ne, she “skips [her] medi cation rather than be 
subjected to his abuse.”  In one  incident, when questioned about his vulgar langu age, Officer I 
admitted it, saying, “I talk to them how they talk  to me.” As these examples illustrate, verbal 
abuse coupled with sexual, physical, and emoti onal abuse harms prisoners and places them at 
substantial risk of harm.   
                                                 
22 Although not a focus of our investigation, we received multiple repo rts of discriminatory treatment by Tutwiler 
staff of prisoners based on national origin, gender identity  and sexual orientation.  We have received reports of 
officers compelling Latina prisoners to solely speak Eng lish and threatening to discipline them if they spoke 
Spanish.  According to one prisoner, when a Spanish-speakin g prisoner asked her to fill out a sick call slip, Officer 
H would not allow it, stating that the prisoner needed to ask in English herself.  As discussed further below, we also 
received reports of discriminatory treat ment based on gender identity and known or perceived sexual orientation.  
Discriminating against prisoners is unconstitutional an d further places the prisone rs at risk of harm.  See also infra  
Part VII.    
 
23 We also received information that Officer I is also physi cally threatening; one prisoner reported that he lifted her 
off the ground by her left arm and pinned her against the wall as he screamed in her face.  See also infra  Part VII. 
    - 14 - 
 
B. Tutwiler’s Toxic Sexualized Environmen t Permits Staff Sexual  Abuse and Harassment 
The harm inflicted by Tutwiler staff on wome n prisoners did not arise in a vacuum.  
Instead, Tutwiler incubate s a “sexualized environment” wher e “boundaries and expectations of 
behavior are not clear.”  See Women Prisoners , 877 F. Supp. at 639.  First, in order to obtain 
necessities and avoid punishment from guards, women at Tutwiler feel they must submit to 
guards’ sexual advances.  Second, Tutwiler staff encourage and participat e in sexual activities by 
and among prisoners.  A flagrant disregard fo r routine, and even seemingly benign, rule 
infractions such as a failure to provide soap or allowing a prisoner’s re lationship with another 
prisoner telegraphs to both staff and prisone rs that boundaries are easily transgressed and 
ignored.  The harm detailed in Part A of this letter occurred in the c ontext of the sexualized 
environment that Tutwiler leadership allowe d to develop and become part of Tutwiler’s 
entrenched culture.   
1. Prisoners Must Submit to Unlawful Sexual Advances to Obtain Necessities and Avoid 
Punishment  
In a custodial setting, staff holds the power  and authority.  According to our expert 
consultant, Tutwiler’s extremely restrictive and punitive environment forces women to submit to 
sexual demands as a means of navigating institu tional landmines.  Prisone r reports support this 
conclusion.  As one woma n explained:  “if you exchange[] sexua l favors you are treated better.  
If you don’t you are treated like crap.”  We r eceived thirty-seven reports from prisoners 
concerning the inconsistent application of prison ru les at Tutwiler.  According to the reports we 
received, rules often differ by shift, staff, and s upervisor, and staff often threaten prisoners with 
disciplinary action and segregation.  In order to find a safe balan ce, prisoners ju stify submission 
to sexual advances with staff in orde r to become one of “the favorites.”24  According to one 
prisoner, “if you are not one of th e favorites, you can be written up for petty offenses and may be 
given a maximum sentence.”   According to another prisoner, officers “play and cut up with the 
younger inmates, that’s why there is  all this sex going on in here these young officers think it’s a 
great playground for them.” [sic].     
 
Prisoners often submit to sexual advances as the only means to secure assistance or 
protection.  Our expert consu ltant observed inadequate a nd unhygienic supplies while at 
Tutwiler.  Essential resources at Tutwiler, includ ing feminine necessities such as tampons, maxi 
pads, and toilet tissue, are severely limited, wh ich unnecessarily creates a black market for goods 
that the State is required to provide.  Thirty-one percent of the correspondence we received 
reported a lack of basic hygiene and laundry se rvices, especially fo r indigent prisoners.25  
Prisoners reported that hygiene prod ucts were not evenly distributed  and alleged that staff either 
took supplies for themselves or provided addition al supplies to their “f avorites.”  Several 
prisoners reported going two to three months without supplies, including feminine hygiene 
                                                 
24 See BRENDA V. SMITH & JAIME M. YARUSSI , BREAKING THE CODE OF SILENCE : CORRECTION OFFICERS ’ 
HANDBOOK ON IDENTIFYING AND ADDRESSING SEXUAL MISCONDUCT 13 (Nat’l Inst. of Corr. 2007) (“What may 
appear to be consent or willingness to participate can often be  a survival strategy or a re sponse to prior or current 
victimization.”).   
 
25  See also infra  Part VII. 
 - 15 - 
 
products, and others reported having to borro w supplies.  Prisoners also complained of 
inadequate laundry service, s upplies, and unsanitary and under supplied uniforms.  Our onsite 
observations lend creden ce to these reports.  
Feminine hygiene products and access to uniform s are necessities, not luxuries.  The lack 
of protocols to ensure the dissemination of uni forms and feminine hygiene products means that 
prisoners must “borrow” or “barter” from othe r women or employees, which is often the first 
step toward an unwanted relations hip or protective part nering, as sex is one form of currency.  
For example, uniforms are in high demand.  Prisone rs can either submit to sexual advances from 
an officer known to exchange a uniform for a sexual favor, submit to th e sexual advances of 
another prisoner in exchange for a uniform, or purchase a uniform for five or ten dollars, 
depending on the seller.  For many indigent pris oners spending money is not an option, and sex 
is therefore the only solution.  Bartering for neces sities is not an acceptable practice and places 
prisoners at Tutwiler at an even greater risk of sexual victimizati on and abuse from both staff and 
prisoners.   
A few of the examples of protectionism and favoritism that we identified include:    
 In July 2012, Prisoner 1 alleged that she witnessed Officer J engage in sexual 
discussions with Prisoner 2, and that Pr isoner 2 told her that Officer J was 
interested in sexual contact with her but that “Tutwiler was too hot right now.”  
Prisoner 1 also alleged that Officer J a llowed Prisoner 2 to bring coffee, sugar, 
and cream into the segregation unit, despite its prohibition.  
 In April 2012, ADOC investigated Instructor K and found he acted 
inappropriately when he allowed prisoners  access to his computer to send emails, 
letters to judges and the IRS, and work  on their resumes.  In exchange, women 
posed for photographs in underclothing and, in one instance, had sex with 
Instructor K while on parole.  An ADOC investigation confirmed the presence of 
prisoners’ posed photographs on the In structor K’s unapproved cell phone. 
 A prisoner reported that Sergeant L is ha ving a sexual relationship with at least 
three prisoners , and that he allegedly plays favorites by ignoring drug use and 
destroying discipline charges.  
 In August 2011, a prisoner reported sexua l contact between prisoners and officers 
in exchange for makeup, perfume, drugs and alcohol.   
If actual physical force is not  involved, it may be tempting to view sexual encounters as 
“consensual.”  However, physical force need not  be employed in order for women prisoners to 
be coerced into sexual contact.  Therefore, “the re is no such thing as ‘consensual’ sexual 
relationships between st aff and [prisoners].”26  Under Alabama law, it is a Class C felony for 
“any employee to engage in sexual conduct w ith a person who is in  the custody of the 
                                                 
26 SUSAN W. MCCAMPBELL & ELIZABETH P. LAYMAN , TRAINING CURRICULUM FOR INVESTIGATING ALLEGATIONS 
OF STAFF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT WITH INMATES  7-8 (Center for Innovative Public Policies, Inc. 2000). 
 - 16 - 
 
Department of Corrections, the Department of  Youth Services, a sheriff, a county, or a 
municipality.”  A LA. CODE § 14-11-31.  Despite knowing this very fundamental premise and 
receiving training on the subject,  Tutwiler staff continue to e ngage in inappropriate sexual 
contact with prisoners.   
2. Tutwiler Staff Encourage and Participat e in Sexual Activities by and Among 
Prisoners  
Officers are placing prisoners at  serious risk of sexual and physical abuse by encouraging 
and even participating in sexual activities by and between prisoners.  Officers flagrantly 
encourage sexual relationships and create an environment that tolera tes coercive sexual behavior.  
Promoting prisoner sexual activity ignores the re ality that sexual activ ity amongst the prisoner 
population can be coercive, and that many pr isoners have histories of predation and 
victimization.  As discussed above, the lack of pe rsonal necessities availabl e to prisoners causes 
many women to submit to sexual advances from othe rs in order to get by; this coercion also 
exists when prisoners submit to sexual demands of  other prisoners with more power and access.   
In a particularly egregious example, sta ff’s encouragement of prisoner sexual activity 
appears to be at least partially motivated by voyeur ism.  Pursuant to a State investigation, it has 
been established that in December 2011, staff al lowed, and in one case participated in, several 
sexually themed parties, includi ng a strip show.  Prisoners conduc ted several dorm contests and 
events, including a Christmas Eve “Victoria’s Se cret Show,” where the prisoners made sexual 
apparel, dildos, and other sex toys.  On New Ye ar’s Eve, two male officers participated in a 
prisoner-led New Year’s Eve stri p show, where one of the officer s provided strobe lighting with 
his flashlight.  Neither of the officers involved were assigned to work in the dorm in question on 
that evening, and both failed to provide a justif ication as to why they were present in the 
incorrect area.   
Even when not actively participating in the sexual activity, staff permitting prisoners 
from different dorms and classification levels to engage freely with each ot her is a serious breach 
of security.27  According to one prisoner, an officer in her dorm would allow prisoners from 
other dorms to enter and remain in her dorm if the prisoner was engaging in a sexual relationship 
with someone in her dorm.  On the eve of our visit to Tutwiler in April 2013, officers 
orchestrated an “Easter Spoon Hunt ” in this same dorm, where prisoners were required to search 
throughout the dorm for hidden spoons.  Prisoners  who found a spoon were then allowed to 
privately dine in the yard with their “girlfriend.”   All eighty prisoners in the dorm were required 
to participate.  These actions by officers disr egard the fact that prisoner-on-prisoner sexual 
contact can be coercive. 
Promoting prisoner sexual activity sends the message to staff and prisoners alike that 
following the rules is discretionary.  Similar to engaging in inappropriate  sexual behavior with 
prisoners,  allowing prisoner-on- prisoner sexual activity to o ccur promotes the officer’s 
dominance over the Facility and becomes one more tool used by staff to manipulate and 
dominate prisoners.  
                                                 
27 Our initial review suggests that the classification system at Tutwiler does not in fact make housing assignments 
based on a complete analysis of these issu es and how they affect prisoner safety.  See also infra  Part VII. - 17 - 
 
C. ADOC and Tutwiler Officials are Deliberately Indifferent to the C onstitutional Harms to 
Women Prisoners  
Tutwiler prison officials are aware of, and delib erately indifferent to, the substantial harm 
and serious risk of harm to its prison populati on due to sexual abuse and harassment and they 
have failed to take reasonable steps to prevent harm and risk of harm.  See Farmer , 511 U.S. at 
828.  In determining whether conduct violates th e deliberate indifference standard of the Eighth 
Amendment, the Eleventh Circuit requires:  (1) fact s presenting an objectively substantial risk to 
prisoners and awareness of thes e facts on the part of the offi cials charged with deliberate 
indifference; (2) that the officials drew th e subjective inference from known facts that a 
substantial risk of serious harm existed; and (3) that the officials responded in an objectively 
unreasonable manner.  Doe v. Georgia Dep’t of Corr ., 248 F. App’x 67, 70 (11th Cir. 2007); see 
also Cooper v. Rogers , No. 2:11-CV-964-MEF, 2012 WL 2 050577, at *3 (M.D. Ala. June 6, 
2012).  The subjective component requires that the prison offici al “acted with a sufficiently 
culpable state of mind” while an objective component requires that “the alleged wrongdoing was 
objectively harmful enough to establis h a constitutional violation.”  Hudson v. McMillian , 503 
U.S. 1, 8 (1992).   
 For over eighteen years, ADOC and Tutwiler o fficials have been aware of staff sexual 
misconduct at Tutwiler and have failed to implemen t the changes necessary to remedy this harm.  
Following the release of the 2007 BJS report, ADOC  officials failed to implement operational 
practices to address the issue of sexual a buse at Tutwiler—no cameras were added or 
adjustments made to staffing or th e physical plant.  Instead, offici als allow staff to continue to 
retaliate against women who make  allegations relating to sexual  misconduct, fail to adequately 
respond to or investigate allegations, and fail to  properly discipline sta ff found to have engaged 
in sexual abuse or harassment.  These actions and inactions, when combined with the various 
systemic deficiencies at Tutwiler, violate the law and foster an environment where additional 
sexual abuse can occur.         
1. Prisoners’ Reports of Sexual Abus e Are Discouraged Due to Actual and 
Perceived Retaliation.   
Women feel retaliated agai nst after making reports, th rough direct harassment, 
involuntary segregation, and havi ng their credibility immediatel y questioned.  This retaliation—
real or perceived—discoura ges further reporting.   
BJS reports in both 2007 and 2013 identifie d that sexual abuse at Tutwiler is 
underreported.  Many prisoners confirmed this, ci ting fear of retaliati on as a reason for not 
reporting sexual abuse and harassment.  Prisoners have the right to report abuse without being 
subject to retaliation.  See Boxer X , 437 F. 3d at 1112 (holding that a prisoner who was punished 
for complaining about officer abuse had gr ounds for a retaliation claim pursuant to  
§1983).  However, prisoners universally fear re porting sexual abuse.  EJI provided multiple 
examples of women who, after re porting sexual abuse, were placed in segregation with limited or 
no access to a telephone, visitors, or programs fo r an extended time period.  Prison officials 
treated these women with the presumption that they were lying, subjecting them to polygraph 
examinations as a prerequisite to investigating the allegation.  Staff verbally harassed them for 
reporting allegations of sexual abuse involving their colleagues.  Women reported observing the - 18 - 
 
accused officers on duty even after they made their allegations, and never being informed of the 
outcome of their allegations. 
The information we independently received s upports the allegations made by EJI.  For 
example: 
 
 A prisoner attempted to report sexual ha rassment three times and was chastised, 
dismissed, and threatened with segregation.  Warden M admonished the prisoner 
(erroneously) for confiding in her parents about being sexually harassed rather than 
using the PREA Hotline.  She then reported the sexual harassment to a sergeant, who 
in turn referred her to a lieutenant.  Th e lieutenant then threatened to put her in 
segregation.   
 In February 2013, Officer O pulled a prisoner aside and told the prisoner to drop her 
complaint against Officer N or else Officer  O would write the prisoner up next time 
she was late for pill call.  The prisoner had complained about Officer N loudly and repeatedly mocking her for scratching her inner thigh due to a razor burn and causing 
other staff and prisoners to laugh at the prisoner.  The ADOC investigator 
characterized Officer O as hostile and defe nsive during her interview.  Despite this, 
there was no finding regarding Officer O’s act  of intimidating the prisoner to drop her 
complaint.  
 Another prisoner reported that Officers F a nd P sexually harassed and threatened to 
physically assault her in re taliation for admitting to Tu twiler investigators in 2011 
that she had a sexual relationship with Offi cer Q; Officer Q was terminated shortly 
thereafter.  Specifically, Of ficers F and P have threatened to “whoop her ass” and 
called her a “piece of shit” for getting Offi cer Q fired.  Officer A also repeatedly 
made sexually harassing statements to  the prisoner.  When Officer F was 
subsequently stationed in her dorm, the pris oner suffered a panic attack and feared for 
her safety.  She left the dorm, met with a crisis counselor, ex plained that she was 
afraid of the officer because he had threaten ed to retaliate agains t her, and requested 
protective custody.  Instead, the Lieutenant on duty sent her back to the dorm—where 
the officer who had threatened her remained  on duty.  Fearing sexual assault, this 
prisoner who has a history of self-injurious behavior, cut her arm because of the stress 
and was transferred to suicide watch.  The matter was not investigated further.   
Because of actions like these, prisoners at Tu twiler are afraid to report sexual misconduct 
fearing retaliation by staff.  Failing to addr ess underreporting of se xual abuse and sexual 
harassment allows abuses to continue.  
2. Tutwiler Fails to Respond Reasonably Upon Discovering Abuses 
Even when Tutwiler receives or identifies allegations of sexual abuse, staff does not 
respond reasonably to the reports.  Staff discredit reports of sexual abuse and harassment if 
prisoners do not immediately repor t the abuse.  When Tutwiler doe s investigate, its review of 
sexual abuse allegations is marginal at best.  Investigations and Intelligence Division investigators rely heavily on polygraph results in  conducting their investig ations and fail to - 19 - 
 
follow logical leads that may further advance thei r review of the prisone r allegations.  Finally, 
inadequate or inconsistent discipline of officers who have committed sexual abuse sends a message that Tutwiler tolerates misconduct and fails to deter future violations. 
a. Inadequate Investigations 
 
The Investigations and Intel ligence Division conducts inves tigations at Tutwiler.   
Investigators are obligated to gather and preserve evidence (including available electronic 
monitoring data), and interview witnesses,  victims, and suspected perpetrators.
28  Tutwiler does 
not do this.  Investigators often fail to use basi c investigative tools a nd techniques, such as 
witness interviews or record reviews, and in stead close investigati ons prematurely based on 
limited information.  For example, investigations ha ve been closed solely because:  both parties 
to a sexual relationship—an officer and a pris oner—denied a sexual re lationship; a prisoner-
victim reported in an interview that the “matte r [was] squashed” and that she “does not have 
anything against [Officer R];” and because  a prisoner-victim became uncooperative and 
argumentative after recounting an ear lier allegation in an interview.  Similarly, investigations are 
frequently closed as “unfounded” if a reporting pr isoner has a mental illness.  In these and other 
cases, investigators fail to seek out potential wi tnesses or check verifi able facts, including 
prisoner accounts and movement records.  Simp ly because a prisoner cannot or will not 
cooperate with an investigation into an alle gation of sexual misconduct does not mean that 
ADOC cannot conduct a thorough inve stigation of the underlying al legation.  The requirement 
for cooperation by a particular prisoner is es pecially improper considering many complaints 
about sexual abuse are made anonym ously or by a third party.  
Investigators also rely heavily—and often exclusively—on prisoner polygraph 
examinations in sexual abuse and harassment inves tigations.  Using polygra phs in this manner is 
highly questionable.  PREA prohibits compelled pol ygraphs as a prerequis ite to investigations,29 
and the Preamble sheds further light on the limits  to their use.  The Preamble recognizes that 
“polygraph examinations are impe rfect assessors of credibility,”30 yet did not want to ban 
polygraphs “to victims who request them.”31  At Tutwiler, however, pris oners perceive that they 
are compelled to submit to polygraphs, and it is unc lear whether any prisoner would feel able to 
refuse a polygraph.  Even if polygraphs were to be used in a non-coercive manner, they cannot 
be the sole investigative tool .  Yet we reviewed several investigative summaries where 
allegations of inappropriate sexu al behavior were determined to be “unfounded” simply because 
a prisoner failed a polygraph, or because an accused employee refused to submit to a polygraph.  Additionally, an investig ation often stops if a prisoner’s re sults come back as “deceptive,” 
despite other investigative avenues av ailable to evaluate the allegations. 
                                                
 
28  28 C.F.R. § 115.71(c) (2012). 
 
29  28 C.F.R. § 115.71(e) (2012). 
 
30  77 Fed. Reg. 119 at 37171. 
 
31  Id. 
 - 20 - 
 
Additionally, ADOC and Tutwiler senior management are appa rently not reviewing the 
investigative reports for quality assurance.  Tutwiler must improve supervision of its 
investigators and implement a process to review all investigations—regardless of whether they 
result in sustained violations.  Without these measures, prisoners remain in jeopardy because 
senior administrators are unable to  identify and correct actual and potential patterns or trends of 
sexual misconduct.   
b. Officers are Not Properly Disciplined for Sexual Abuses 
The long and unabated history of staff sexual abuse and harassment is facilitated by a 
disciplinary system that fails to  substantiate the conduct of, and discipline, sexual predators.  
As discussed below, Tutwiler fails to adequately  manage and analyze ex isting data to identify 
potential sexual misconduct and problematic sta ff behavior.  As a re sult, officers who are 
identified in several prisoners’ allegations are not flagged for furt her review and are less likely to 
be disciplined and prevented from  further abuse.  After the pris oners who file t hose reports see 
the officers remain on the unit, they decide that reporting is futile.   
ADOC provided seven records, for the pe riod 2011 through March 2013, of employees 
who were separated from the organization for conduc t related to sexual abus e or harassment.  Of 
the seven employee separation records produced, one officer resigned, two officers resigned in 
lieu of termination, and four officers were terminat ed, two of whom were subsequently reinstated 
to their jobs via the appeal pr ocess.  Allowing officers to resi gn in lieu of termination or 
reinstating officers who engaged in sexual misc onduct sends a message to prisoners and staff  
that sexual misconduct will be tolerated.     
These seven records do not capture the true extent of officers involved in sexual abuse 
allegations.  For example, ADOC re ported, as required by law, to the District Attorney of the 
19th Judicial Circuit the names of individuals who were being invest igated for various allegations 
of criminal conduct, including custodial sexual misconduct.  The forms reporting this data for 
2011 to 2013 included seventeen unique names that were referred for potential sexual 
misconduct.  Even seventeen officers is an unders tated number; our review of data provided by 
Tutwiler, and letters and interviews with prisoner s, lead us to conclude  that Tutwiler vastly 
understates the number of officers in volved in sexual abuse.     
ADOC and Tutwiler do not effectively maintain  the names and assignments of officers 
who are charged either with rule violations or suspended or reassigned pending investigations, or 
the outcome(s) of the investigation.   This is a compelling reason for a centralized database that 
includes an early warning system.  As noted else where in this report, several Tutwiler employees 
involved in sexual misconduct remained on the job, and were ultimately terminated for these 
offenses.  Until Tutwiler holds officers uniformly accountable for their actions, the prevalence of 
sexual abuse at Tutwiler will continue unabate d, and women will continue to be harmed.  
 
3. Systemic Deficiencies at Tutwiler Directly Contribut e to the Sexual Abuse and 
Sexual Misconduct of Women Prisoners and Create Harm and a Substantial Risk 
of Further Harm - 21 - 
 
Our investigation revealed seri ous systemic deficiencies in  Tutwiler’s oper ations that 
directly contribute to th e sexual abuse and harassment at Tutw iler and create a subs tantial risk of 
further harm if not remedied.   As discussed below, Tutwiler’s failure to adopt gender-responsive 
strategies is one of the factors that has resulted in the sexualized  environment that continues to 
harm the prisoners in its care.  Tutwiler has fa iled to provide sufficient operational guidance to 
prevent sexual abuse and harassment, including guidance on cross-gender viewing.  Tutwiler has 
also failed to collect and analyze existing data to identify potential misconduct and does not have 
a system in place to identify problem employees  evidencing sexually inappropriate behavior.  
Tutwiler’s attempts to prevent staff sexual a buses are severely hamp ered by not having a 
grievance system in place that would allow pr isoners to report concerns that could flag 
inappropriate sexualized behavior by staff or sexualized activity within the inst itution.  Although 
ADOC has a system in place to respond to reports of sexual abuse and sexual misconduct, the system at Tutwiler is compromised.  Women prisone rs are afraid of repor ting incidents of sexual 
abuse and harassment, and staff is not reporting a llegations either.  Cata strophically low staffing 
and supervision levels impact not only the repor ting of, but also the identification of sexual 
abuse, allowing opportunities for abuse to occur undetected.  Tutw iler has no proactive plan to 
increase staffing ratios based upon an  adequate staffing analysis.  The Facility has no cameras, is 
an architectural structure ill suited for housi ng women, and has an inadequate classification 
system that puts vulnerable prisone rs at increased risk.     
  
a. Tutwiler Lacks Gender-Responsive Policies and Procedures To 
Prevent Sexual Abuse and Harassment 
 
Clear, gender-responsive policies and procedures  are essential to protecting prisoners 
from sexual abuse and harassment.  Gender-responsive policies, programs, and procedures are those that reflect empirical and gender based differences.
32  Being gender-responsive means 
creating an environment that is grounded in re search and theory that acknowledges women’s 
pathways into the criminal justice system and a ddresses issues such as abuse, violence, family 
relationships, substance abuse,  and co-occurring disorders.33  Developing a gender-responsive 
approach to managing women offende rs at Tutwiler is critical to  addressing decades of sexual 
abuse and harassment at the Facility.  It requ ires a fundamental unders tanding and appreciation, 
by prison officials and staff, for gender differences among the offender population—an 
understanding particularly true for male correc tional officers assigned to  male prisons but who 
work overtime at Tutwiler.  There is a correl ation between improved behavioral outcomes for 
women offenders and providing a safe and supportive setting for supervision.34  
 Tutwiler officials are well aware of the con cept of gender-responsive strategies.  In 2010, 
approximately twenty Tutwiler officials attended a NIC trai ning that addressed                   
gender-responsive strategies to managing wo men offenders.  Despite Warden II Jones’ 
attendance at the training, Tutwiler officials have  yet to embrace gender-responsive strategies to 
manage the institution, or incorporate the strategies  into their operational policies, practices, and 
                                                 
32 BLOOM ET AL ., supra  note 13, at 5. 
 
33 Id. at Xvi. 
 
34 Id. at 81. 
 - 22 - 
 
procedures.  Had Tutwiler adopted these strate gies, a number of the harms identified in our 
investigation could have been avoided.   
For example, as previously discussed, Tutwiler provides no guidance on cross-gender 
viewing in showers and bathrooms, and male o fficers at Tutwiler have unrestricted access to 
shower and bathroom areas.  Although officers ar e reportedly told, via an unofficial policy, to 
announce their presence prior to entering the shower and bathroom areas, this requirement is 
often not complied with or enforced.  In anot her example, Tutwiler could have developed a 
policy regarding gender-responsive management of  the prisoner population, including ensuring 
basic sanitation necessities.  As discussed above, th e scarcity of these necessities leads to sexual 
abuse.  Finally, Tutwiler’s prisone r handbook fails to inform prisoners of their right to be free of 
sexual abuse, does not provide definitions of se xual abuse or sexual misconduct, or information 
about how to report sexual abus e or sexual misconduct.  While we appreciate that Tutwiler 
provides an orientation for incoming prisoners, it is unclear why this  or similar information is not 
included in the prisoner handbook.35  If prisoners are unaware of their rights and the methods by 
which they can report abuse, it is more likely fo r abuse to go undetected by facility leadership. 
   Successful incorporation of gender-responsiv e strategies into Tutwiler’s operations and 
practices also requires prison officials to review existing policies that may have a harmful effect 
on women offenders.  The only staff policy dire ctly addressing sexual abuse prevention is 
Standard Operating Procedure (“SOP”) 15-39, en titled “Prison Rape Elimination Act.”  
Presumably, Tutwiler intended SOP 15-39 to  mirror the requirements of PREA.36  While 
attempting to draft policies incorporating PR EA’s requirements is commendable, SOP 15-39 
does not succeed in capturing even a portion of the PREA requirements.37  Instead, Tutwiler’s 
most recent revision to SOP 15-39, dated June  29, 2012, is an abridged version of the 
Department of Justice’s May 17, 2012 press release summarizing  the goals of the standards, not 
detailing the standards themselves .  Rather than incorporate la nguage directly from the PREA 
regulations into its policy, Tutw iler officials merely pulled language  from the DOJ press release, 
manipulating the text to their lik ing.  For example, when transfe rring the list of requirements 
                                                 
35 Moreover, Tutwiler must ensure that non-English speak ing prisoners receive the orientation in their native 
language to ensure understanding of sexual safety issues in prison and reporting incidents of sexual abuse or 
misconduct.  During our tour we spoke with a prisoner whose native language was Spanish who reported that she 
did not receive orientation in Spanish.  Although she could say a few words in English, it was clear that she was not 
proficient.  See also infra  Part VII. 
    
36 On September 4, 2003, Congress passed the Prison Rape Elimination Act to establish a zero-tolerance standard for 
the incidence of rape in prisons acro ss the United States and to increase the accountability of pris on officials who 
fail to detect, prevent, reduce, and punish prison rape.  Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003, 42 U.S.C. § 15601 
(2003).  On May 16, 2012, the Attorney General issued a fi nal rule establishing national standards for the detection, 
prevention, and punishment of prison rape.  42 U.S.C. § 15607.  Any correctional accreditation organization seeking 
federal grants must conform to the national standards on sexual abuse proscribed by the final rule.  42 U.S.C.            § 15608.  While the Special Litigation Section of the Civil Rights Division does not have the authority to enforce 
PREA, the National Standards to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, 28 C.F.R. § 115 (2012), serve as a 
strong remedial point of reference.  
37  We recognize that ADOC sent staff to training regarding PREA, with a focus on gender-informed strategies, but 
any knowledge gained from this training is not evident at Tu twiler.  This failure is likely due, in part, to the systemic 
deficiencies and inadequate correcti onal practices discussed throughout.  
  - 23 - 
 
outlined in the press release, Tutwiler officials deleted the term “among ot her things,” converting 
the summary list of examples to a finite list of re quirements.  To be clear,  an institution need not 
have a policy that explicitly parrots all of PREA’s requirements word for word.  However, Tutwiler’s policy fails to provide guidance and sp ecificity and fails to set forth standards for 
staff, contractors, and volunteers. 
In addition to having imprecise definitions , Tutwiler’s SOP 15-39 l acks specificity in 
terms of required actions of staff in providing su pport to victims of sexual abuse.  For example, 
pursuant to policy, Tutwiler staff must “provide access to victim advocates from rape crisis 
centers for emotional support servic es related to sexual abuse.”  There is no direction, however, 
on how this should be accomplished, whom empl oyees should contact, or within what time 
frame the victim advocates should be contacted.   
Moreover, Tutwiler’s SOP 15-39 provides no guidance on cross-gender viewing in 
showers and bathrooms.  Tutwiler has given it s officers unrestricted access to shower and 
bathroom areas without any guidance on the appr opriateness of the intrus ion.  Although we were 
told that male officers are required to announce th eir presence prior to entering the shower and 
bathroom areas, this practice is not codified in  any institutional policy.  The only language we 
could find in the policies produced  by Tutwiler related to cross- gender viewing in showers and 
bathroom only governed prisoners housed in Do rms D and H, the special housing dorms at the 
Facility.  As discussed above, Tutwiler’s failure to amend its  policy to address cross-gender 
viewing in shower and bathroom areas has cau sed significant harm to women prisoners who 
report being sexually harassed by officer s while in these private areas.  
Finally, SOP 15-39 is similarly silent on th e management of lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, and intersex (“LG BTI”), and gender nonconforming pr isoners.  Without adequate 
education of and direction to staff, LGBTI a nd gender nonconforming prisoners at Tutwiler are 
at a disproportionately increased risk for sexua l abuse, discrimination, and harassment.  During 
the course of the investigation, we have become  increasingly concerned about the treatment of 
LGBTI and gender nonconforming pris oners beyond policy issues.  Staff indicated discomfort 
when using these terms, and internal documen ts reduce regulatory requirements regarding 
LGBTI and gender nonconforming prisoners to the shorthand “those with non-traditional sexual 
identities.”  In addition to containing normativ e language, this shorthand exhibits a lack of 
education regarding gender identi ty, separate and apart from sexua l orientation.  Further, the one 
report we have regarding treatment of a gender nonconforming prisoner warns that the lack of 
policies and direction will cause  grave harm to any gender no nconforming prisoner who enters 
Tutwiler.  In 2009, an intersex prisoner was re peatedly humiliated and degraded by a multitude 
of Tutwiler staff who entered his cell in segregation merely to look at hi s genitals.  Tutwiler 
refused to allow the prisoner to shower alone, wh ich forced him to make informal arrangements 
with prison cleaning crews to shower at night .  This intersex prisoner remains in ADOC’s 
system.  We expressed our concern regarding hi s treatment to ADOC general counsel and were 
informed that the issue had been remedied a nd he is now allowed to shower in private.
38   
                                                 
38   See also infra  Part VII. 
 - 24 - 
 
Perhaps recognizing the insufficiency of their current policies, Tutw iler leadership noted 
that the Facility was waiting for the passage of  amendments to Section 454 of the Alabama 
Administrative Code (Inmate Sexual Offens es and Custodial Sexua l Misconduct) before 
updating its own policies.  However, it is simply  unacceptable to wait for these revisions before 
addressing any of the sexual safety issues at Tu twiler—as one Tutwiler official admitted.  The 
minimal changes to SOP 15-39 made in 2012 are insufficient to remedy the widespread and 
pervasive sexual abuse and harassmen t at Tutwiler.  Further, give n Tutwiler’s extensive history 
of sexual abuse and harassment, ADOC official s must take a more proactive approach in 
ensuring sexual safety at Tu twiler, including advising on Tutw iler’s sexual abuse prevention 
policies.   
We recognize the increasing attention ADOC officials are giving Tutwiler.  We were 
pleased to learn that Commissioner Thomas ha s visited the Facility on several occasions, 
including a visit with the PR EA Coordinator assigned to Tu twiler, and that Commissioner 
Thomas has encouraged the PREA Coordinators  to conduct unannounced visits during the day 
and at off hours.  However, given the severity  of the problems at Tutwiler, ADOC officials 
should be more engaged in the review of the operational practices of Tutwiler, rather than 
leaving this critical work to the Facility.  
Tutwiler’s failure to develop gender-respons ive practices has fac ilitated and allowed 
years of continued sexual abuse and harassment.  Attending NIC training is an important first 
step, but more is needed.  Tutwiler must adopt  the principles in terms of recruitment, 
management services, and the full range of beha vior management to ensure women’s safety.  
Tutwiler’s failure to adopt these strategies illustra tes a deliberate indifference to the needs of this 
prison population. 
b. Tutwiler Fails To Adequately M anage and Analyze Existing Data 
To Identify Potential Sexual  Misconduct  and Problem Staff 
Behavior 
 
Data management is critically important to  identify and prevent sexual misconduct in an 
institutional setting.  The importance of data co llection, analysis, and management is not lost on 
ADOC, as it relies heavily on data for its m onthly and annual statisti cal reports.  Tutwiler 
collects data, but fails to manage, analyze,  or effectively use the information.   
ADOC and Tutwiler officials provided us with  two separate databases that documented 
sexual abuse allegations at Tu twiler.  We received a log of sexual misconduct incidents 
maintained by ADOC’s PREA Coordinator, and a general incident re port log maintained by 
Tutwiler that tracked the level of disorder in the Facility, such as prisoner violence, contraband, 
and sexual abuse. 
Tutwiler officials should be re viewing its general incident report logs for activity that 
suggests or implies sexual undertones.  For exampl e, there are a large nu mber of disciplinary 
write-ups involving prisoners who ar e classified as being in an “unauthorized area.”  Based on 
our review of the investigations conducted, th e investigator never que stioned how or why the 
prisoner was in an unauthorized area.  The prev alence and types of contraband found is another 
infraction recorded in incident reports that should be examin ed for a potential connection to - 25 - 
 
sexual activity.  The prisoners who hosted the Ne w Years Eve strip show with sex toys and 
lingerie could not have done so without contraba nd, either provided by or tacitly permitted by 
staff.  Indeed, many prisoners re ported that staff bring items su ch as food, cosmetics, and drugs 
to their “favorites.”  Staff bringing in items th at are identified as contraband is a potential 
indicator of the existence or risk  of inappropriate sexual behavior.  Thus, a closer examination of 
the incidents occurring within the Facility could shed light on some of the contributing factors to 
sexual abuse and harassment at Tutwiler. 
Alarmingly, we found serious discrepancies between the information maintained by 
Tutwiler in its incident report log related to allegations of sexual misconduct, and the sexual 
abuse log maintained by ADOC’s PREA Coordinato r.  According to our review, there were at 
least sixteen reports of sexual a buse missing from Tutwiler’s incide nt report log.  In addition, the 
general incident report log c ontained over 113 incidents labeled “pending.”  When we inquired 
about, and were provided, the inve stigations labeled “pending,” we found thirty-eight reports 
alleging a range of sexually inappropriate behavior  by staff and prisoners including allegations of 
rape, sexual touching, cross-ge nder viewing, and sexual harassme nt.  Of those, twenty-five 
involved allegations of  staff sexual misconduct.39  Many of the incidents had been “pending” for 
a substantial period of time, and there was no clea r indication that further action was being taken 
that would cause the inves tigation to be taken out of  a pending status.    
In addition, the practice of labeling incide nts as “pending” without providing any 
underlying information as to the allegation is pa rticularly troubling because it may lead to 
underreporting of sexual misconduct statistics.  For example, prison officials reviewing the 
incident report log would erroneously believe that there were no allegations of staff sexual 
misconduct in 2012.  The discrepancies in the coll ection and management of this data make it 
difficult for prison officials to assess the preval ence and severity of sexual abuse and harassment 
at Tutwiler.  We encountered this  same difficulty when we requested investigations related to 
sexual abuse and harassment in March 2013.  While on our tour, we obtained ADOC’s PREA 
log and the Tutwiler general log, which listed investigations relate d to sexual abuse and 
harassment that ADOC had not previously produced  to us.  While we understand supplementing 
discovery requests as information becomes know n, the late production of over fifty responsive 
investigative reports, only in response to a follo w-up inquiry from us, suggests mismanagement 
and a serious deficiency in Tutwiler’s data mana gement system.  Because of these deficiencies, 
the efficacy of the incident report log as a repos itory of incidents that occurred at Tutwiler is 
compromised.   
Moreover, titles given to incidents are al so important for tracking purposes and by 
mislabeling or not labeling the inci dents, the offense data could be skewed.  Multiple reports that 
discussed sexual misconduct in the text of the report were simply labeled “employee 
misconduct.”  In one example, a complaint from  a prisoner regarding an  officer touching her 
lower back in a manner that caused her to beco me uncomfortable was entitled “possible false 
                                                 
39  It bears noting that it was only after we employed substa ntial effort to resolve these discrepancies that we were 
able to gather a comprehensive sample of investigations related to alleged staff sexual misconduct and reach the 
conclusions regarding investigations.  Given our difficu lties in reconciling conflicting data to identify relevant 
documents, the substantial time it took ADOC to locate and produce the supplemental doc uments, and the differing 
scope of NIC’s analysis, it is not su rprising that the NIC offered a somewhat different review of Tutwiler’s 
investigations.        - 26 - 
 
inmate complaint” and dismissed with no follow-up.  If Tutwiler were to do a quick search of the 
complaints entitled “possible employee sexual misconduct,” the results would far under-represent the number of actual complaints. 
 Properly tracking and analyzing the information contained in the data Tutwiler collects 
could help identify and track staff behavior that might i ndicate staff sexual abuse and 
harassment.  For example, an early warning system  is a database management tool designated to 
identify potentially problematic behavior, allo w early intervention to correct misconduct, and 
assist in identifying deficiencies  in supervision, management, and policies.  Such a system would 
allow prison officials to track allegations of sexual abuse and ha rassment and to intervene before 
boundaries are crossed and prisoners  harmed.  Had a system been in place, ADOC might have 
been able to intervene with officers and empl oyees whose names are associated with multiple 
sexual misconduct or harassment allegations, PR EA hotline calls, complaints, use of force 
allegations, or alleged criminal activity.  One o fficer, for example, was named in at least four 
allegations of sexual misconduct in 2012.  While th e allegations may be unfounded, the fact that 
an employee is implicated in several allegations  of inappropriate sexual conduct should warrant 
further review by Tutwiler official s.  We also learned of a Serg eant who had a restraining order 
against him for domestic violen ce and battery.  This same Sergeant was later caught receiving 
oral sex from a prisoner.  An employee with this  background should not be assigned to work in a 
woman’s facility.   
The lack of a data management system has allowed Tutwiler officials to willfully blind 
themselves to the repeated and serious incide nts of sexual abuse and harassment.  Tutwiler 
officials must actively review and analyze their existing data for tr ends that suggest or identify 
patterns of sexual a buse and harassment. 
c. Non-existent Grievance Procedures 
The lack of a grievance system severely underm ines prison officials’ ability to identify 
and prevent sexual abuse and harassment.  Although ADOC has advised us that they are 
developing a grievance program, the failure to have one contributed directly to the harms 
discussed.  We received 233 letters from prisoners raising a variety of concerns including sexual 
abuse by staff and prisoner-on-prisoner sexual conduc t.  These letters reported officers notorious 
for abusive or threatening beha vior, officers who would view pr isoners in the shower during 
count, and officers who had special relationships with prisoners.  These letters also reported on 
other conditions at the Facility that were troubl ing, including allegations of discrimination based 
on national origin, gender identity, sexual orientati on and of physical force.
40  The sheer volume 
of letters received suggests that prisoners at Tu twiler have a lot to say, but not many avenues to 
be heard.  For example, over half of the reports of sexual harassment we received were undocumented in ADOC’s files.  If Tutwiler had even a small percentage of the information 
provided in the 233 letters, they would be much more equipped to identify and prevent abusive 
behavior.   
                                                
 
40  During our review of documents produced by ADOC, we were alarmed by the frequency by which physical force 
was used at Tutwiler and are concerned that the levels of  force used are the result of  insufficient administrative 
safeguards, understaffed and overwhelmed officers, and poor investigations.  See also infra  Part VII.  
 - 27 - 
 
For example, the general incident report log identified four officers whose involvement in 
incidents at Tutwiler far exceeded those of their peers.  Of th e four outliers, Officer S was 
involved in thirty-eight incident s, Officer T in twenty-seven, and Officers U and D in nineteen 
each.  Had a grievance system been in place, Tutwiler officials would have known the following 
about these outliers: 
 All four officers are known by prisoners for their use of profane and degrading 
language when speaking with prisoners.  
 Prisoners report that two of the four o fficers, Officers U and D, are physically 
abusive and sexually inappropriate.  Pris oners report that Officers U and D enter 
the shower areas unannounced and watch the women as they shower during count.  Prisoners reported that Officer D refers to the women in the drug and 
alcohol rehabilitation unit as  “dope whores,” and discri minates against Caucasian 
prisoners.  One prisoner alle ged that she reported Officer U to investigators for 
violating the prison’s unofficial policy re quiring that male officers announce their 
presence before entering an area where pris oners are likely to be in a state of 
undress, but did not know whether anything was done. 
 Officer T has an alleged viol ent history at Tutwiler.  Several women reported that 
he has physically assaulted them.  One pr isoner alleged that Of ficer T grabbed her 
by the throat and threw her in the dor m when she approached him about a 
telephone dispute.  Another prisoner alle ged that Officer T and another officer 
slammed a prisoner on a desk, spat in he r face, and threw her to the ground.  
While she was on the ground, Officer T reportedly handcuffed the prisoner and jerked her up from the ground by her bra, causing it to tear.  Yet another prisoner 
reported that Officer T watched as anothe r officer slammed a prisoner against the 
shower wall, hitting her head against th e shower grills, and cutting her lip.   
The lack of a grievance system places pris oners in harm’s way; not only are prison 
officials limiting prisoners’ ability to report al legations, they are also ignoring a key source of 
critical information necessary to identify and discipline staff and pris oners engaging in sexual 
misconduct.  Had there been a grievance syst em, Tutwiler officials could have known about 
many of these same issues and responded to them in a timely manner.  See Section (B)(1)(c), 
supra .  
d. Tutwiler is Dangerously Understaffed 
Tutwiler fails to provide adequa te supervision of its  prisoners in viol ation of the Eighth 
Amendment.  See Laube v. Haley , 234 F. Supp. 2d 1227, 1244-46 (M.D. Ala. 2002) (“the 
combination of substantial overcrowding and si gnificantly inadequate  supervision in open 
dorms” at Tutwiler violates th e Eighth Amendment right to protection from violence); see also 
Krein v. Norris , 309 F.3d 487, 489-91 (8th Cir. 2002) (evi dence that official s provided only one 
guard for three barracks housing 150 inmates, and di d not change staffing even though one of the 
barracks was known to be extremely violent, supported an Eighth Amendment claim).  Roughly 
ninety-nine officers manage a prison populati on of over 900 women spread across fifteen 
housing units.  In addition to the housing units, o fficers are required to se cure the Kitchen, the - 28 - 
 
Medical Unit, the Educational Building, the Chapel, Laundry, Central Waiting, the external 
perimeters, and manage prisoner movement.  Acco rding to our assessment of staffing patterns, 
Tutwiler assigns, on average, twenty -four officers to the day shift,  with ten of those officers 
assigned to various posts  throughout the Facility.41  This leaves only fourteen officers assigned to 
supervise and manage the prison population.  In the evenings, the numbers are even lower:  
fifteen officers are assigned to Tutwiler, with five assigned throughout th e Facility, leaving only 
ten officers to supervise over 900 women.  While  there are no nationa l staff/prisoner ratio 
requirements, these figures are abysmal.  Accord ing to the United States’ expert’s analysis of 
Tutwiler, it is impossible for ten officers to adequate ly maintain order and s ecurity in Tutwiler.   
Staffing shortages have plague d ADOC’s management of Tutwiler for over a decade.  In 
2002, fifteen prisoners housed at Tutwiler, the Edwina Mitchell Work Release Center, and the 
Birmingham Work Release Center sued ADOC officials alleging unconstitutional conditions 
based on the operations of the facilities.  Specifi cally, the plaintiffs alleged, and the court agreed, 
that the facilities were overcrow ded and understaffed and, as a resu lt, placed prisoners at serious 
risk of harm.  Laube , 234 F. Supp. 2d at 1230.  The district c ourt conducted a staffing analysis of 
Tutwiler and found that at  the time of the litigation, Tutwiler housed “1,017 inmates with a total 
security staff of 92” and relied heavily on overtime employees to supplement the rest.  Id. at 
1233.  This led to a ratio of officer to prisoner population that was dangerously low, with one 
officer assigned to supervise 228 prisoners.  Id.  While the staffing figures  at Tutwiler are not as 
bad as they were in 2002, they remain dangerous ly low.  Low staff assignment, coupled with 
officers absconding from their post to engage in sexually inappropria te behavior, places 
prisoners at serious risk of harm, especially when housed in an open dorm.  See id.  at 1232-33 
(finding the open dorm system “while acceptable, s till raises significant safety issues” regarding 
officer visibility and disruptive behavior due to idleness).  
Many of the prisoners are acutely aware of Tu twiler’s staffing needs and take advantage 
of the shortages, to the detrim ent of the prisoner population.  Pris oner sexual activity is prevalent 
throughout Tutwiler, occurring at al l hours of the day.  According to the United States’ expert 
consultant’s review of incide nt reports, approximately 44% of prisoner-on-prisoner sexual 
contact occurs in the showers, 21% outside of  the buildings, and 12% in the dorms.  Sexual 
activity that occurs in the dorms is in plai n view and takes place during the daytime hours— 
indicative of a facility stretche d thin on staff and lacking superv ision.  According to Tutwiler’s 
Incident Report Log, in 2012, ther e were at least 30 reported in cidents of prisoner-on-prisoner 
sexual contact and 74 incidents of prisoner- on-prisoner physical assaults.  Given the 
discrepancies in the data produced by Tutwiler offici als, we project this figu re to be larger than 
reported.  According to BJS’s report on sexual violence for 2011-2012, despite a slip in the 
rankings, Tutwiler remains one of the top four women’s facilities for sexual violence.   
                                                 
41 ADOC and Tutwiler officials have not conducted a staffing analysis to determine staffing needs and projections.  
Staffing deficiencies likely have broad consequences in permitting a range of unlawful and unconstitutional conduct.  
See also infra  Part VII.  In order to assess the severity of the staffing issues, our expert prepared a staffing plan 
based on the employee roster pr oduced by ADOC.  In order to assess the accu racy of the staffing plan prepared by 
our expert, we reviewed staffing patterns over a three-da y period for March, April, and May excluding weekends 
and holidays.  This examinatio n revealed only slight deviations from the e xpert’s staffing plan.  Oddly, according to 
the roster produced, there were no officers assigned to the Annex where approximately 248 prisoners reside.  It is difficult to believe that Tutwiler would not assign officer(s ) to supervise the Annex, but the roster did not reflect 
this. - 29 - 
 
Data derived from the employee roster illustrates the severity of the staffing problem.  
For example, that one officer is assigned to  supervise 153 prisoners in a single dorm, or 135 
prisoners spread across two dorms, places prisoners at risk of serious harm.  These numbers are 
dangerously low for a facility of this size.  Even with the dorms visible from the corridor, blind 
spots still exist within the Facility, which prisone rs can manipulate.  To be effective, open dorm 
housing requires direct supervisi on.  It is impossible to believe that prisoners can be protected 
from harm when one officer is assigned to supe rvise multiple dorms.  Dorm F, for example, was 
the dorm where prisoners organized several sex parties in December 2011 without officer 
intervention.  Had there been mo re supervision, Tutwiler might have been able to disband the sex 
parties before the culminating New Years Eve st rip show.  As noted, the staffing patterns in 
Dorm A, which houses the unclass ified prisoner population, are partic ularly troubling and date as 
far back as 2002.  See Laube , 234 F. Supp at 1234 (finding “understaffing poses a special danger 
in the intake dorm [at Tutwiler]  . . . because it has both a uni que physical structure and an 
unclassified inmate population”).  Currently, the officer assigned to  Dorm A is also required to 
supervise Dorm E.  Thus, at numerous point s throughout the day, thes e housing units are 
unattended.  Given these staffing st atistics, it is clear how prisone rs are able to organize sex 
parties, strip shows, and engage in sexual ac tivity in their housing units during the day.   
Moreover, ADOC simply does not employ enough women officers at Tutwiler to meet its 
operational needs while protecting the rights of prisone rs.  The dearth of women officers at 
Tutwiler results in an inability to conduct specific rounds in a ll units, such as entering the 
bathroom and shower areas, and provides an  opportunity for sexual abuse by staff and other 
prisoners.  The opportunity for cross-gender view ing of nude or potentially nude women by male 
officers in the bathroom and shower areas incr eases where there are insufficient numbers of 
women officers assigned to supe rvise housing units.  ADOC and Tu twiler officials are aware of 
the problem and recognize the need to hire additional women o fficers, but have taken little action 
to address this concern.  Diffi culty in recruitment may be re lated to a number of factors, 
including the physical standards set by the Alabama Peace Officer St andards and Training 
Commission (which have not been valid ated for a corrections environment),42 mandatory 
overtime, and Tutwiler’s current 12-hour shift re quirement.  The 12-hour shift requirement poses 
a considerable barrier in hiri ng those with children who are attempting to accommodate child-
care needs; those challenges may fall part icularly harshly on wo men.  While ADOC and 
Tutwiler officials recognize a need for impr oved staffing, remediati on is slow and not 
innovative.  ADOC and Tutwiler offi cials appear to have resigned themselves to the limitations 
of recruiting and are “making do.”  Given the se verity of the staff sexual abuse and harassment 
allegations at Tutwiler, it is important for ADOC to  take a more proactive approach in addressing 
the barriers to the recruitment and retenti on of women officers—including addressing the 
physical exam.43 
                                                 
42 The Alabama Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission originally developed Alabama’s physical 
standards to reflect law enforcement duties.  While applied to correctional officers, it is our understanding that the 
test has not been validated for corrections.  The test involv es pushing, climbing, window en try, balance, weight drag, 
timed push-ups, timed sit-ups, and a 1.5 mile run.  None of the components of the test are gender-normed. 
43 To the extent that the State’s physical  test disproportionately screen out fe male candidates, its use by the ADOC 
may violate Title VII’s prohibition on sex discrimination.  42 U.S.C. § 2000e-6. - 30 - 
 
During two unannounced visits to the Faci lity on July 15, 2012 and August 7, 2012, 
ADOC’s Regional PREA coordinator, Sergean t Melissa Crawford, made the following 
observations about staffing at Tutwiler: 
 Not enough women officers assigned to th e Dorm A night shift and only two 
women officers were assigned to dorms;   
 Male officers assigned to Dorm C are su sceptible to increased allegations of 
abuse—sexual or physical—due to the dor m’s proximity to the Chapel (the 
Chapel is an unmonitored location where several sexual encount ers have allegedly 
occurred).  There were also two male o fficers assigned to the Mental Health Unit; 
 A high number of male officers from other ADOC correctional facilities are 
working overtime at Tutwiler; 
 The remodeled bathrooms require officers to enter the shower area for count; and 
 No supervisors roved the ha lls or dorms.  According to Sergeant Crawford, 
“officers complained about not getting br eaks” and “never [being] checked on by 
a supervisor” when on post. 
The lack of women officers assigned to Dorm  A is extremely troubling because young or 
new prisoners in the intake dorm are particularly vulnerable to in appropriate sexual advances by 
staff.  Similarly troublesome is assignment of male  officers to the Mental Health Unit.  This Unit 
is secluded from the main hallway and has severa l single cells.  The layout of the Unit may foster 
sexual misconduct and subject extremely vulnerable prisoners to sexual abuse.  As discussed 
above, investigators consider a prisoner’s mental health when investigatin g allegations of sexual 
abuse and have closed investigations solely based on that factor.  Finally, the lack of supervisors 
roving the Facility during the ni ght shift is concerning.  Supervis ors should be checking on their 
officers to make sure that the officers are at th eir assigned posts and are not engaging in sexually 
inappropriate behavior.   
e. Tutwiler Fails to take Necessary Measures to Address an 
Architectural Structure that is  Ill-Suited for Protecting Women 
Prisoners from Sexual Abuse and Harassment 
The physical plant conditions at Tutwiler create  increased risks that place women at risk 
of harm because Tutwiler does nothing to addre ss them.  According to the NIC’s report, “the 
current design layout and population levels of the facility are not conducive to managing a 
female population.  The physical plant layout is not  conducive to reinforcing privacy, safety and 
security protocols of an inmate population a nd more specifically, the female offender.”44  While 
a long-term solution may be to consider a new physical plant for housing women offenders in 
Alabama, as long Tutwiler is still used, ADO C can and must address these limitations through 
other means.     
                                                 
44 ONSITE ASSESSMENT RE : CROSS -GENDER SUPERVISION IN CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES , supra note 9, at 8. - 31 - 
 
For example, Tutwiler has blind spots throughout  the Facility, includ ing in the laundry 
room and in the death row unit.  We have revi ewed several accounts of sexual activity occurring 
in these areas.  Tutwiler is fully aware of these ri sks.  In one incident in 2011, an officer admitted 
to kissing a prisoner on death row on  two separate occasions.  The pr isoner reported that after the 
officer delivered her mail he kissed her, touched her, and placed her hand on his penis.  Tutwiler 
investigated the matter, but did not find enough evid ence to present the incide nt to a grand jury.  
According to the investigatory report, Tutwiler t ook no further administrative action.  The officer 
has since resigned.  Despite th eir knowledge of the challenge s associated with death row 
housing, Tutwiler has not taken any action to minimize the risk.45  One potential action would be 
to add cameras and increased staffing to mon itor these areas.  Yet ADOC has not conducted a 
physical plant or vulnerability assessment of Tutw iler to determine which areas facilitate sexual 
violence and where Tutwiler should install camer as.  Tutwiler only has three cameras in the 
entire Facility, which is simply not enough to capture  the actions of prisoners and staff or to deter 
abusive behavior.  Given the age of the Facility, it will require considerab le resources not only to 
install the cameras, but also to establish a c ontrol center and hire more staff to monitor the 
cameras. 
  In another example, women prisoners at Tutwiler have complained  about the lack of 
privacy to undress, shower, or use the bathroom.  The design of the bathrooms allows for blind 
spots and makes it difficult for officers to obser ve activities without en tering the bathroom.  
Moreover, the bathrooms that were redesigned to accommodate prisoners with disabilities now 
afford prisoners with even less privacy since th ey are open to officers and other prisoners.  
Tutwiler could have focused on sexual safety  and developed improvements for privacy in 
toileting, showering, and undressi ng while maintaining security  and accommodating prisoners 
with disabilities, rather than rely on unrestric ted cross-gender viewing.  Tutwiler officials are 
fully aware of the risk of abuse associated with  unrestricted cross-gender viewing in showers and 
bathrooms, yet they continue to permit the practice as a means of curbing prisoner sexual 
activity.  Although the majority of prisoner sexual activity occurs in the showers, the lack of 
supervision and the paucity of wo men officers assigned to Tutwiler means this level of intrusion, 
in addition to being a constitutional violation itself , is ripe for further abuse.  Tutwiler officials 
have failed to identify alternatives to patr olling these areas without  undermining prisoner 
privacy.  For example, saloon doors would allow o fficers to see the prisoners’ feet and heads—
enough to determine whether any misconduct is occurring in the showers.    
f. Tutwiler’s Classification System is Unable to Protect Potential 
Victims From Abuse 
 
Tutwiler’s classification and risk assessment process doe s not adequately identify 
potential predators and potential victims.  Marsh v. Butler Cnty., Ala. , 268 F.3d 1014 (11th Cir. 
2001) (lack of classification and risk assessment system constitutes deliberate indifference where 
inmates were harmed by other inmates because h ousing assignments did not account for the risk 
violent prisoners posed); Jensen v. Clarke , 94 F.3d 1191 (8th Cir. 1996) (failure to account for 
size, age, or length of sentence of inmates entering facility in  determining appropriate housing 
assignment may amount to deliberate indifferenc e).  Although ADOC’s Di rector of Treatment 
has updated a risk assessment tool to identify sexual predators and victim s, at the time of our 
                                                 
45 Id. - 32 - 
 
visit, ADOC had not conferred with any Tutwile r classification, securit y, mental health, or 
medical staff regarding the tool, and Tutwiler was not using it.  W ithout the ability to identify 
sexual predators, Tutwiler cannot  appropriately manage their be havior, thus exposing women to 
harm.  Furthermore, Tutwiler has no systems in  place that would enable  re-classification of 
women who may be identified as sexual predators as a result of actions in the Facility.  With the 
exception of the women housed in the specialized  units, including segregation and death row, 
there is only one classification le vel:  general population.  Thus , Tutwiler disperses vulnerable 
populations amongst the various units, there by subjecting them to risk of harm.   
Perhaps most alarmingly, Tutwiler has no pr e-classification screening.  When women 
first arrive at Tutwiler, they are housed in Dorm A, where they undergo several medical and 
mental health screenings and a classification anal ysis.  Prisoners spend anywhere from three to 
four weeks waiting for a housing assignment, with  the delay in placement purportedly related to 
the receipt of medical results.  Ma ny of these prisoners arrive at Tutwiler from other facilities 
without critical documents, includi ng medical and mental health f iles.  Accordingly, Tutwiler is 
blindly housing prisoners in the same dormitory without an adequate assessment of risk, thus 
placing the prisoners at se rious risk of harm.   
V. Conclusion 
Tutwiler violates the constitutional rights of its prisoners, resulting in harm and risk of 
harm, due to staff-on-prisoner and prisoner-on- prisoner sexual abuse and harassment.  The 
Facility’s leadership has been well aware of the multitude of structural problems that allow this abuse and harassment to continue unabated.  Tutwiler has not only failed to implement the 
recommendations provided by the NIC and the EJI,  Tutwiler has also failed to proactively 
address the harm by conducting a PREA assessmen t to determine compliance and to identify 
remediation.  Staff and prisoners  continue to engage in overt and inappropriate sexual behavior 
at Tutwiler, most recently within da ys of our arrival.  This behavior  is indicative of the need for 
critical institutional reforms that will not only address the underlining causes of the harm, but 
also identify and implement sustainable reforms.  To this end, ADOC must take on an active role 
in monitoring the changes made at Tutwiler.  It is no longer enough to de legate the changes to 
the Tutwiler officials without expansive oversight. 
ADOC and Tutwiler remain deliberately indifferent  to the serious and significant need to 
protect women prisoners at Tutwiler from sexua l assault, abuse, and harassment.  Without 
putting reforms in place in a timely fashion and addressing understaffing and employee turnover, 
Tutwiler will continue to violat e the constitutional rights of it s prisoners due to the harm and 
substantial risk of harm from sexual abuse and harassment.   
VI. Minimal Remedial Measures 
 
In order to rectify the defici encies identified in this fi ndings letter, Tutwiler should 
implement, at a minimum, the following remedial measures:
46 
 
                                                 
46 Implementation of these policies shall not be delayed by proposed amendments to the Alabama Administrative 
Code. - 33 - 
 
1. PREA Standards 
 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall comply with  all provisions of  the National  
 Standards to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape as promulgated 
 by the United States Department  of Justice in 28 C.F.R. §115. 
 
2. Reporting and Retaliation 
 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall provide multiple internal methods for prisoners to 
privately report sexual abuse and sexual harassment.  The agency shall also 
provide at least one way for residents to report abuse or harassment to a 
public or private entity or office that is not part of the agency and that is able to receive and immediately forward resident reports of sexual abuse and 
sexual harassment to agency officials, allowing the resident to remain 
anonymous upon request. 
 
b. ADOC and Tutwiler shall protect all prisoners who report sexual abuse or 
sexual harassment or cooperate with sexual abuse or sexual harassment investigations from retaliation by other prisoners or staff, and shall designate 
which staff members or departments are charged with monitoring retaliation.
 
 
c. ADOC and Tutwiler shall pr ovide a method for staff to privately report 
sexual abuse and sexual harassment of prisoners.   
 
3. Investigations 
 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall ensure that an administrative and/or criminal 
investigation is completed for all al legations of sexual abuse and sexual 
harassment.  
b. ADOC and Tutwiler shall prepare a writt en report of its  investigative 
findings for each investigation.   
 
c. ADOC and Tutwiler shall establish guidelines for timely and thorough 
investigations and develop a proces s for monitoring those timelines.  
Investigations shall not solely re ly on polygraph examinations and 
Tutwiler shall not require a prisoner to submit to a polygraph examination 
as a condition for proceedi ng with an investigation. 
 
d. ADOC shall ensure that all allega tions of sexual abuse or sexual 
harassment are properly labeled and tracked. 
 
4. Policies and Procedures 
 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall have a wri tten policy mandating zero tolerance 
toward all forms of sexual abuse and sexual harassment and outlining their 
approach to preventing, detecting, and responding to misconduct.   - 34 - 
 
 
b. ADOC and Tutwiler shall develop a nd implement a detailed policy on 
prevention, detection, reporting, and investigation of sexual abuse, 
including prisoner-on-prisoner and st aff-on-prisoner sexual abuse.   
 
c. ADOC and Tutwiler shall develop a writt en, institution specific plan to 
coordinate actions taken in response to  an incident of sexual abuse, among 
staff first responders, medical a nd mental health practitioners, 
investigators, and facility leadersh ip, including timelines and lists of 
whom staff should contact in specific situations. 
d. ADOC and Tutwiler shall implement policies and procedures that enable 
prisoners to shower, use the bath room, and change clothing without 
nonmedical staff of the oppos ite gender viewing thei r breasts, buttocks, or 
genitalia.  Policies and procedures shall require staff of the opposite 
gender to announce their presence when entering a prisone r-housing unit.   
 
e. ADOC and Tutwiler shall implement po licies and procedures regarding 
the management of LGBTI and gender nonconforming prisoners.   
 
f. ADOC and Tutwiler shall ensure that all newly admitted prisoners receive 
information in their native language , through a prisoner handbook and, at 
the discretion of ADOC a nd Tutwiler, an orientat ion video, regarding the 
following:  facility rules and regulat ions; definitions of sexual abuse and 
sexual harassment; how to report mi sconduct; how to report sexual abuse 
and sexual harassment; the process for accessing medical and mental health care; the disciplinary proc ess; and how to access the grievance 
process once it is developed. 
 
5. Use of Data 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall collect, co nsolidate, analyze, track and 
otherwise use its data, including inci dent reports and grievances, to 
identify sexual abuse and sexual harassment and problematic staff 
behavior.   
 
6. Grievances 
 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall develop and implement an adequate grievance 
process.  
 
b. ADOC and Tutwiler shall ensure that a prisoner who alleges sexual abuse 
or sexual harassment may submit a grievance without submitting it to a staff member who is the subject of th e complaint, and the grievance is not 
referred to a staff member who is the subject of the complaint.  
7. Staffing - 35 - 
 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall ensure that  Tutwiler develop, implement, and 
document a staffing plan, based on ge nder-responsive principles, that 
provides for adequate levels of sta ffing, and, where applicable, real-time 
video monitoring, to protect prison ers against sexual abuse.   
 
b. ADOC and Tutwiler shall develop a pl an to recruit additional women 
correctional officers at Tutwiler.  
c. Tutwiler shall establish a policy to ensu re that any employee, contractor or 
volunteer who is suspected of sexual abuse or sexual harassment does not 
interact with prisoners until an investigation is concluded. 
 
d. ADOC and Tutwiler shall prov ide appropriate orientation, basic, and      
in-service training to all employees w ho may have contact with prisoners.  
All modules must include gender-res ponsive strategies and strategies 
related to the management of  LGBTI and gender nonconforming 
prisoners. 
 
8. Architectural Structure 
 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall address architect ural features th at contribute to 
a lack of privacy for prisoners while showering or using the bathroom and 
conduct an assessment to identify physic al plant vulnerab ilities, including 
blind-spots within the f acility, that could contri bute to sexual misconduct. 
 
9. Classification 
 
a. ADOC and Tutwiler shall implement a gender-normed classification 
system specific to women prisoners at Tutwiler. 
 
b. ADOC and Tutwiler shall implement a risk assessment process that 
adequately identifies potentia l predators and victims.   
 
VII. Notice of Expanded Investigation 
 
As noted throughout this letter, information we  have received compels us to expand our 
investigation.  Therefore, this le tter also serves to inform you that, pursuant to our authority 
under CRIPA, we are expanding our investigation to evaluate allegations re garding excessive use 
of force, constitutionally inade quate conditions of confinement,  constitutionally inadequate 
medical and mental health care, and discriminato ry treatment on the basis of national origin, sex, 
sexual orientation, gender iden tity, and gender nonconformity. 
 
While we have gathered a substantial amount of information about policies and practices 
that affect prisoners at Tutwiler,  and have commented on some of our  concerns in this letter, we 
have not reached any conclusions  about the subject matter of th e expanded investigation.  During 
the course of our expanded investigation, we w ill consider all relevant information, and, where -36-
appropriate, will offer recommendations on ways to improve prison conditions. If we find no 
systemic constitutional violations, we will notifY you that we are closing the investigation. 
On the other hand, if we find violations, we will infonn you of the findings and attempt 
to work with ADOC to remcdy any violations. In addition, wc will idcntifY any financial, 
technical, or othcr assistance the united States may be able to provide In assist ADOC in 
correcting the identified deficicncies. In our many years of enforcing CRlP A, the good faith 
cooperation we receive from state or local jurisdictions frequently enables us In resolve our 
claims without resOli to contested litigation. 
We encourage ADOC to continue to cooperate with our investigation and can assure you 
that we will seek to minimize any potential dismption our investigation may have on Tutwiler's 
operations. We hope to work collaboratively with ADOC to efficiently !U1d expeditiously collect 
the infonnation we need. We commend Commissioner Thomas and his staff for the cooperation 
they have already shown us and their receptivity to our concerns. Now that we are expanding 
our investigation, we look forward to continuing to work with ADOC and Tutwiler in a 
eollaborati ve maimer. 
Please note that this Findings Letter is a puhlic document. It will be posted on the Civil 
Rights Division's website. 
We are obligated to advise you that, in the event that we are unable to reach a resolution 
regarding our concems with regard to sexual abuse, the Attomey General may initiate a lawsuit 
pursuant to CRIP A to correct deficiencies of the kind identified in this letter anyiime following 
the date that is 49 days after appropriate officials have been notWed of them. 42 U.S.C. § 
1997b(a)(I). 
We would prefer, however, to resolve this matter by working eooperatively with you. 
The lawyers assigned to this investigation will be contacting ADOC to discuss this matter in 
fmther detail. If you have any questions regarding this letter, please eall Jonathan M. Smith, 
Chief of the Civil Rights Division's Special Litigation Section, at (202) 514-5393. 
cc: Kim Thomas 
Commissioner 
Alabama Department of Corrections Sincerely, 
Jocelyn Samuels 
Acting Assistant Atlnmey General 