For Immediate Release 
Tuesday, October 14, 2014
Contact: Bryan Stevenson, 334-269-1803, bstevenson@ eji.org
Equal Justice Initiative Files Federal Law suit Against 
Alabam a Departm ent of Corrections Over Dangerous and Violent Conditions 
at St. Clair Correctional Facility
(Montgomery, AL; October 14, 2014 )  The Equal Justice Initiative (EJI) filed a class
action lawsuit in federal court today  on behalf  of men incarcerated at St. Clair Correctional
Facility  in Springville, Alabam a.  EJI is filing the suit following the failure of the Alabam a
Departm ent of  Corrections to respond to dangerous conditions and an extraordinarily  high
rate of violence at St. Clair, including six homicides in the past thirty-six months.  EJI asserts
in the complaint that violence at the severely  overcrowded facility  can be traced to poor
managem ent, noncom pliance with protocols and procedures, and corruption.
EJI’s investigation into conditions at St. Clair revealed mismanagem ent, poor
leadership, and frequent verbal and physical abuse by some officers, including several high
ranking supervisors.  EJI has docum ented serious and chronic lapses in security , including
broken and non-f unctioning locks on the majority  of cell doors.  Prison leadership and staff
tolerate a culture of violence at St. Clair, where weekly  stabbings and violent assaults are too
often deadly .
Carter Davenport was prom oted to Warden at St. Clair Correctional Facility  despite
a history  of discipline for unprof essional conduct, including an incident in 2012 when
Davenport punched a handcuf fed prisoner in the face.  Under Warden Davenport’s
leadership, fatal and non-f atal stabbing incidents have escalated at St. Clair, with at least six
homicides in the past thirty -six months and multiple inmates suffering near-f atal injuries that
have required extended offsite hosp ital treatment.  Since Warden Davenport’s arrival, St.
Clair has consistently  had one of  the highest annual hom icide rates in the country .
Because of poor leadership, drugs and other contraband — often brought into the
facility  and sold to prisoners by officers or staff — are prevalent, creating instability  and
increasing violence.  The potential for violence is exacerbated by new policies that have
eliminated or severely  cut back mental health and drug treatm ent services and rehabilitative
program ming, limited recreation, and removed books and other constructive activities from
housing units.In April 2014, EJI shared its troubling findings with Alabam a Departm ent of
Corrections Com missioner (ADOC) Kim Thom as and asked him to investigate the escalating
violence at St. Clair under the leadership of Warden Carter Davenport.  In June 2014, after
another murder, EJI renewed its formal request for the immediate removal of Warden
Davenport and the appointm ent of correctional staff who can address the dram atic increase
in serious violence at the prison.  
Yet another homicide occurred when Timothy Duncan was killed at St. Clair in
Septem ber 2014.  The departm ent’s inaction has forced EJI to initiate court action to address
the increasingly  perilous situation at St. Clair.  “We believe we’ve been very patient with
prison authorities, but they have taken no action to address these urgent problem s,” said EJI
Director Bryan Stevenson, who filed the lawsuit.  “ADOC’s failure to manage its prisons
safely is not about a lack of money, but a lack of will to act responsibly .  The situation at St.
Clair is getting worse and im mediate action is required.”
If you would like to speak with Bryan Stevenson, Executive Director of the Equal Justice
Initiative, please contact him at: 334-269-1803 or bstevenson@eji.org .
The Equal Justice Initiative is a private, nonprofit organization that provides legal
representation to indigent defendants and prisoners who have been denied fair and just
treatment in the legal system.
 ###