Native American Rights Fund
Page 1CONTENTS
Introduction .................................................................................................................. .............................. page 3
Executive Director’s Report .................................................................................................... .................... page 5
Chairman’s Message............................................................................................................. ......................... page 7
The Board of Directors ........................................................................................................ ........................ page 8
The National Support Committee ................................................................................................ .............. page 9
The Preservation of Tribal Existence .......................................................................................... .............. page 11
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources .................................................................................... .......... page 19
MAJOR ACTIVITIES 2010 – NARF CASE MAP ......................................................................................... . page 20
The Promotion of Human Rights ................................................................................................. ............. page 27
The Accountability of Governments ............................................................................................. ............. page 32
The Development of Indian Law ................................................................................................. ............. page 34
Financial Report .............................................................................................................. .......................... page 36
Contributors .................................................................................................................. ............................ page 37
NARF Staff ..................................................................................................................... ............................. page 40
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund
1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund
801 B Street, Suite 401Anchorage,Alaska 99501907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund
1514 P Street, NW , Suite D (Rear)Washington, D.C. 20005202-785-4166On the cover: Artist Eddie Running Wolf’s portrayal of 40 years of
NARF employees and defending the rights of indigenous peoples.
TTaaxx  SSttaattuuss  The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable 
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District of Columbia. NARF isexempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of theInternal Revenue code. Contributions to NARF are tax deductible. The InternalRevenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private foundation”as defined in Section509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was founded in 1970 and incorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.Looking back at the past forty years
of the Native American Rights Fund’s(NARF) existence, it is almost impossi-ble to comprehensively document theimpact that NARF has had in Indiancountry. Before NARF’s existence,there were not many attorneys workingfor Indians. Most of them were handling contingency-fee cases sincefew tribes could afford tribal counsel.“Indian law” was neither developed,nor defined, let alone being taught inlaw schools.
Today, the delivery of responsible,
comprehensive legal representation to Indian tribes, organizations andindividuals has been institutionalizedas an integral part of America’s justicesystem. Private practitioners, tribalattorneys, legal services offices andother non-profit organizations likeNARF together are providing represen-tation to Indians, using our country’sjustice and legislative systems toassure that Indian rights are upheld. 
Native advocates were almost invin-
cible during the 1970’s and into the1980's, especially in the U.S. SupremeCourt. Beginning in the mid-1980’s,Supreme Court decisions started shifting against tribal interests. Thisnegative shift continues today as themajority of the Supreme Court seemsintent on limiting tribal sovereignty.
After the modern day tribal sover-
eignty movement, the field of Indianlaw is no longer considered an esoteric subject about ancient history.Due in part to NARF’s existence – itstremendous successes in the courts as
well as continued representation overthe years in thousands of cases – therights of America’s Indians are nowjudiciously and routinely being advocated before the courts, adminis-trative hearings, state legislatures andCongress. Officials and bureaucratswho either chose to ignore or had noinformation on the specific rights ofAmerica’s Indians in the past are todayheld accountable for decisions relatingto Native Americans, partly because of the rights defined and upheld inNARF’s courtroom and legislative victories.
The initial goal for NARF’s Indian
law practitioners was to representNative Americans in cases of majorsignificance to a great number ofIndian people. For the first time,Indian people were assured that a sustained, highly-trained Indian advocacy group was available to themto clarify treaty and constitutionalrights guaranteed them – regardless oftheir ability to pay. NARF was directlyinvolved as either counsel or co-counsel in practically all of the earlyprecedent-setting cases of the 1970’s. 
The Native American Rights Fund has
been at the forefront on advocatingmany of the major acts and reviews
potentially affecting all NativeAmericans including the AmericanIndian Religious Freedom Act, theIndian Child Welfare Act, the AmericanIndian Policy Review Commission, theNative American Graves Protection andRepatriation Act, the Voting Rights Act,the Indian Self-Determination Act, theMaine Indian Land Claims SettlementAct, the Religious FreedomRestoration Act and many others.NARF has also been instrumental inassisting vital new Indian organizationsincluding the American Indian HigherEducation Consortium, the TribalEducation Departments NationalAssembly, the Council on EnergyResource Tribes, the National TribalEnvironmental Council and the NativeHawaiian Legal Corporation. 
As an Indian-controlled organiza-
tion, NARF’s leadership has providedas many opportunities as possible todevelop young Indian law graduatesand students in the area of Indian law.An average of eight law interns and/orclerks are employed annually by NARF,most of them being Native American.
NARF’s existence would not be 
possible without the efforts of thethousands of individuals who have
Native American Rights Fund
Page 3INTRODUCTION
“One can only imagine what it might be like
if NARF had been created 10 or 20 years
earlier.” — Tribal Leader at NARF’s 
40th Anniversary Indian Law Forum
John Echohawk NARF Executive Directoroffered their knowledge, courage and
vision to help guide NARF on its quest.Of equal importance, NARF’s financialcontributors have graciously providedthe resources to give our efforts life.Contributors such as the FordFoundation have been with NARF since its inception.  The Open Society
Institute, the Bay and Paul Foundationsand the Unger Foundation have alsomade long term funding commitments.Finally, the positive effects of NARF’swork are reflected in the financialcontributions by a growing number of tribal governments like the YochaDehe Wintun Nation, the SeminoleTribe of Florida, the Chickasaw Nation,the San Manuel Band of Mission
Indians, the Muckleshoot Tribe, theMississippi Band of Choctaw Indiansand the Poarch Band of CreekIndians.  United, these financial,moral, and intellectual gifts providethe framework for NARF to fulfill itsgoal of securing the right to self-determination to which all NativeAmerican peoples are entitled. 
NARF’s Priorities
One of the initial responsibilities of
NARF’s first Board of Directors was todevelop priorities that would guide theNative American Rights Fund in itsmission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  The
Committee developed five prioritiesthat continue to lead NARF today:
Preservation of tribal existence
Protection of tribal natural
resources
Promotion of Native American
human rights
Accountability of governments to
Native Americans
Development of Indian law and
educating the public about Indianrights, laws, and issuesAnnual Report 2010
Page 4
NARF’s 40th Anniversary Pow Wow.Native American Rights Fund
Page 5It is hard to believe, but 2010
marked the 40th anniversary of theNative American Rights Fund.  I helpedto start the organization in 1970 and Iremember hoping that we could useIndian legal advocacy to improve thelives of Native Americans.  Forty yearslater, I see clearly how our legal workon behalf of Native Americans acrossthe country has created much bettersocial and economic conditions forour Indian people.  In 2010, we continued our legal advice and repre-sentation to Native tribes, organizationsand individuals in cases of major significance and once again realizedseveral important achievements.  
After a 32 year saga, the
Shinnecock Indian Nation in New Yorkwas officially recognized as an Indiantribe by the U.S. Department of theInterior.  The Native American RightsFund had filed a petition for federalrecognition for the Shinnecock IndianNation in 1978 and worked through-out the years for a favorable determi-nation on the petition.  The ShinnecockNation became the 565th federallyrecognized Indian nation in the United States.
In a lawsuit over enforcement of the
federal Voting Rights Act, Nick v.
Bethel and State of Alaska , a settle-
ment was reached with the State ofAlaska.  The city of Bethel, Alaska hadagreed to a settlement of the case in2009.  The comprehensive settlementagreement includes translation andinterpretation assistance for all Alaska Natives speaking the Yup’iklanguage throughout the entire voterregistration and voting process.  The
Federal District Court in Alaska hasretained jurisdiction to oversee theState of Alaska’s compliance with thesettlement agreement.  The NativeAmerican Rights Fund had filed thecase in 2007 on behalf of severalYup’ik speaking voters.
The United States Supreme Court
declined to hear the State of Alaska’sappeal in 
Hogan v. Kaltag Tribal
Council , thus letting stand a decision
of the Ninth Circuit of Appeals holdingthat tribal courts in Alaska haveauthority to initiate and fully adjudi-cate Native children’s cases.  TheNative American Rights Fund becameinvolved in 2006 when the State ofAlaska refused to recognize an adoption order of the Kaltag TribalCourt involving a Kaltag child.  Thiscase reaffirms the rule that when tribal courts adjudicate domestic matters of their own member children, their decisions are entitledto full faith and credit in state courts.
At a meeting with tribal leaders in
December 2010, President Obamamade the historic announcement thatthe United States has reversed its pre-vious negative vote and now endorsesthe United Nations Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples.  TheUnited States is the last of four countrieswho voted against the Declaration inthe United Nations in 2007 to changeits position.  Indigenous peoplesworld-wide have worked on theDeclaration since the late 1970s.  The Native American Rights Fund hasworked on the Declaration with itsclient, the National Congress of
American Indians, since 1999.
Also in December 2010, President
Obama signed into law the $3.4 billionsettlement in the 
Cobell v. Salazar
litigation involving the federal govern-ment’s mismanagement of over300,000 individual Indian money trustaccounts.  The $3.4 billion settlementwill be paid out to settle the classaction lawsuit if the federal districtcourt in Washington, D.C. approvesthe settlement following proceedingswhich are underway.  The NativeAmerican Rights Fund was involved inthe case with private co-counsel from1996 when it was filed until 2006when we filed a similar lawsuit overfederal mismanagement of tribal trustaccounts for 42 tribes in 
Nez Perce
Tribe v. Salazar .  The Native American
Rights Fund is pleased to have playeda very significant role in resolving the long-standing federal trust respon-sibility issues raised in the 
Cobell case.EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ’SREPORT
continued on the following pageJohn E. Echohawk
With the support of an anonymous
donor, the Native American RightsFund has started a new project to promote and support Native people inrestoring sustainable peacemakingpractices.  This project provides anopportunity to support traditionalpeacemaking and community buildingpractices as an extension of Indianlaw and sovereign rights. Peacemakingis a community-directed process to develop consensus on a conflictresolution plan that addresses theconcerns of all interested parties.
Our National Indian Law Library
(NILL) has undergone a new push toincrease the tribal law content avail-able at NILL and online through itsTribal Law Gateway.  NILL’s Access toTribal Law Project (ALTP) currentlyhas over 230 tribes participating by
providing tribal codes, constitutionsand other tribal legal materials forNILL’s collection.  In an effort to fosterincreased communications with tribes,NILL conducted surveys on the impor-tance of having access to tribal lawmaterials.  NILL also created the ALTPSupport Committee composed of leaders in Indian law from across thenation to oversee the Project.
Our Indian Law Support Center
(ILSC) has served as a national sup-port center on Indian law and policyfor the national Indian legal servicescommunity and the 32 basic field programs serving Native Americanclients since 1972.  In 2010, the ILSCand Indian legal services programssecured a line item appropriation 
of $2.35 m illion from Congress for
supplemental funding to Indian legalservices programs for their represen-
tation of Indian people and tribeswhich fall below federal poverty guide-lines.  The ILSC is administering withthe National Association of IndianLegal Services (NAILS) the funding forthe civil and criminal work undertakenby the 25 NAILS member programs.
The Native American Rights Fund
thanks everyone who provided grantsand contributions to us in our 40thanniversary year. Without your mone-tary support, our critical legal workon behalf of Native Americans across
the country would not have been possible.  We very much appreciateyour financial assistance and hope thatit will continue for our Indian legaladvocacy efforts in the future.
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
Annual Report 2010
Page 6
NARF’s 40th Anniversary Pow Wow.Native American Rights Fund
Page 7As my time on the Native American
Rights Fund Board of Directors issoon coming to an end, it was myhonor to stand with NARF at their 40thAnniversary Celebration held at theChickasaw Nation in Oklahoma inOctober 2010. Serving six years on theBoard has given me the opportunity towitness first hand the passion thatNARF displays for our people and theissues that confront them. I know nowthat Indian country has an institutionin NARF that is looking out for ourpeoples’ interests and doing so without politicizing its own role. 
As you look back at the 40 year 
history of NARF, it is just amazing theimpact that they have had in protectingtribal sovereignty, insuring that our waysof life and our spiritual connection to our Mother Earth is never againbroken and that the federal govern-ment lives up to their promises andtheir treaty obligations. NARF's legaland legislative victories will continueto guide us and we will forever begrateful for their commitment to our people. 
There remains much work to be
done for Indian rights and NARF willcontinue its fight on our behalf. Andas in the first 40 years, NARF intendsto continue to play a major role inrighting wrong and in representingour people with the highest standardpossible.
As Chairman of NARF’s Board of
Directors, I am fully aware that theprogress that NARF has achievedwould not be possible if it weren’t for
the many contributors that make NARFpossible. To those few tribes that generously contribute to NARF, thosefoundations that continue to have faith in NARF’s mission and to thosethousands of individuals who continueto believe in NARF – we thank you. Tothose who have yet to contribute toNARF – we encourage you to join usin insuring that NARF will be here foranother 40 years.
With Sincere Thanks,
Delia Carlyle, Board Chairman
CHAIRMAN ’SMESSAGE
“NARF’s legal and legislative victories
will continue to guide us...”
NARF’s 40th Anniversary Pow Wow.Delia Carlyle
Annual Report 2010
Page 8The Native American Rights Fund
has a governing board composed ofNative American leaders from acrossthe country -- wise and distinguishedpeople who are respected by NativeAmericans nationwide.  IndividualBoard members are chosen based ontheir involvement and knowledge ofIndian issues and affairs, as well astheir tribal affiliation, to ensure a comprehensive geographical representation. The NARF Board ofDirectors, whose members serve amaximum of six years, provide NARFwith leadership and credibility, andthe vision of its members is essentialto NARF’s effectiveness in representingits Native American clients.NARF’s Board of Directors: Delia Carlyle, Board Chairman (Ak Chin
Indian Community); Kunani Nihipali, Board Vice-Chairman (Native
Hawaiian); Gerald Danforth, Board Treasurer (Wisconsin Oneida);
Ron His Horse Is Thunder, Board Executive Committee (Standing Rock
Sioux Tribe); Richard Luarkie, Board Executive Committee (Pueblo of
Laguna); Virginia Cross (Muckleshoot Indian Tribe); Miko Beasley
Denson (Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians); Mark Macarro
(Pechanga Band of Luiseño Indians); Marshall McKay (Yocha Dehe
Wintun Nation); Buford L. Rolin (Poarch Band of Creek Indians)
Natasha V . Singh (Native Village of Stevens); Barbara Smith (Chickasaw
Nation).BOARD OF DIRECTORS
...the vision of its members is essential to
NARF’s effectiveness in representing its
Native American clients.
NARF’s 40th Anniversary Pow Wow.Native American Rights Fund
Page 9The National Support Committee
assists NARF with its fund raising andpublic relations efforts nationwide.Some of the individuals on theCommittee are prominent in the field
of business, entertainment and thearts. Others are known advocates forthe rights of the underserved.  All ofthe 32 volunteers on the Committee
are committed to upholding the rightsof Native Americans.NATIONAL SUPPORT COMMITTEE
Randell and Deborah Bardwell,
Pechanga Band of Luiseno Indians 
Katrina McCormick Barnes Jaime Barrientoz, Grand Traverse
Band of Ottawa and ChippewaIndians
John S. Bevan Wallace E. Coffey, ComancheAda E. Deer, Menominee Harvey A. DennenbergLucille A. Echohawk, Pawnee Jane FondaJames GarnerEric GinsburgJeff GinsburgRodney Grant, Omaha
Chris McNeil, Jr.,Tlingit-Nisga’aBilly Mills, Oglala LakotaAmado Peña, Jr.,Yaqui/Chicano Nancy Starling RossWayne RossMarc RudickPam RudickErnie Stevens, Jr.,
Wisconsin Oneida
Andrew Teller, Isleta PuebloVerna Teller, Isleta PuebloRichard Trudell, Santee SiouxRebecca Tsosie, Pasqua Yaqui Tzo-Nah, Shoshone Bannock
Aine UngarRt. Rev.William C.Wantland,
Seminole 
W . Richard West, Southern
Cheyenne
Randy Willis, Oglala LakotaTeresa Willis, UmatillaMary Wynne, Rosebud Sioux
~
Rick Williams, former NARF employee at
the Swift Bird Corrections Project in 1977.Native American Rights Fund
Page 11Under the priority of the preserva-
tion of tribal existence , NARF works
to construct the foundations that arenecessary to empower tribes so thatthey can continue to live according to their Native traditions, to enforcetheir treaty rights, to insure their independence on reservations and toprotect their sovereignty. 
Specifically, NARF’s legal represen-
tation centers on sovereignty andjurisdiction issues, federal recognitionand restoration of tribal status, andeconomic development.  Thus, thefocus of NARF's work involves issuesrelating to the preservation andenforcement of the status of tribes as sovereign governments.  Tribal governments possess the power toregulate the internal affairs of theirmembers as well as other activitieswithin their reservations. Jurisdictionalconflicts often arise with states, thefederal government and others overtribal sovereignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The focus of NARF’s work under
this priority is the protection of thestatus of tribes as sovereign, self-governing entities. The United StatesConstitution recognizes that Indiantribes are independent governmentalentities with inherent authority overtheir members and territory.  Intreaties with the United States, Indiantribes ceded millions of acres of landin exchange for the guarantee that thefederal government would protect thetribes’ right to self-government.  From
the early 1800s on, the Supreme Courthas repeatedly affirmed the fundamentalprinciple that tribes retain inherentsovereignty over their members andtheir territory.  However, beginningwith the decision in Oliphant v.
Suquamish Indian Tribe, 435 U.S.
191 (1978) and with increasing frequency in recent years, theSupreme Court has steadily chippedaway at this fundamental principle,both by restricting tribal jurisdictionand by extending state jurisdiction.These decisions by the Supreme Courthave made this priority more relevantthan ever and have led to a TribalSovereignty Protection Initiative inpartnership with the National Congressof American Indians (NCAI) andTribes nationwide to restore the tradi-tional principles of inherent tribal sovereignty where those have beenundermined and to safeguard the core of sovereignty that remains.
This initiative consists of three 
components.  The first component isthe Tribal Supreme Court Project, thefocus of which is to monitor casespotentially headed to the SupremeCourt and those which actually are
accepted for review.  When cases areaccepted, the Project helps to ensurethat the attorneys representing theIndian interests have all the supportthey need and to coordinate the filingof a limited number of strategic amicusbriefs.  A second component of theInitiative is to weigh in on judicialnominations at the lower court andthe Supreme Court levels.  Finally,there is a legislative component to fight bills that are against tribalinterests and to affirmatively push legislation to overturn adverseSupreme Court decisions.
NARF launched the Tribal Supreme
Court Project in conjunction with NCAIin 2001.  The Tribal Supreme CourtProject is housed at NARF's office inWashington, D.C. and is staffed by oneNARF attorney and by support staff.  Inan effort to foster greater coordinationin advocacy before the Supreme Court,an advisory board of tribal leaders,comprised of NCAI ExecutiveCommittee members and other triballeaders willing to volunteer their time,
THEPRESERVATION OF TRIBAL EXISTENCE
continued on the following page“...Along the way, Chief Justice Marshall cements the
notion of the doctrine of discovery – a notion peppered
with racist attitudes and a clear declaration of the racial
superiority of the discoverers over the discovered and 
having the effect of invalidating aboriginal title 
to the discovered lands.” 
— Walter Echo-Hawk, NARF attorney, retired
Former NARF attorney and noted author
Charles Wilkinson.also assists the Project.  Their role is
to provide necessary political and tribalperspective to the legal and academicexpertise.  The Project has also estab-lished a working group – a group ofmore than 200 noted attorneys andacademics from around the nationwho participate in the Project as theirinterest, time and resources allow.
To achieve the goals of the Project,
NARF monitors cases which appear tobe headed for the Supreme Court andorganizes, coordinates and contributesto a nation-wide Indian amicus briefwriting network.  Amicus briefs allowthose not directly involved in litigation,but potentially impacted by the out-come, to provide information andarguments directly to the Court.  Bybringing together experienced Indianlaw practitioners and scholars to discuss and agree upon a coordinatedamicus brief writing strategy in eachcase and by assisting the parties, NARFensures that the most effective andfocused arguments are made beforethe Court on behalf of Indian Country.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project
monitored each petition at the time itwas filed and provided resources inthe preparation of the briefs whereappropriate.  For example, the Projectassisted in the development of theamicus strategy and briefs in supportof the petitions in Harjo v. Pro-
Football, Inc. (doctrine of laches 
precludes consideration of a petitionseeking cancellation of the “Redskins”trademarks owned by Pro-Football,even though the Trademark Trial andAppeals Board’s found that the trade-marks disparaged Native Americans)and Benally v. United States (allegations of juror racial bias based
on jury foreman’s statement that“‘[w]hen Indians get alcohol, they get drunk,’ and ‘when they get drunk,they get violent’”).  Unfortunately, theCourt denied review in both cases.The Project also worked closely withattorneys representing tribal interestswhich prevailed in the lower courts toprepare response briefs to successfullyoppose review.  These cases included:Elliot v. White Mountain ApacheTribe (non-Indian defendant must
exhaust her tribal court remediesbefore the federal court will entertainher challenge to tribal court jurisdic-tion); and Rosenberg v. Hualapai
(sovereign immunity bars lawsuit instate court against a tribally-ownedwhitewater rafting business).  
Unlike the previous term wheneight petitions involved questions
relating to provisions of the IndianGaming Regulatory Act (IGRA) and/orquestions arising under state-tribalgaming compacts, only one petitionthis past term, North County
Community Alliance v. Salazar,involved a question arising underIGRA.  No one subject matter areadominated the field of twenty-six petitions filed this past term: fiveinvolved questions of state or federalcriminal jurisdiction over Indians;four involved issues related to the federal trust relationship; and threeinvolved questions of state or federaltaxes on Indians. The remainder ofthe petitions was a mix of questionsregarding tribal civil jurisdiction overnon-Indians (2), the status of Indianlands (2), various tribal membership
Annual Report 2010
Page 12
NARF attorney Yvonne Knight, retired.disputes (3), Indians and trademark
issues (2); tribal sovereign immunity(1), water rights (1), civil rights (1)and class actions (1). 
In addition to its work before the
U.S. Supreme Court, the Project continues to monitor Indian law casespending before the lower federalcourts and in the state courts.  In certain cases, the Project may becomeinvolved in the lower court litigation—coordinating resources, developinglitigation strategy and/or filing briefsin support of tribal interests.  Thispast term, the Project assisted in thepreparation of amicus briefs in anumber of cases, including:  Patchak
v. Salazar (pending before the D.C.
Circuit challenging trust land acquisi-tion based on 
Carcieri and the status
of the Tribe in 1934);  Water Wheel
Camp v. LaRance (pending before the
Ninth Circuit on questions involvingthe scope of tribal court jurisdictionover non-Indian lessees); Osage
Nation v. Irby (request for en banc
review by Tenth Circuit on question ofdisestablishment of Osage Reservationdenied); and Colorado v. Cash
Advance (pending before the Colorado
Supreme Court on the question of thesovereign immunity of tribal enterprisesdoing business outside the reservation).The Project has renewed its efforts tomonitor a substantial number ofIndian law cases pending in the lowercourts, updating the cases by subjectmatter area, including:  Post- Carcieri
Litigation; Criminal Jurisdiction(Federal and State); Civil Jurisdiction(Tribal and State); Diminishment/Disestablishment; Indian/Tribal Status;Sovereign Immunity; Taxation; TreatyRights; Religious Freedoms; and Trust
Relationship.  Hopefully, these effortswill help us identify trends or currentswithin distinct areas of Indian law thatcan be effectively addressed prior toreaching the Supreme Court.  
Water Wheel Camp Recreation
Area v. La Rance is a case involving
tribal court jurisdiction over a non-Indian company that leases land withina Tribe’s reservation. In May 2010,NARF co-counseled, along with privatecounsel, an amicus curiae brief in theU.S. Court of Appeals for the NinthCircuit on behalf of the NationalAmerican Indian Court JudgesAssociation.  In an unusual decision,the federal district court upheld tribalcourt jurisdiction over the non-Indiancompany, but not the non-Indian indi-vidual that presides over the company.The case also involves issues regardingthe federal court’s consideration ofevidence that was not presented to the tribal courts, under the exhaustionof tribal remedies doctrine. The Court of Appeals heard oral argument in theappeals in this case for February 2011.
The Judicial Selection Project 
prioritized the development of aprocess to identify, evaluate and promote qualified Native attorneys,tribal judges and state court judges for nomination to the federal bench.Currently, there are no active judgeson the federal bench who are NativeAmerican. There are 866 federaljudgeships – nine on the SupremeCourt, 179 on the Courts of Appealsand 678 for the district courts.  Andthere are zero American Indian,Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian federal judges. A primary objective ofthe Project is to ensure that qualified
Native candidates are considered andnominated to fill current vacancies onthe federal bench.
Federal Recognition of
Tribal Status
The second category of NARF’s
work under this priority is federalrecognition of tribal status.  NARF currently represents Indian communi-ties who have survived intact as identifiable Indian tribes but who are not federally recognized.  Tribalexistence does not depend on federalrecognition, but recognition is neces-sary for a government-to-governmentrelationship and the receipt of manyfederal services.
On October 1, 2010, the U. S.
Interior Board of Indian Appeals dismissed two requests for reconsid-eration of the U.S. Department of theInterior’s Final Determination forFederal Acknowledgment of theShinnecock Indian Nation in NewYork, because the requesters failed todemonstrate that they were interestedparties under the federal acknowledg-ment regulations. With the ruling, theFinal Determination was immediatelyeffective, thereby rendering theShinnecock Nation the 565th federallyrecognized Indian nation in the UnitedStates. The decision ends a 32-yearsaga initiated by the Nation and NARFwhen NARF filed the Nation’s initialpetition and litigation request in 1978with the U. S. Department of theInterior.Native American Rights Fund
Page 13continued on the following pageAfter twenty-two years of preparing
the necessary historical, legal andanthropological documentation tosupport its petition for federalacknowledgment, the Pamunkey Tribeof Virginia filed its petition with theOffice of Federal Acknowledgement.The Native American Rights Fund hasrepresented the Pamunkey Tribe inthis effort since 1988. The PamunkeyTribe represents an Indian communitywho has survived intact as an identifi-able Indian tribe, but who is not federally recognized.  The Tribe hashad to submit evidence that they havecontinued to exist as an Indian tribefrom the time of significant white contact to the present day, and havecontinued to govern themselves andtheir members throughout this time.The Pamunkey Tribe’s reservation islocated on the Pamunkey River, 
adjacent to King William County,Virginia. A Virginia Historic Landmark,it contains approximately 1,200 acresof land, 500 acres of which are wetlands.  Pumunkey tribal membersreside on the reservation and live innearby Richmond, Newport News,other parts of Virginia and other statesfrom coast to coast. 
In October 2009, the Acting
Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairsissued a Final Determination againstrecognition of the Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Montana, over-ruling the decision in the PreliminaryDetermination.  The stated rationalefor the decision was the unwillingnessto go along with the “departures fromprecedent” which the previousAssistant Secretary found to be justi-fied by historical circumstances.  In
February 2010, the Tribe filed aRequest for Reconsideration with theInterior Board of Indian Appeals(IBIA).  As it is unclear how long theIBIA will take to rule, the Tribe willcontinue its legislative efforts inCongress. 
Environmental Law and
Policy Initiative
The third category of NARF’s work
under this priority is the environmentallaw and policy initiative.  NARF hasplayed a key role in the implementa-tion of federal environmental law andpolicy that recognizes tribal govern-ments as the primary regulators andenforcers of the federal environmentallaws on Indian lands.Annual Report 2010
Page 14
Past NARF Board of Directors 1970's.A scientific consensus has emerged
in recent decades that human activitiesare causing significant changes to ourclimate and environment.  Among thedocumented changes are higher tem-peratures, rising sea levels, warmingoceans and melting polar ice sheets.Climate change is a global phenome-non and will affect everyone undereven the most conservative scientificprojections.
However, climate change will not
affect everyone equally.  Native peoplesfind themselves already at ground zeroin a fight that will ultimately determinethe survival of their tribal nations.Native communities are exceptionallyvulnerable to the effects of climatechange and the devastating resultshave already begun to fall dispropor-tionately on tribes.  Despite the factthat Native peoples have historicallyleft a negligible carbon footprint, theyare suffering and will suffer dispro-portionately from the effects of climatechange. Native peoples are often thefirst to see and the first to feel changesin the natural environment. Traditionaltribal practices and relationships withthe natural world form the spiritual,cultural and economic foundation formany Native American nations that willbe and, in some cases, already arethreatened by climate change.  MotherEarth is definitely in crisis and Nativepeoples’ knowledge and their intimateand direct relationships with ourecosystems point the way toward anurgent need for a paradigm shift andchange in lifestyle for all humanity.
Global warming is wreaking havoc
in Alaska. In recent years scientistshave documented melting ocean ice,rising oceans, rising river tempera-
tures, thawing permafrost, increasedinsect infestations, animals at risk anddying forests. Alaska Natives are thepeoples who rely most on Alaska's ice,seas, marine mammals, fish and gamefor nutrition and customary and tradi-tional subsistence uses; they are thusexperiencing the adverse impacts ofglobal warming most acutely. In 2006,during the Alaska Forum on theEnvironment, Alaska Native partici-pants described increased forest fires,more dangerous hunting, fishing andtraveling conditions, visible changes inanimals and plants, infrastructuredamage from melting permafrost andcoastal erosion, fiercer winter storms,and pervasive unpredictability.Virtually every aspect of traditionalAlaska Native life is impacted. Asnoted in the Arctic Climate ImpactAssessment of 2004, indigenous peoples are reporting that sea ice isdeclining, and its quality and timingare changing, with important negativerepercussions for marine hunters.Others are reporting that salmon arediseased and cannot be dried for winterfood. There is widespread concernabout caribou habitat diminishing aslarger vegetation moves northward.Because of these and other dramaticchanges, traditional knowledge isjeopardized, as are cultural structuresand the nutritional needs of Alaska’sindigenous peoples. Efforts are contin-uing to convene Congressional hearingson climate change impacts on indige-nous peoples.
In Native Village of Kivalina v.
Exxon Mobil, NARF represents the
Native Village of Kivalina, which is afederally recognized Indian Tribe, and
the City of Kivalina, which is anAlaskan municipality, in a suit filed ontheir own behalf and on behalf of alltribal members against defendantsExxonMobil Corp., Peabody EnergyCorp., Southern Company, AmericanElectric Power Co., Duke Energy Co,Chevron Corp. and Shell Oil Co.,among others. In total there are nineoil company defendants, fourteenelectric power company defendantsand one coal company defendant. Thesuit claims damages due to the defen-dant companies’ contributions to global
warming and invokes the federalcommon law of public nuisance. Thesuit also alleges a conspiracy by somedefendants to mislead the publicregarding the causes and consequencesof global warming.
In October 2009, the Court granted
the Defendant's motion to dismiss onthe basis that Kivalina's federal claimfor nuisance is barred by the politicalquestion doctrine and for lack ofstanding under Article III of theConstitution. Although this was a set-back, it was not a surprise. Thecase will now go up on appeal to theU.S. Court of Appeals for the NinthCircuit where the appellate court maybe more persuaded by the reasoningof the U.S. Court of Appeals for theSecond Circuit in the recent decisionConnecticut v. American ElectricPower Company . That ruling held that
plaintiffs, including states and privateentities, may bring suits. In short, thecourt held that: (1) the plaintiffs’claims do not present political ques-tions that the courts cannot / shouldnot address; (2) the plaintiffs have
Native American Rights Fund
Page 15standing to bring their claims;(3) the
complaint states claims under the federal common law of nuisance; and(4) the plaintiffs' claims are not displaced by any federal legislation.These are the very issues that are atissue in Kivalina and which the appel-
late court will now have opportunity toreview. Opening brief was filed inMarch 2010 in the Ninth Circuit.  ReplyBriefs were filed in September 2010.Oral argument has not yet been set.
As climate change is one of the
most challenging issues facing theworld today, its effects on indigenouspeoples throughout the world areacute and will only get worse.  Asreported above, effects are especiallypronounced in Alaska where 184 villages are threatened with removal.NARF, in addition to working withAlaska Native villages on this issue, is working with the National TribalEnvironmental Council (NTEC) on climate change issues and in particularon ensuring that climate change legis-lation and action at the internationallevel, incorporate Indigenous Peoplesas sovereign partners in addressingthis issue and provides them the neededresources for adaptation and mitiga-tion.  NTEC, NARF, NCAI and theNational Wildlife Federation workedtogether and created a set of tribalprinciples which should govern treat-ment of tribes in any legislation or treaty. 
In June 2009, the American Clean
Energy and Security Act was passed bythe House of Representatives. The billis the first climate bill passed by eitherthe full House or Senate. The Housebill provides for reduced Green HouseGas (GHG) emissions, renewable
energy standards, energy efficiencystandards, investment in carbon cap-ture and sequestration, clean vehicles,clean energy, resources for states andTribes to engage in adaptation andhelp for low income consumers.There were a good number of tribalprovisions in the bill which treat themas sovereign partners in the effort toaddress this crucial issue.  However,Tribes were left out of key provisionsas well and funding of set-asides forTribes is inadequate.  Congressional
focus shifted to the Senate which
came out with a draft bill inSeptember 2009.
NARF along with NTEC and the
National Wildlife Federation (NWF)and approximately 20 tribal leadersparticipated in meetings in March2010, in which visits were made tokey Congressional staffers remindingthem of the need for comprehensiveclimate change legislation and forinclusion of strong tribal provisions.NARF, along with NTEC, NWF alsosigned onto “The New Energy FutureIn Indian Country: Confronting ClimateChange, Creating Jobs and ConservingNature,” a report on clean energypotential in Indian Country and theneed to create a level playing field forTribes to compete in this arena.Unfortunately, nothing moved forwardbecause Congress was tied up withHealth Care reform and other matters.
194 countries of the world, many
environmental and other organiza-tions, as well as representatives ofindigenous peoples met for the UNFramework Convention on ClimateChange (UNFCCC) process in Cancun,Mexico in Conference of the Parties
16 (COP 16).  NARF attended thismeeting as did its client, NTEC. Thisprocess is an effort by the nations ofthe world to address the crucial issueof climate change by reaching agree-ment on a broad range of issues relatedto climate change.  Indigenous peoplesaround the world are among thosemost affected by climate change, eventhough their own carbon footprint isvery small.  Indigenous peoples havestruggled mightily to get their interestsprotected in the international arena.The Cancun process culminated in anagreement on Long-term CooperativeAction that was crucial to the continu-ation of the process.  This agreementreflects some modest and importantprogress on indigenous issues.
The agreement contains increased
mentions of indigenous peoples and of the United Nations Declaration onthe Rights of Indigenous Peoples(UNDRIP).  Indigenous status isreferred to in the preamble andindigenous peoples’ effective partici-pation is mentioned in the SharedVision section which is importantbecause it applies to the whole document.  In addition, there is a new mention of the UNDRIP in thesection titled “Economic and socialconsequences of response measures”which takes “note of relevant provisions of the United NationsDeclaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples”.   
There are safeguards calling for
“The full and effective participation”of indigenous peoples in REDD+activities (Reduction of Emissionsfrom Deforestation and Forest
Annual Report 2010
Page 16Degradation).  Paragraph 72 under
REDD+ provides for “the full andeffective participation of relevantstakeholders, inter alia, indigenouspeoples and local communities” in thedevelopment of national action plans.Likewise, there is a provision thatREDD+ plans should include “(d) Asystem for providing information onhow the safeguards referred to inannex I to this decision are beingaddressed and respected throughoutthe implementation of the activitiesreferred to in paragraph 70, whilerespecting sovereignty.”  There arealso a few scattered references to takinginto account traditional knowledgeand traditional indigenous knowledge.
Additionally, there are positive 
provisions of direct importance to theindigenous peoples though not directedto them specifically.  Paragraph 8 ofthe Shared Vision section “emphasizesthat Parties should, in all climatechange-related actions, fully respecthuman rights.”  Also in annex I thatrefers to safeguards is Paragraph 2.(e), which provides that “Actions areconsistent with the conservation ofnatural forests and biological diversity,ensuring that actions referred to inparagraph 70 of this decision are notused for the conversion of naturalforests, but are instead used to incen-tivize the protection and conservationof natural forests and their ecosystemservices, and to enhance other socialand environmental benefits.”  Theseprovisions are fully supported by theIndigenous Caucus.
All of these provisions are very 
positive steps for indigenous rights,but much remains to be done. First of all, the UNFCCC process does not
itself allow for the full and effectiveparticipation of indigenous peoples.The references to the UNDRIP merely“take note” of the Declaration – thislanguage must be strengthened.  Thesafeguard provisions provide that they“should be promoted and supported….” Given the threats that REDD+presents to indigenous peoples, thatlanguage needs to be mandatory.  Thesafeguard provisions do not providefor “free, prior and informed consent”as requested by indigenous peoplesand as contained in the UNDRIP .There is no prohibition against offset-ting REDD+ credits, or the outlawingof market mechanisms, indeed suchmechanisms are encouraged contraryto indigenous wishes.  The referencesto incorporating and protecting 
traditional indigenous knowledge are wholly inadequate.  In addition,indigenous peoples lack specific mention in numerous paragraphswhich encourage the participation ofrelevant stakeholders.  Overall, theprocess still does not recognize nearlyenough the difference between indigenous peoples and civil society.
Native American Rights Fund
Page 17
NARF Board of Directors 1995Native American Rights Fund
Page 19Throughout the process of
European conquest and colonizationof North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady diminishment oftheir land base to a mere 2.3 percentof its original size.  Currently, thereare approximately 55 million acres of Indian-controlled land in the continental United States and about 44 million acres of Native-owned landin Alaska.  An adequate land base andcontrol over natural resources arecentral components of economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, andas such, are vital to the very existenceof tribes.  Thus, much of NARF’s workinvolves the protection of tribal 
natural resources. 
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal
existence is difficult to maintain.  ThusNARF helps tribes establish ownershipand control over lands which arerightfully theirs.  
Since 1981, NARF has represented
the Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texasin their quest to secure compensationfor the loss of use of millions of acresof fertile forest land they once occu-pied in southeast Texas.  In 2002, theU.S. Court of Federal Claims ruled infavor of the Tribe in their breach-of-trust claim against the United States,holding the government liable for theTribe's loss of use of over 2.85 millionacres of land between 1845 and 1954.The Court also ruled that 5.5 millionacres of aboriginal title has neverbeen extinguished.  Negotiators for the
U.S. and Tribe reached an agreementon the amount of damages for the lossof land – $270.6 million – and theCourt recommended the agreement toCongress in 2002.  NARF is workingwith the Tribe to have a bill intro-duced in Congress to settle the Tribe’sclaims, accompanied by the Court’sfavorable recommendation. 
NARF has been retained by the
Eastern Shoshone Tribe of the WindRiver Indian Reservation to analyze thelegal implications of the Surplus LandAct of March 3, 1905 as it may haveaffected the boundaries of thatReservation. NARF is working with theTribe's Attorney General and theShoshone Business Council on a vari-ety of fronts to secure the vindicationof the boundary. The Shoshone Tribesand Arapaho Tribes, through theirrespective attorneys, are also cooper-ating in an application to the UnitedStates Environmental ProtectionAgency (US-EPA) for delegation of"treatment in the same manner as astate” (TAS) in the administration ofcertain Clean Air Act programs. Thedetermination supporting delegationto the Tribes from US-EPA will requirethat US-EPA determine the location ofthe boundary of the Reservation. The
TAS Application has been published byUS-EPA and they have received com-ments. The Tribes filed their Responseto the comments in March 2010. US-EPA also requested a written opinionfrom the Department of the InteriorSolicitor on the boundary of the WindRiver reservation. The Solicitor’s viewson the boundary have not yet beenissued.
NARF is representing the Hualapai
Indian Tribe of Arizona in preparingand submitting applications for thetransfer of lands owned by the Tribe infee into trust status.  The Tribe islocated on the south rim of the GrandCanyon in Arizona, and claims aboundary that runs to the center of theColorado River. In addition to assistingthe Tribe in the transfer of the ChollaCanyon Ranch lands from fee status tobe held in trust by the United Statesfor the benefit of the Tribe, NARF ispreparing an additional four applica-tions related to lands the Tribe isseeking to have taken into trust. Theapplication for the transfer of thelands at Cholla Canyon Ranch wasfiled in November 2009. The Bureau
THEPROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES
continued on page 22"All we ever wanted was to catch fish."
(Katie John when told that her name was
now familiar to the power brokers in
Washington, D.C.)
Vine Deloria, Jr., former NARF Board 
member and noted author.Annual Report 2010
Page 20Major Activities 2010
NARF Case StudiesNative American Rights Fund
Page 21COLORADO
NARF HEADQUARTERSBOULDER, COLORADOIndian Child Welfare Act SiteTribal Education Departments
National Assembly Headquarters
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Valmont Butte – Sacred Site IssueIDAHONez Perce Tribe 
- Water Rights, Tribal Trust Funds 
KANSASKickapoo Tribe – Water Rights and
Tribal Trust Funds
MINNESOTABois Forte Band of Chippewa 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Minnesota Chippewa Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Prairie Island Indian Community 
– Tribal Trust Funds
White Earth Band of Chippewa
Indians - Tribal Trust Funds 
MICHIGANGrand Traverse Band of Ottawa and
Chippewa Indians – Tribal TrustFunds
Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa
– Tribal Trust Funds
MONTANA
Chippewa-Cree Tribe of the Rocky
Boys Reservation – Tribal Trust Funds
Confederated Salish and Kootenai
Tribes – Tribal Trust Funds
Little Shell Tribe 
– Recognition & Tribal Trust Funds
NEBRASKASantee Sioux Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Fund
NEW MEXICOMescalero Apache Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Fund
Pueblo of Zia – Tribal Trust FundsNEVADASummit Lake Paiute Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
NEW YORKShinnecock Indian Nation 
– Tribal Recognition 
NORTH DAKOTAFort Berthold Reservation 
– Water Rights
Spirit Lake Dakotah Nation 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Turtle Mountain Reservation 
– Tribal Trust Funds
OKLAHOMACheyenne-Arapaho Tribes 
– Tribal Trust FundsALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICEAkiachak Native Community 
– Land into Trust
Native Village of Atka 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Aleut Community of St. Paul Island
– Tribal Trust Funds
Chilkoot Indian Association 
– Land into Trust
Chalkyitsik – Land into TrustChistochina Tribe – SubsistenceChuryung v. Alaska 
– Indian Child Welfare 
Native Villages of Eyak, Tatitlek,
Chenega, Nanwalek, and Port Graham– Subsistence & Aboriginal Title
Ivanof Bay Village 
– Sovereign Immunity
Kaltag Tribe – Indian Child WelfareNative Village of Kasigluk 
– Voting Rights Act Suit
Katie John v. Norton – Subsistence
Kenaitze Indian Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Native Village of Kivalina 
– Global Warming Project
Native Village of Kwigillingok 
– Voting Rights Act Case
Gwich’in Steering Committee 
– Environmental/Subsistence
Native Village of Nulato 
– Indian Child Welfare
Ninilchick Tribe – SubsistenceNoocksack Indian Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Qawalangin Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Tanana – Tribal SovereigntyTlingit and Haida Indian Tribes 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Native Village of Tuluksak – Trust
Lands & Voting Rights Act Case
Native Village of Tuntutuliak 
– Voting Rights Case
Native Village of Venetie 
– Subsistence
Voting Rights Act SuitARIZONAHualapai Tribe – Boundary Issue
and Tribal Trust Funds
Kaibab Paiute Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
CALIFORNIACachil Dehe Band of Wintun
Indians of Colusa Rancheria – Tribal Trust Funds
Rincon Luiseno Band of Indians 
– Tribal Trust Funds
San Luis Rey Indian Water Authority
– Tribal Trust Funds
Tule River Tribe 
– Water, Tribal Trust Funds 
Yurok Tribe – Tribal Trust FundsPawnee Nation – Education, NAG-
PRA & Tribal Trust Funds
Sac & Fox Nations 
– Tribal Trust Funds
OREGONKlamath Tribes 
– Water Rights & Tribal Trust Funds
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians
– Tribal Trust Funds
SOUTH DAKOTALower Brule Sioux Tribe 
– Trust Lands
Oglala Sioux Tribe – Environmental TEXASAlabama-Coushatta Tribe 
–  Land Claim 
VIRGINIAPamunkey Tribe 
– Tribal Recognition
WASHINGTONSamish Indian Nation 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Shoalwater Bay Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Skokomish Tribe 
– Tribal Trust Funds
Spokane Tribe – Tribal Trust FundsTulalip Tribes – Tribal Trust FundsYakama Nation – Tribal Trust FundsWASHINGTON, D.C.NARF WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE
Tribal Supreme Court ProjectHarjo et al v. Washington Redskin
Football – Human Rights 
WISCONSINBad River Band of Lake Superior
Chippewa Indians – Tribal Trust Funds
Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Ojibwe
– Tribal Trust Funds
Lac Du Flambeau Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa – Tribal Trust Funds
WYOMINGEastern Shoshone Tribe 
– Land Issue 
CANADANorthern Lakes Pottawatomi Nation
– Land Claim 
INTERNATIONALDeclaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples/Climate ChangeIssues – United Nations &Organization of American Statesof Indian Affairs acknowledged receipt
of the Application in March 2010 andforwarded official notification of theApplication to the State of Arizona andMohave County, requesting commentsand specific information concerningthe potential impact of the transfer. APreliminary Title Opinion on the landhas been requested from the U.S.Department of the Interior’s RegionalSolicitor. NARF provided briefings forthe Hualapai Tribal Council in Apriland September 2010 concerning thestatus of the Application and theremaining steps to be completed tosecure the transfer of the lands. Inaddition, NARF is preparing applica-tions for the transfer to trust status foran additional eight parcels of landowned in fee by the Tribe.
In Chalkitsik, et al v. United
States, the Tribe brought suit seeking
judicial review of 25 C.F.R. Part 151 as it pertains to federally recognizedtribes in Alaska. This regulation governs the procedures used by Indiantribes and individuals when requestingthe Secretary of the Interior to acquiretitle to land in trust on their behalf.The regulation bars the acquisition ofland in trust in Alaska other than forthe Metlakatla Indian Community orits members. The case has been fullybriefed and is waiting for decision.
Water Rights
The culture and way of life of many
indigenous peoples are inextricablytied to their aboriginal habitat. Forthose tribes that still maintain tradi-tional ties to the natural world, suitable habitat is required in order toexercise their treaty-protected hunting,fishing, gathering and trapping rights
and to sustain their relationships with the animals, plants and fish thatcomprise their aboriginal habitats. 
Establishing tribal rights to the use
of water in the arid west continues tobe a major NARF priority.  The goal ofNARF's Indian water rights work is tosecure allocations of water for presentand future needs for Indian tribes represented by NARF and other westerntribes generally.  Under the precedentestablished by the Supreme Court in1908 in Winters v. United States and
confirmed in 1963 in Arizona v.
California, Indian tribes are entitled
under federal law to sufficient waterfor present and future needs, with apriority date at least as early as theestablishment of their reservations.These tribal reserved water rights aresuperior to all state-recognized waterrights created after the tribal prioritydate.  Such a date will in most casesgive tribes valuable senior water rightsin the water-short west.  Unfortunately,many tribes have not utilized theirreserved water rights and most ofthese rights are unadjudicated orunquantified.  The major need in eachcase is to define or quantify theamount of water to which each tribe isentitled through litigation or out-of-court negotiated settlements. Tribesare generally able to claim water forany purpose which enables the Tribe'sreservation to serve as a permanenthomeland.
NARF represents the Nez Perce
Tribe of Idaho in its water rights claimin the Snake River Basin Adjudication(SRBA). The Nez Perce Tribe is locatedin northern Idaho near the confluenceof the Snake and Clearwater Rivers.
The Nez Perce claims dispute hasbeen the biggest outstanding disputein the SRBA, which includes a legalinventory of about 180,000 waterrights claims in 38 of Idaho’s 44counties.  In early 2005, the Nez PerceTribal Executive Committee (NPTEC)accepted the final terms of the waterrights claims settlement in the State ofIdaho’s SRBA. Congress enacted theSnake River Settlement Act of 2004and President Bush signed it into lawthe same year. The Governor signedthe approval legislation in 2005. Theapproval by NPTEC represented thefinal sign-off by the three sovereigns.This is a major accomplishment forthe Nez Perce Tribe and its members.This settlement represents the mergingof traditional Indian water rights 
Annual Report 2010
Page 22
Wallace Black Elk, spiritual advisor for the
Swift Bird Corrections Project in 1977.settlement elements with other major
environmental issues confronting allof the people of Idaho. NARF contin-ued to work with the Tribe to securefinal approval of the settlement by theSRBA water court and on the federalappropriations process. NARF and the Tribe were successful in securingFY 2011 appropriations for the Tribe and are working now on the 2012appropriations.
NARF represents the Klamath Tribes
of Oregon in asserting and defendingtheir treaty-based water rights in theKlamath River Basin to support theirtreaty hunting, fishing and gatheringrights with a time immemorial prioritydate, as well as water rights needed tosatisfy the agricultural purposes of theKlamath Reservation. In May 2010, theTribes appeared before anAdministrative Law Judge for a threeweek cross-examination hearing heldin Salem, Oregon. The hearing per-tained to the four instream flow cases,which includes the Williamson River,Sycan River, Sprague River, and WoodRiver.  For the two cases that cover theKlamath Marsh and selected seeps andsprings, no parties elected  to cross-examine either parties witnesses.Post-hearing briefing is underway forthese cases and scheduled for comple-tion in May 2011, with opening briefsfiled in October and December 2010.The parties in the marsh and seepsand springs cases will also proceedwith post-hearing briefing scheduledfor completion in July 2011.Meanwhile, in the remaining two casesthat cover the main stem of theKlamath River and the Upper KlamathLake, the parties are finalizing writtendirect testimony and thereafter, 
rebuttal testimony for submission inOctober 2010 and February 2011,respectively. A cross-examinationhearing is scheduled for April 2011 inSalem, Oregon. Upon the submissionof all post-hearing briefs of all eightTribal cases, the Oregon Office ofAdministrative Hearings will issue a proposed order no later thanDecember 2011 for six of the casesand April 2012 for the remaining two cases. 
After almost 30 years of advocacy
work, the Tule River Indian Tribe hassuccessfully settled its water rightsclaims. In 2007 the Tribe signed a settlement agreement with water userson the South Fork Tule River ofCalifornia. The settlement agreementsecures a domestic, municipal, indus-trial, and commercial water supply forthe Tribe. The Tribe is engaged inpreparing federal legislation that willratify the settlement agreement andauthorize appropriations to developthe water rights through the creationof water infrastructure and reservoirson the Tule Reservation. In 2007, abill was introduced on behalf of theTribe to authorize a feasibility study toevaluate the appropriate location of areservoir on their reservation to storethe Tribe's water.  The bill was passedby the full House of Representativeslate in the 2008 session, but was notpassed by the Senate.  A new bill wasthen introduced in the House and inthe Senate in 2009. Unfortunately, thebill was held up and not enacted bythe 111th Congress and so NARF’s andthe Tribe’s work begins anew with theincoming Congress.In 2006, the Kickapoo Tribe in
Kansas filed a federal lawsuit in U.S.District Court in an effort to enforceexpress promises made to the Tribe tobuild the Plum Creek ReservoirProject in the Upper Delaware andtributaries watershed. The Nemaha-Brown Watershed Joint Board # 7, theNatural Resources ConservationService of the U.S. Department ofAgriculture, and the State of Kansasmade these promises to the Tribe overa decade ago. In the intervening yearsthese same parties have been activelydeveloping the water resources of the watershed, resulting in the neardepletion of the Tribe’s senior federalwater rights in the drainage. 
The water quality on the reservation
is so poor it is harmful to humanhealth and unsuitable for human 
Native American Rights Fund
Page 23continued on the following page
Don Wharton, NARF senior staff attorney.consumption according to the EPA.
The water supply is in violation of theSafe Drinking Water Act of 1974. As aresult the Kickapoo people are unableto safely drink, bathe or cook with tapwater. The Plum Creek ReservoirProject is the most cost-effective andreliable means by which the Tribe canfree its members from the dire livingconditions forced upon them by theirunreliable and dangerous water supply.  A thirty-year era of unreliablewater supplies on the KickapooReservation located in Brown County,Kansas has disabled the KickapooTribe from providing basic municipalservices necessary to protect its resi-dents from illness, fire, and unsanitaryliving conditions. There is not enoughwater on the reservation to providebasic municipal services to the com-munity. The Tribe is unable to providelocal schools with a reliable, safe run-ning water and the Fire Department
cannot provide adequate fire protection due to the water shortage.
The United States, the State and 
the local watershed district have allconceded the existence of the Tribe’s senior 
Winters water rights. The real
issue ultimately will be the amount ofwater to satisfy the Tribe’s needs andthe source or sources of those rights.The Tribe and the U.S. are also discussing funding to quantify theTribe’s water rights.  NARF continuedactive negotiations with the State andthe local water interests on an agreedquantity of water for the Tribe. NARF isalso in the approval processes for theland condemnation agreement withthe local watershed district. 
NARF and the Oglala Sioux Tribe
(OST) have been working on thedelivery of a safe, reliable and ade-quate source of municipal, industrialand rural water supply through thefederally authorized and funded MniWiconi Project. A critical element ofthe delivery of a safe source of drinkingwater to the OST is to ensure the secu-rity of the pipeline that distributes thewater to the users. NARF has assistedthe OST Department of WaterMaintenance and Conservation in fulfilling its responsibility to secure thepipeline through the development andadoption of the OST Pipeline SecurityOrdinance. The Department of WaterMaintenance and Conservation is nowfaced with enforcement of theOrdinance against individuals who donot accept that they cannot waste thewater provided through the MniWiconi Distribution System on theOST's Reservation.  NARF is assistingthe Department with the development
of the necessary forms and protocolsto accomplish enforcement of thiscritically important law of the Tribeand with the training of Departmentpersonnel on enforcement of theOrdinance. NARF conducted a trainingfor Department personnel on theenforcement of the Pipeline SecurityOrdinance in June 2009 and providedrevised and updated forms and standards for administration of theOrdinance. NARF continues to workwith the Tribe on the implementationof this important Ordinance for theprotection of the Tribe’s drinkingwater.
Protection of Hunting and
Fishing Rights in Alaska
The subsistence way of life is 
essential for the physical and culturalsurvival of Alaska Natives.  As importantas Native hunting and fishing rights areto Alaska Natives' physical, economic,traditional and cultural existence, theState of Alaska has been and continuesto be reluctant to recognize theimportance of the subsistence way of life. 
In Native Villages of Eyak,
Tatitlek, Chenega, Nanwalek, andPort Graham v. Gutierrez, Secretaryof Commerce, five Chugach villages
sued the Secretary of Commerce toestablish aboriginal rights to their traditional-use areas on the OuterContinental Shelf of Alaska, in CookInlet and the Gulf of Alaska. A decisionwas rendered by the federal districtcourt in 2002, against the Chugach.NARF brought an appeal to the NinthAnnual Report 2010
Page 24
Kim Gottschalk, NARF senior staff attorney.Circuit and in 2004, the Ninth Circuit
issued an order for a hearing en banc
to take place. The Ninth Circuit en
banc panel vacated the decision of 
the district court and remanded fordetermination of whether the tribescan establish aboriginal rights to theareas. Trial on whether these Tribeshold aboriginal rights to hunt and fishin federal waters was held in 2008. InAugust 2009, the federal court heldthat although the five Chugach tribeshad established that they had a “terri-tory” and had proven they had usedthe waters in question, the Tribescould not hold aboriginal rights as a
matter of law. The Chugach have
appealed to the Ninth Circuit en bancpanel which has retained jurisdictionover this case and briefing was completed in April 2010. Plaintiffs are now waiting for oral argument to bescheduled by the en banc panel. 
In State of Alaska v. Norton, theState of Alaska filed a lawsuit in the
District of Columbia challenging theU.S. Department of the Interior’s finalrule implementing the mandate in theprior subsistence case, John v. United
States. That prior NARF case estab-
lished that the United States must protect subsistence uses of fisheries in navigable waters where the UnitedStates possesses a reserved waterright. The State challenges theDepartment’s implementation of themandate by arguing that the reservedwaters doctrine requires a quantifica-tion of waters necessary to fulfill specific purposes. Katie John, theplaintiff in John v. United States, filed
a motion for limited intervention forpurposes of filing a motion to dismissfor failure to join an indispensableparty. The United States filed a motionto transfer venue to Alaska.  The judgeentered an Order in 2005 transferringthe case to the District of Alaska. Thecase was then consolidated with John
v. Norton, the case discussed below.
The issues in the two cases were bifur-cated for briefing with the State’s claimsaddressed first. The district courtentered an Order upholding theagency’s rule-making process identifyingnavigable waters in Alaska that fallwithin federal jurisdiction for purposesof the subsistence priority containedin the Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act (ANILCA).
In 2005, Katie John, represented by
NARF, filed a lawsuit in the U.S.District Court for the District of Alaskachallenging the Secretaries’ final ruleimplementing the prior Katie Johnmandate as being too restrictive in itsscope. Katie John’s complaint allegesthat the Federal agencies should haveincluded Alaska Native allotments aspublic lands and further that the federal government’s interest in waterextends upstream and downstreamfrom the Conservation Units estab-lished under ANILCA. The State ofAlaska intervened and challenged the regulations as illegally extendingfederal jurisdiction to state waters. InSeptember 2009, the Court entered anorder upholding the agency’s final ruleas reasonable. While rejecting KatieJohn’s claim that the agency had aduty to identify all of its federallyreserved water rights in upstream anddownstream waters, the court statedthat the agency could do so at somefuture time if necessary to full the purposes of the reserve. The case wasappealed to the U.S. Court of Appealsfor the Ninth Circuit.  NARF filed thereply brief in October 2010.
Native American Rights Fund
Page 25
NARF’s 40th Anniversary Pow Wow.Native American Rights Fund
Page 27Although basic human rights are
considered a universal and inalienableentitlement, Native Americans face anongoing threat of having their rightsundermined by the United States government, states, and others whoseek to limit these rights. Under thepriority of the 
promotion of human
rights, NARF strives to enforce and
strengthen laws which are designed toprotect the rights of Native Americansto practice their traditional religion, to use their own language, and toenjoy their culture. NARF also workswith Tribes to ensure the welfare oftheir children. In the internationalarena, NARF is active in efforts tonegotiate declarations on the rights ofindigenous peoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation
that holds Native communities andcultures together, religious freedom isa NARF priority issue. 
The Native American Rights Fund
established a working group of Indianorganizations and tribal leaders toaddress government intervention inthe lives of Native people who workwith or use eagle feathers in traditionalways.  Since time-immemorial, theeagle and other raptor birds havebeen an integral part and intrinsic tothe traditions, culture and religion ofmany tribes, pre-dating U.S. coloniza-tion.  The U.S. Fish and Wildlife (FWS)and other federal law enforcementagencies had been conducting raids,confiscations and interrogations 
on many Indian reservations and Pow-wow events, in at least 14 statesof the western United States under what purportedly is referred to as an“Eagle Feather Sting Operation.”
The immediate purpose of these
investigations by the FWS was toaddress the illicit sale of eagles andeagle parts and the poaching ofeagles.  However, the impact of theseinvestigations has awakened fear thatthe U.S. government is once againencroaching upon tribal culture andreligious practices, to the point wherethe tribal culture and religion may beforced underground once again. 
The working group met with the
FWS and the Department of Justice(DOJ) in 2009 to express tribal con-cerns about raids that were conductedby the FWS, FBI and other lawenforcement officials who seizedfeathers and demanded documenta-tion. Under federal law, only Nativepeople can possess eagle feathersthrough gifts or inheritance, or from agovernment-run repository near
Denver which issues permits specifically for individual birds orparts, generally after lengthy waits.
As a result of this meeting, FWS and
DOJ pledged to take action regardingtheir lack of effective outreach andeducation to tribes on policiesregarding the possession, use, gifting
and crafting of eagle feathers andother endangered birds.  FWS proposedthe development of a Tribal AdvisoryGroup to work out long term solutionsto the issues that tribes raised. 
The National Congress of American
Indians (NCAI) adopted a resolutionsupporting the establishment of aTribal Advisory Group to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in order toprovide consultation on the policies,regulations, and procedures for theacquisition, possession, gifting, craftingand use of eagles and other migratorybirds by tribal members.  It was alsoresolved that NARF shall serve as acentral clearinghouse for the cases
THEPROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
continued on the following page“The aspirations it affirms – including the respect 
for the institutions and rich cultures of Native peoples –
are one we must always seek to fulfill... 
But I want to be clear, what matters far more than
words – what matters far more than any resolution or
declaration –  are actions to match those words... That's
the standard I expect my administration to be held to.” 
— President Barack Obama – on the 
U.N. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
NARF Executive Director John Echohawk and
former NARF attorney David Getches, 1970's.appertaining to the “Eagle Feather
Sting Operation” being conducted bythe U.S. Fish & Wildlife and other federal law enforcement agencies. 
NARF and NCAI have continued
meetings with U.S. Fish and Wildlifeand other federal law enforcementagencies to discuss and seek solutionsas to the effects and impacts of eaglefeather confiscations and to discussthe drafting of an all inclusive bill to"fix" the gap between current law andadministrative policies, regulationsand procedures.
Legal work continues on a number
of Native American Graves Protectionand Repatriation (NAGPRA) imple-mentation issues.  NARF continued adecade long effort as a member of theColorado Commission of Indian Affairsto work out agreements and protocols
with the Colorado State HistoricalSociety for the repatriation and reburialof hundreds of Native Americanhuman remains, both culturally affili-ated and unaffiliated. Part of the workalso involved the development of aprotocol for the future identificationand disposition of Native Americanremains disturbed on state or privatelands, which specifies a process forconsultation with interested tribes andfor the reburial on site of thoseremains whenever possible. 
NARF has also continued its 
representation of the Native AmericanChurch of North America in addressingissues concerning the sacramental useof peyote in their ceremonies.Civil and Cultural Rights
NARF filed a lawsuit, Nick v. Bethel
and State of Alaska, in federal court
alleging that Alaska (through its agentsthe Lieutenant Governor and theDivision of Elections, among others)had violated the Voting Rights Act(VRA) by failing to provide languageassistance to the thousands of Yup`ikspeaking voters in the Bethel CensusArea. The first claim was under Section203 of the VRA, which requires thatjurisdictions covered by the Act provide oral and written assistancesufficient to enable the voter to cast ameaningful ballot. While the languagescovered (meaning those for which theState has to provide assistance) variesstatewide to correspond to the numberof people who speak that language, inthe Bethel Census Area, the coveredlanguage is Yup`ik. However, as thecomplaint alleged, there is little to nooral language assistance provided andabsolutely no written assistance pro-vided to the Yup`ik voter. The secondclaim was under Section 208 of theVRA which provides that a voter whoneeds help reading and writing maybring anyone they like into the votingbooth to help them cast a ballot. 
The complaint was filed in June
2007 and in July 2008 the DistrictCourt  issued a Preliminary Injunctionordering the State to provide compre-hensive language assistance in time for the 2008 August primary andNovember general elections. This reliefincluded providing written ballots inthe Yup’ik language, publicizing allelection notices and information inYup’ik, and creation of a newstatewide position to oversee NativeAnnual Report 2010
Page 28
Former NARF employees Mary Hanewall, Marilyn Pourier and Mary Lu Prosser, 1980's.language assistance. Additionally, the
State must report to the Court beforeand after each election that they havetaken these steps. 
The Plaintiffs settled with the City of
Bethel in 2009 and settled with theState in January 2010. The compre-hensive agreement includes translationand interpretation assistance for allYup’ik speaking voters throughout theregistration and voting process. Thecourt has retained jurisdiction to oversee the State’s compliance withthe settlement agreement. NARF monitored the State’s compliance with the settlement agreement for the2010 election cycle.
From the embryonic days of our
Nation, Indian tribes have long strug-gled against the assimilationist policiesinstituted by the United States whichsought to destroy tribal cultures byremoving Native American childrenfrom their tribes and families.  As anexample, the federal governmentfailed to protect Indian children frommisguided and insensitive child welfarepractices by state human service agen-cies, which resulted in the unwarrantedremoval of Indian children from theirfamilies and tribes and placement ofthose children in non-Indian homes.Statistical and anecdotal informationshow that Indian children who growup in non-Indian settings becomespiritual and cultural orphans. Theydo not entirely fit into the culture inwhich they are raised and yearnthroughout their life for the family andtribal culture denied them as children.Many Native children raised in non-Native homes experience identityproblems, drug addiction, alcoholism,incarceration and, most disturbing,
suicide.
In order to address these problems
facing tribes as a result of the loss oftheir children, the Indian ChildWelfare Act (ICWA) was enacted byCongress in 1978. It established mini-mum federal jurisdictional, proceduraland substantive standards aimed toachieve the dual purposes of protectingthe right of an Indian child to live withan Indian family and to stabilize andfoster continued tribal existence. Sincethat time, there has been misinterpre-tations and, in some cases, outrightrefusal to follow the intent of the lawby state agencies and courts. 
The United States Supreme Court
declined to hear the State of Alaska’sappeal in the case of Hogan v. Kaltag
Tribal Council, thus effectively ending
the case and clearly reinforcing therule that tribal courts have authority toinitiate and fully adjudicate children'scases. The Kaltag Tribal Council hadtaken emergency custody of one of itsmember children due to allegations ofabuse and neglect and, after conductinghearings and finding a suitable home,it terminated the rights of the birthparents and issued an order of adop-tion to the adoptive parents. Kaltagthen notified the State of AlaskaBureau of Vital Statistics about theadoption and requested a new birthcertificate reflecting the names of theadoptive parents and the new lastname of the child. The State refused,claiming that it did not owe full faithand credit to the decision of the KaltagTribal Court because Kaltag did not havejurisdiction to initiate the case at all.
In the fall of 2006, NARF filed alawsuit on behalf of the Kaltag Tribal
Council and the adoptive parents toenforce the full faith and credit provi-sion of IWCA. In February 2008, theUnited States District Court rejectedthe State's claims, holding that Tribeshave jurisdiction to adjudicate adop-tions and child-in-need-of-aid (CINA)type cases over their member childrenand that the Tribal Court's decisionsare entitled to full faith and credit bythe State. In a detailed and thoughtfulopinion, the Court reaffirmed what theUnited States Supreme Court stated inthe Holyfield case that the IWCA created“concurrent but presumptively tribaljurisdiction in the case of children notliving on a reservation.” The Courtalso noted that denying tribal jurisdic-tion in CINA-type cases would leaveTribes "powerless to help children intheir own villages at the most criticaltime." The Court's decision was thensummarily affirmed by the NinthCircuit Court of Appeals. This casereaffirms the rule that when Tribesadjudicate domestic matters of theirown member children, whether it is asimple voluntary adoption or a CINA-type case, their decisions are entitledto full faith and credit.
In another Alaska ICWA case, the
Villages of Tanana, Nulato, Akiak,Kalskag, Lower Kalskag and Kenaitzealong with two individuals filed a complaint against the State of Alaska,Attorney General and various stateagencies challenging the policy adoptedby the Attorney General of Alaska thatstate courts have exclusive jurisdictionover child custody proceedings involving
Native American Rights Fund
Page 29continued on the following pageAlaska Native children and that tribes
in Alaska do not have concurrentjurisdiction to hear children’s casesunless (1) the child’s tribe has suc-cessfully petitioned the Department of Interior to reassume exclusive orconcurrent jurisdiction under theICWA, or (2) a state superior courthas transferred jurisdiction of thechild’s case to a tribal court in accor-dance with law.  The Plaintiffs’ seek adeclaration that Tribes have inherentjurisdiction to initiate children’s pro-ceedings without first filing a petitionto reassume jurisdiction under ICWA.In 2007 Alaska state district courtissued an opinion in the Tribes’ favorrejecting all of the State’s arguments.After extensive briefing on the form ofrelief, judgment was entered. The caseis now on appeal before the AlaskaSupreme Court. Oral argument washeard in December 2009, and a decision is pending. 
International Recognition
of Indigenous Rights
The development of international
laws and standards to protect therights of indigenous peoples greatlybenefits Native American peoples.NARF and the National Congress ofAmerican Indians (NCAI) entered intoan attorney-client relationship severalyears ago for the purpose of workingin the international arena to protectindigenous rights.  
In 2007, the United Nations General
Assembly overwhelmingly adopted theDeclaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples. The Declarationrecognizes that Indigenous peopleshave important collective human rightsin a multitude of areas, including self-
determination, spirituality, and lands,territories and natural resources. The Declaration sets out minimumstandards for the treatment ofIndigenous peoples and can serve as the basis for the development ofcustomary international law. 
In December 2010, President
Obama made the historic announce-ment that the United States hasreversed its previous negative vote andnow endorses the United NationsDeclaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples. In announcingthe change in position, PresidentObama stated...“And as you know, inApril, we announced that we werereviewing our position on the U.N.Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples. And today I canannounce that the United States islending its support to this declaration.The aspirations it affirms – including
the respect for the institutions andrich cultures of Native peoples – areone we must always seek to fulfill...But I want to be clear, what mattersfar more than words – what mattersfar more than any resolution or decla-ration –  are actions to match thosewords... That’s the standard I expectmy administration to be held to.”
The United States is the last of four
countries who voted against theDeclaration in September 2007 toreverse its vote and to join the interna-tional chorus of voices recognizing the fundamental rights of indigenouspeoples.  Australia, Canada and NewZealand had previously reversed theiropposition to the Declaration.Indigenous peoples world-wide haveworked on the Declaration since thelate 1970s. NARF has worked on theDeclaration with its client NCAI sinceAnnual Report 2010
Page 30
NARF staff: Joanne Soklin, Legal Assistant; Eric Anderson, Legal Assistant; Jeff Schmidt,
Paralegal; Chrissy Johnson, Paralegal.1999. The Declaration affirms the 
collective human rights of Indigenouspeoples across a broad range of areasincluding self-determination, spirituality,land rights and rights to intellectualproperty. 
The adoption of the U.N.
Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples will have animpact on the Organization ofAmerican States (OAS) process. NARFalso represents NCAI in this process.It was agreed that the United Nations’Declaration would be used as thefoundation for the OAS document, inthat all the terms of the OAS documentwould be consistent with, or morefavorable to, Indigenous rights thanthe United Nations document. Thegroup further agreed that all the termswould be met through a consensusbased decision making process whichincludes the Indigenous representatives.The United States and Canadaexpressed their opposition to a docu-ment that would be consistent with theUnited Nations Declaration, againstwhich they had voted, but agreed theywould not oppose the process movingforward. Modest progress has beenmade at the negotiation sessions, however, it has been disappointingthat the United States is not actuallyparticipating. 
NARF represents the Pottawatomi
Nation of Canada, a band of descen-dants from the Historic PottawatomiNation, which from 1795 to 1833signed a series of treaties with theUnited States.  While the AmericanPottawatomi bands recovered the payment of annuities in the IndianClaims Commission (ICC), theCanadian Pottawatomi members could
not bring a claim in the ICC.  In 1993,NARF brought suit on behalf of theCanadian Pottawatomi in the Court ofFederal Claims, and the partiesreached an agreement in principlewhich was approved by the Court in2000 and recommended to Congressin 2001.  Attempts to passCongressional legislation approving
the settlement agreement has stalledsince 2002.  NARF continues to workwith Senator Daniel Inouye to onceagain re-introduce a settlement bill inthe 112th Congress.
Native American Rights Fund
Page 31
Bryce Wildcat, former NARF employee.Contained within the unique trust
relationship between the United Statesand Indian nations is the inherent dutyfor all levels of government to recog-nize and responsibly enforce the manylaws and regulations applicable toIndian peoples and the trust duties towhich those give rise.  Because suchlaws impact virtually every aspect oftribal life, NARF maintains its involve-ment in the legal matters pertaining toaccountability of governments to
Native Americans. 
The Cobell v. Salazar case was filed
in 1996 in the U.S. District Court forthe District of Columbia by NARF andprivate co-counsel, on behalf ofapproximately 300,000 past and present individual Indian trust benefi-ciaries. The individual Indian moneyaccount holders (plaintiffs) seek a fullaccounting of their trust assets for theentire period that such assets havebeen held in trust – since 1887.Trustees, without exception, have aduty to provide accurate and completestatement of accounts to each benefi-ciary at regular intervals and a complete and accurate accountingupon demand. Yet, the United Statesgovernment as trustee has never provided an accounting to individualIndian trust beneficiaries. It has neverprovided beneficiaries accurate andcomplete statement of accounts. Inaddition, the Cobell plaintiffs seek that
their account balances be corrected,restated and, where appropriate, distributed to the correct beneficiaryin the correct amount. Finally, theCobell plaintiffs seek reform of the trust management and accounting
system.
In December 2010, President
Obama signed into law a settlement of$1.5 billion to be paid to the 300,000individual Indian money account hold-ers with another $1.9 billion madeavailable to pay individual Indians whowant to sell their small fractionatedinterests in their trust lands to the federal government to be turned overto their Tribes.  The total $3.4 billionin settlement funds will be paid out ifthe federal district court approves the settlement.  The federal districtcourt is beginning its proceedings todetermine whether it will approve thesettlement. 
NARF is no longer involved in the
Cobell case because of its involvement
in the tribal trust fund mismanage-ment case. With the Cobell case fully
staffed by private co-counsel and manytribes requesting legal representationto initiate litigation in 2006 over fed-eral mismanagement of tribal trustaccounts, NARF filed Nez Perce Tribe
v. Salazar.
NARF represents forty-two plaintiffs
– the Nez Perce Tribe; the MescaleroApache Tribe; the Tule River IndianTribe; the Hualapai Tribe; the Yakama
Nation; the Klamath Tribes; the YurokTribe; the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe;the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma; theSac and Fox Nation; the Santee SiouxTribe of Nebraska; the Tlingit andHaida Indian Tribes of Alaska; AleutCommunity of St. Paul Island; BadRiver Band of Lake Superior ChippewaIndians; Bois Forte Band of Chippewa;Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indiansof Colusa Rancheria; ConfederatedSalish & Kootenai Tribes; ConfederatedTribes of Siletz Indians; GrandTraverse Band of Ottawa andChippewa Indians; Kaibab PaiuteTribe; Kenaitze Indian Tribe; KickapooTribe in Kansas; Lac Courte OreillesBand of Ojibwe; Lac Du FlambeauBand of Lake Superior Chippewa;Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe; MinnesotaChippewa Tribe; Native Village of Atka;Noocksack Indian Tribe; Prairie IslandIndian Community; Pueblo of Zia;Qawalangin Tribe; Rincon LuisenoBand of Indians; Samish IndianNation; San Luis Rey Indian WaterAuthority; Sault Ste. Marie Tribe ofChippewa; Shoalwater Bay Tribe;Skokomish Tribe; Spirit Lake DakotahNation; Spokane Tribe; Summit Lake
THEACCOUNTABILITY OF GOVERNMENTS
“We have a whole country that we feel a responsibility
for and whatever those legal needs are, we’re going 
to be there because oftentimes if we’re not there, nobody’s
going to be there. So that’s our job, that’s what we do 
and it keeps me going.”  
— John Echohawk, NARF Executive Director)Annual Report 2010
Page 32Native American Rights Fund
Page 33Paiute Tribe; Tulalip Tribes; and the
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, in an actionin the federal district court for theDistrict of Columbia seeking full andcomplete accountings of their trustfunds. Such accountings never have been provided by the federal government which is the trustee forthe funds.
Pending before the Court is the 
government's motion to dismiss theaction for lack of jurisdiction, whichthe Tribes have opposed. A ruling onthat is expected at any time.  In themeantime, NARF has been workingwith appointees of President Obamaon his campaign promise to resolveequitably all Indian trust fund mismanagement litigation against the federal government by beginning settlement negotiations in this caseand the other tribal trust fund mismanagement cases.  Since April2010, NARF attorneys, along with theattorneys for 34 other Tribes litigatingtrust accounting and mismanagementclaims, have had several in-person settlement negotiations meetings hosted by the President’s appointees in Washington, D.C. 
In a separate U.S. Court of Federal
Claims action, NARF represents theTurtle Mountain Chippewa, ChippewaCree, White Earth Band of MinnesotaChippewa, and Little Shell ChippewaTribes in this case against the federalgovernment for misaccounting andmismanagement of their tribal trustfund, the Pembina Judgment Fund(PJF), since the inception of the fundin 1964. In 2006 the Tribes defeatedthe United States’ motion to have thecase dismissed.Since 2007 the parties have been
trying to resolve the Tribes’ claims primarily through alternative disputeresolution proceedings before a Settlement Judge of the Court.  In August 2009 the parties reachedagreement at least for settlement negotiations on the population of“baseline” (non-investment) transactions in the PJF. They are nowproceeding to analyze the govern-ment’s investment management of thePJF.  An in-person ADR settlementnegotiations session was held inMarch 2010, at the U.S. Court ofFederal Claims in Washington, D.C.This was the first negotiations sessionattended by representatives of thePembina clients.  The parties havebeen preparing for the next in-personnegotiations session, which likely willbe in April 2011. 
NARF has started working with the
Boarding School Healing Project ofthe Seventh Generation Fund, theAmerican Indian Law Clinic at theUniversity of Colorado Law School,and the Human Rights Project at theUniversity of Wyoming School of Lawto convene a symposium of 30-35invited individuals active and/or expertin the issue of Indian BoardingSchools to craft a strategy to secure ameaningful apology and resources tosupport healing for individuals, com-munities and tribes as a result of thedisastrous federal boarding schoolpolicy of the 19th and 20th Century.The purposes of this strategy includeeducation of the public as well asCongress and the White House, andtreatment for the ongoing effects ofthe historical trauma resulting fromthe deliberate policies of cultural
genocide and abuse of individual students that have resulted in ongoingtrauma to those individuals, theircommunities and tribes.
The Symposium will bring together
those individuals that have been active
in working on, researching, writing
about and producing media about theboarding school experience in theareas of social/psychological, health,cultural, legislative, legal, educational,media and funding.  The goal will beto produce an agreed upon strategy tocoordinate and/or support the effortsof individuals and organizations tosecure a meaningful apology and adequate resources to support locally
oriented and controlled programs for
healing individuals and communities
from the effects of trauma caused by
the federal boarding school policy.The Symposium will be held in thespring of 2011.
Lionel Bordeaux, former NARF Board mem-
ber, NARF’s 40th Anniversary.Annual Report 2010
Page 34The coordinated development of
Indian law and educating the publicabout Indian rights, laws and issuesis essential for the continued protec-tion of Indian rights.  This primarilyinvolves establishing favorable courtprecedents, distributing informationand law materials, encouraging andfostering Indian legal education, andforming alliances with Indian lawpractitioners and other Indian organi-zations. NARF has three ongoing proj-ects which are aimed at achieving thisgoal: the Many Paths to Peace Project;the National Indian Law Library; andthe Indian Law Support Center.
Many Paths to 
Peace Project
NARF is in the start up phase of a
new project, tentatively called the“Many Paths to Peace Project.”  Madepossible by a long-term anonymousgrant, the mission of the “Many Pathsto Peace Project” is to promote andsupport Native people in restoring sustainable peacemaking practices.This project provides NARF with anopportunity to support traditionalpeacemaking and community buildingpractices as an extension of Indianlaw and sovereign rights. 
Peacemaking is a community-
directed process to develop consensuson a conflict resolution plan thataddresses the concerns of all interestedparties. The peacemaking processuses traditional rituals such as thegroup circle, and traditional peace-maker such as from a traditional Clan,to involve the parties to a conflict,their supporters, and other elders and
interested community members.Within the circle, people can speakfrom the heart in a shared search forunderstanding of the conflict, andtogether identify the steps necessary toassist in healing all affected partiesand prevent future occurrences andconflicts.  NARF began program rollout in 2010 with support of the ManyPaths to Peace Advisory Committee,consisting of peacemaking experts andpractitioners.  NARF will focus its initial efforts on the creation of aclearinghouse, conducting needsassessment of peacemaker resources,and developing a sustainable businessmodel for the program.
The National Indian Law
Library 
The National Indian Law Library
(NILL) is the only law library in theUnited States devoted to Indian law.The library serves both NARF andmembers of the public. Since it wasstarted as a NARF project in 1972,NILL has collected nearly 9,000resource materials that relate to federalIndian and tribal law. The Library’sholdings include the largest collectionof tribal codes, ordinances, and 
constitutions; legal pleadings frommajor Indian cases; and often hard tofind reports and historical legal information. In addition to making itscatalog and extensive collection avail-able to the public, NILL provides reference and research assistancerelating to Indian law and tribal lawand its professional staff answers over 2,000 questions each year. Inaddition, the Library has created andmaintains a huge web site that pro-vides access to thousands of full-textsources to help the researcher.
The National Indian Law Library is
currently undergoing a new push toincrease the tribal law content avail-able at NILL and online through itsTribal Law Gateway. NILL’s Access toTribal Law Project (ATLP) currentlyhas over 230 tribes participating byproviding tribal codes, constitutionsand other tribal legal materials forNILL’s collection. In an effort to fosterincreased communications betweentribes and the library, NILL recentlysurveyed over ninety tribal judges,tribal leaders, law librarians, students,tribal members and other practitionersof Indian Law on the importance ofTHEDEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN LAW
“For 500 years, we have had 99 percent of what is written
about Indians slanted with a Eurocentric bias. Now we
are in the process of writing about ourselves and our
truth may be disconcerting to those who have had only
their truth to read about until now.” 
— Reuben SnakeNative American Rights Fund
Page 35having access to tribal law materials.
The last few months also saw the creation of the Access to Tribal LawProject Support Committee, composedof leaders in Indian law from acrossthe nation. The Support Committeeoversees the Project’s goal of providingreliable access to current tribal law,assists in recruiting new tribes to jointhe ATLP and encourages participatingtribes to provide updates.
NILL has recently debuted two new,
helpful features on its website to assistresearchers searching for tribal lawmaterials: a sleeker, consolidated version of the library’s Tribal LawGateway (www.narf.org/nill/triballaw/index.htm) and the Access to Tribal Law Project Homepage(www.narf.org/nill/atlp.htm). TheGateway now hosts the code and constitution of each tribe in one, easy-to-use location and is updatedfrequently. The ATLP Homepage pro-vides more information about triballaw access through NILL and guidestribes through the process of gettinginvolved with the project, step-by-step.For any tribal leaders or tribal attorneysinterested in learning more aboutAccess to Tribal Law at NILL or readyto add your tribe’s code and/or consti-tution to our growing collection, callJames Bryant at (303) 447-8760 ext.139 or email at jbryant@narf.org. 
Indian Law Support Center
Since 1972, NARF’s Indian Law
Support Center (ILSC) has served as anational support center on Indian lawand policy for the national Indianlegal services community and the 
32 basic field programs serving NativeAmerican clients.  NARF continues toperform Indian Law Support Centerduties by sending out regular mailoutsto Indian Legal Services programs,handling requests for assistance, andworking with Indian legal servicesprograms to secure a more stablefunding base from Congress. 
In 2000 Congress enacted the
Indian Tribal Justice and LegalAssistance Act which President Clintonsigned into law. The Act authorizes the Department of Justice to providesupplemental funding to Indian legalservices programs for their represen-tation of Indian people and tribeswhich fall below federal poverty guide-lines. Congress appropriated fundingin 2003 and 2004 under the Act andNARF and Indian Legal Services (ILS)programs worked with the Departmentof Justice to devise an allocationmethodology. Most of the grant fundswere contracted out to the Indianlegal services programs with a smallportion used to cover NARF adminis-trative costs. NARF continued to be actively involved with local ILS programs in the administration of thegrant and in developing training eventsto meet local program needs. Fundingfor calendar year 2006 was appropri-ated by Congress for the project.Funding via 2007, 2008 and 2009Congressional appropriations wasunsuccessful. 
In 2010, NARF and ILS secured 
a line item appropriation of $2.35million from Congress and againbegan dialogues with DOJ for getting
the money to the ILS programs.  NARFwas eventually successful in securingthe ILS funding. The ILSC has alsobeen administering with the NationalAssociation of Indian Legal Services(NAILS) the civil and criminal workundertaken by the 25 NAILS memberprograms. NARF also continues towork on continued funding in 2011and 2012.
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects,
NARF continued its participation innumerous conferences and meetingsof Indian and non-Indian organiza-tions in order to share its knowledgeand expertise in Indian law.  Duringthe past fiscal year, NARF attorneysand staff served in formal or informalspeaking and leadership capacities atnumerous Indian and Indian-relatedconferences and meetings such as theNational Congress of American IndiansExecutive Council, Midyear andAnnual Conventions and the FederalBar Association’s Indian LawConference.  NARF remains firmlycommitted to continuing its effort toshare the legal expertise which it possesses with these groups and indi-viduals working in support of Indianrights and to foster the recognition ofIndian rights in mainstream society.Annual Report 2010
Page 36Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS   $ 1,604,342
      1,321,750           10,000         528,580
  2,192,905
         351,278
           43,312
   $ 6,052,167    26.5% 
    21.8%
 0.2%   8.7%  
 36.3% 
 5.8% 
 0.7% 
    100%     $ 1,812,793
     1,198,941          10,000
      1,972,172      2,488,811
          (50,952)
26,283
    $ 7,458,048   24.3%
   16.1%
     0.1% 
 26.4%  33.4% 
   (0.7)% 
 0.4% 
 100%dollars percents
UNRESTRICTED SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
EXPENSE COMPARISONdollars percents
Legal Fees
dollars percents dollars percents2009
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program ServicesManagement and General
Fund Raising
     Total Support Services                         TOTALS $4,889,392
 178,529
 5,067,921
 770,152
 1,311,551
 2,081,703
 $ 7,149,624 68.4%  
   2.5%  
 70.9%  
 10.8%  
 18.3%  
  29.1%  
 100%   66.6% 
 3.4% 
   70.0%
 10.9%
 19.1%
 30.0%
 100%  $ 4,770,000
 246,948
         5,016,948
            779,843
          1,369,436
          2,149,279
     $ 7,166,2272010 2009
2010
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unqua lified opinion by the
accounting firm of BKD, LLP .  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office or at www.nar f.org.Based on our audited financial 
statements for the fiscal year endingSeptember 30, 2010, the Native AmericanRights Fund reports unrestricted revenuesof $6,052,167 against total expendituresof $7,149,624.  Total revenue and netassets at the end of the year came to$7,470,788 and $5,297,953, respectively.Due to presentation requirements of theaudited financial statements in terms ofrecognizing the timing of certain revenuesand expenses, they do not reflect the factthat, based on NARF’s internal reporting,expenses and other cash outlays exceeded
revenue resulting in a decrease of$1,014,049 to NARF’s reserve fund.When compared to fiscal year 2009: the decrease in Public Contributions isprimarily due to the continued economicconditions and decreases in bequestswhich can vary widely from one year tothe next.  The increase in TribalContributions is mostly attributed to thegenerous contribution from the YochaDehe Wintun Nation (a pledge of$1,500,000 over a three year period, with $500,000 recorded as unrestricted in 
fiscal year 2010).  The large decrease inFoundation Grants relates to the FordFoundation’s release of restrictions on the$1.3 million endowment in fiscal year2009.  There was a decline in activity forfee paying clients in fiscal year 2010.NARF’s Investments have improved in fiscal year 2010.
Unrestricted revenue and Expense
comparisons between fiscal year 2010and fiscal year 2009 are shown below.
2010 F INANCIAL REPORTNative American Rights Fund
Page 37NARF A CKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS : FISCAL YEAR2010
Tribes and Native Organizations
Akiak Native CommunityAmericans For Indian OpportunityCow Creek Band of Umpqua Indians of OregonCuryung Tribal CouncilLummi Commercial CompanyMississippi Band of Choctaw IndiansMuckleshoot Indian TribeNational Congress of American IndiansNative Hawaiian Legal CorporationNative Village of Fort YukonNez Perce TribeNome Eskimo CommunityPokagon Band of Potawatomi IndiansPonca Tribe of OklahomaSac and Fox NationSaginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of MichiganSan Manuel Band of Mission IndiansSan Pasqual Band of Mission IndiansScotts Valley Band of Pomo IndiansSeminole Tribe of FloridaSeven Cedars CasinoShakopee Mdewakanton Sioux CommunityConfederated Tribes of Siletz Indians of
Oregon
Sitka Tribe of AlaskaSycuan Band of Kumeyaay IndiansTulalip TribesWildhorse FoundationYocha Dehe Wintun Nation
Foundations, Corporations 
and Organizations
Ford FoundationOpen Society InstituteTzo'Nah Fund
AnonymousArches FoundationAria FoundationBay & Paul FoundationBassett FoundationBiedenharn FoundationEdward & Verna Gerbic Family FoundationEverett Philanthropic FundEvergreen FundFredericks, Peebles & Morgan LLPGorlitz Foundation, Ltd.Inge FoundationLeFort – Martin FundLutheran Community FoundationMaynes, Bradford, Shipps & SheftelPanaphil FoundationRMF FoundationStettenheim FoundationThe Susan and Ford Schumann FoundationUngar FoundationWhizin FoundationWinky Foundation
Corporate Matching Gifts – Currently,
more than 20 foundations and corporationsnationwide make matching gifts to NARF on aregular basis.  Employers match their employ-ees’ contributions sometimes doubling oreven tripling their donation. Please check withyour human resources office and request amatching gift form.
Adobe Systems Inc.
AIG Matching Grants ProgramDellDirect TV Matching Gift CenterEdison International
Fannie Mae Foundation Matching Gifts CenterG.E. FoundationHanson Bridgett LLPHewlett PackardH.P . CompanyIllinois Tool Works FoundationJohn Hancock Matching GiftsJustGive.orgMerrill Lynch & CompanyMicrosoft CorporationMorgan StanleyPepsico FoundationP .S.E.G.The David & Lucile Packard FoundationVisa GivingstationWellPoint Foundation, Associate Giving CampaignWells Fargo Community FoundationXcel Energy Foundation
Living Waters Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman Memorial FundJerome Davis Living Waters Endowment FundKathleen and Ruth Dooley Family FundEdward & Verna Gerbic Family FoundationSusan K. Griffiths Memorial FundThe Robert and Joy Hanson Leland
Endowment
Frank J. McCormick Family FundMarvin W. Pourier, Sr. & Donna M. Deans
Memorial Fund
Mary Lou Mosca-Ragona Memorial FundErnest L. Schusky EndowmentHelen & Sidney Ungar Memorial Endowment
Fund
We thank each and every one of our supporters for their commitment to the goals of NARF.  NARF’s success could not have been
achieved without the generosity of our many donors throughout the nation. NARF receives contributions from foundations, corpora tions,
religious organizations, tribes and Native organizations, bequests and trusts, benefactors, private donations, and in-kind cont ributions.
We gratefully acknowledge these gifts received for fiscal year 2010 (October 1, 2009 through September 30, 2010).
continued on following pageAnnual Report 2010
Page 38NARF A CKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS : FISCAL YEAR2010
Bequests and Trusts
Mary Helen BickleyMary CoatesMario A. ContiCarolyn W. FerridayRico GenhartDorothy JonesMary Louise JonesKazuo MatayoshiHelena Briggs MeltesenOlga Pylpow Revocable TrustLinda Sue PlumbAnn R. SchwartzJames TunnyJohn Vaupel, Jr.Richard & Nathalie Woodbury
Peta Uha Pipestone
Robert Friede
Peta Uha Turquoise
Barbara BastleJohn BevanTina  C. Peterson
Peta Uha Granite
Elizabeth CelioMr. & Mrs. Lyle DethlefsenMarion McCollom HamptonKarin HolserScott & Ricki KresanJames MarienthalEdith QuevedoFaith RoesselMathew SlaterMary ZerbyPeta Uha Flint
Roger & Camille AbelsonJerald AndersonDavid & Sharon BergmannRobert & Patricia BerryWilliam & Elsa BoycePeter BronerMark CookeHarvey DennenbergThomas & Jane DunphyLucille EchohawkBert & Jo Ann EderDaren & Amy EilertBrad EngdahlLyman FlinnHerbert FloydAndrew & Audrey FranklinKay GerriMarcia GreenDuncan HaasCollier HandsSherrill HogenJoan LesterMr. & Mrs. William LymanHarry McAndrewMichael MeredithGene MillerShirley MiollaBrent & Marilyn MinneyJeanne Morrel-FranklinCassandra NaylorFrannie OatesClaude & Noelle PonceletEsther Hayward RivinusGeorge & Jo Rainie RodgersPeter SheldonMary SpragueWalter StockJay StonerBridget Stroud
Margaret VerbleDavid Winston
Peta Uha Obsidian
James & Louise ArnoldNorval BhendraAnne DeMuthAnn EllisAnne EvansJudy Fair-SpauldingJack FletcherRaymond HoneywellBrenda JonesYvonne LeMelleD. Michael McBrideDonald McKinleyJulie MontanaBarbara MusicusAllan OlsonAlfred SchwendtnerGene SmithGilbert TauckMargaret TravisJanice Warner
Circle of Life – Catches Bear &
Judy Adams, Rodney Addison,Gloria Adkinson, Dale Armitage,Maxwell Barnard, BarbaraBeasley, Diane Ben Ari, RoyBenson, Sandra Berger, BobbyBitner, Betty Blumenkamp,Charles Bowers, Dale Brand,William Brown, Gloria Burgess,Patricia Burnet, ThomasCampbell, Lawrence Candel,Arthur Carter, Robert Carter,Mary Casmus, Carter Castle, EdChasteen, Paul Clifton, CharlesCole, Janet Congero, Judith Day,Harvey Dennenberg, LyleDethlefsen, Gary Dickerhoof,Starr Dormann, Patricia Duval,Noelle Edwards, Allison Emerson,
Judy Fair-Spaulding, James Fee,Debra Frazier, Jan Freeman, LyleFunderburk, Suzanne Gartz,Lawrence Geller, DeborahGhoreyeb, Estela Goldsmith,Louise Gomer Bangel, ArlineGoodrich, Bernard Gordon, GeneGrabau, Jean Gundlach, MerrillHakim, Michael Hall, MargaretHartnett, Theodora Haughton,Patricia Heidelberger, KarinHolser, Charles Holtzer, AlfredHoose, Judith Horton, VeronicaIfill, Elizabeth Johnson, VusamaKariba, Emily Kirk, Betty Kleczy,Margo Kochruthe, EllyneKrakower - Rice, Edward Kriege,James Langharst, SharonLaughlin, Ingrid Leblanc, JamesLehnerer, Frank Loveland,Richard Luers, Rima Lurie,Suzanne MacDonald, PatriciaMarks-Greenfield, MarionMcCollom Hampton, JosephMcNamara, Stanley Metzger,Peter & Betty Meyer, GaryMontgomery, Leila Moore, JeanneMorrel-Franklin, Jeanne Moskal,Shirley Norton, Marc Pearce,Moses Peter, Randall Petersen,Denise Pfalzer, Rose Pilcarsky,Thelma Populus Gordon, B.Powell, Horace Raines, Robert &Mary Resnik, Maureen Ripley,Barbara Roberts, AndreaRobinsong, June Rosenthal, KeithRoss, William Rozier, MarySacher, B. Sampson, PeterSchmidt, LaRoy Seaver, MichaelSeeley, Charlotte Selver, KateySimetra, Charles Smith, KirkSperry, Carolyn Staby, HerbertStewart, James & Patricia Straus,Michael & Carol Sullivan, LouisTabois, Valeria Tenyak, CharlotteThompson, M. Turek, John Tyler,Rene' Vivo', William Wade, TedWeitz, Robert & Mary Wellman,Roger Welsch, Gary White, KarenWilliams-Fast Horse, MarcelWingate, David Yeoman, WayneZengel.Native American Rights Fund
Page 39NARF Employee Endowment Giving -  Jonathan Briggs, Rose Cuny,
Kim Gottschalk, David Gover, Richard Guest, Carly Hare, HeatherKendall-Miller, Melody McCoy, Steve Moore, Christine Pereira, RayRamirez, Don Wharton
Native Ways Federation – The Native Ways Federation (Native Ways)
is unique in that it is the only workplace giving program in the UnitedStates to directly serve Native nonprofits that assist Native peoples andcommunities in Indian Country. Native Ways is comprised of sevennational Native nonprofit organizations that serve Indian Country: theAmerican Indian College Fund, the American Indian Science andEngineering Society, American Indian Youth Running Strong, theAssociation on American Indian Affairs, First Nations DevelopmentInstitute, the National Indian Child Welfare Association, and the NativeAmerican Rights Fund. NARF’s share of those campaign contributionsin fiscal year 2010 is $1,410.  Native Ways exists to build a brighterfuture for Native People by strengthening the circle of giving in IndianCountry. 
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee – Lucille A. Echohawk,
Thomas W. Fredericks, David Getches, Ava Hamilton, Jeanne Whiteing,Charles Wilkinson.
Federated Workplace Campaigns
Thank you to the thousands of federal, state, municipal and private sector employees throughout the country who through their payrolldeduction plans contributed $90,408 in fiscal year 2010.
Show Your Support in NARF’s programs –  NARF receives contri-
butions from foundations, corporations, religious organizations, tribesand Native organizations, bequests and trusts, benefactors, privatedonations, and in-kind contributions. Below are descriptions of NARF’sdonor programs and additional ways you can get involved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the Lakota (Sioux) language
means firekeeper. One that honors tribal members who made a solemncommitment to ensure that the sacred flame, source of light, heat andenergy for his people, always be kept burning. Like the firekeepers ofold, members of the Peta Uha Council can demonstrate constancy andvigilance by helping to ensure that the critical work of the NativeAmerican Rights Fund continues to move ever forward.  For benefitsassociated with each level of Peta Uha membership, please contact ourDevelopment Department, 303.447.8760. 
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce word meaning equal 
justice.  Tsanáhwit Circle members provide a regular source of incometo NARF by pledging and making monthly contributions at any level ofyour choice. You may sign up to receive monthly pledge reminders inthe mail or your credit card may be billed automatically.Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han is the Lakota Sioux word trans-
lated as giveaway.  Otu’han is a memorial and honoring gift programmodeled after the tradition of the Indian giveaway in which items ofvalue are gathered over a long period of time to be given away in honorof birthdays, marriages, anniversaries, and in memory of a departedloved one.
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life are donors who provide a lasting
legacy to the Native American Rights Fund by including NARF in estateplanning or deferred gifts. The circle is an important symbol to NativeAmericans representing unity, strength and the eternal continuity oflife. These lasting gifts help ensure the future of NARF and our Indianclients nationwide.
Endowments – NARF has two established endowments, the 21st
Century Endowment and the Living Waters Endowment. The 21stCentury Endowment is a permanent fund in which the principal isinvested and interest income is used for NARF’s programs. This endow-ment is designed to provide a permanent, steady income that can support the ever-increasing costs of providing legal representation toour tribal clients.  The Living Waters Endowment directly funds the 21stCentury Endowment. It allows donors to honor friends and loved onesby making an endowment gift of $10,000 or more.  By designating agift to either endowment, you can be sure that your contribution willcontinue to generate annual funds in perpetuity. Endowment supportersare recognized on a special wall plaque displayed at NARF. Supporterswill also receive a memorial piece for their home and be acknowl-edged in NARF’s annual report.
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of America’s Charities,
a national workplace giving federation. Giving through your workplaceis as easy as checking off NARF’s box on the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payroll deduction.NARF is also a member of Community Shares of Colorado (CSC), member #5037.
Matching Gifts – Currently, more than 20 foundations and corpora-
tions nationwide make matching gifts to NARF on a regular basis.Employers match their employees’ contributions sometimes doublingor even tripling their donation. Please check with your humanresources office and request a matching gift form.
E-Action – Sign up for our e-action network by providing NARF with
your email address . This is a great way to get periodic case updates,calls-to-action, special events information, invitations and other activities. Your e-mail address is confidential and we will not share itwith any outside sources.  For further information about any of the programs or services, please contact NARF’s Development Departmentat 303-447-8760.  Thank you.
SHOW YOURSUPPORT IN NARF’ S PROGRAMSAnnual Report 2010
Page 40CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation Management CommitteeAttorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Litigation ManagementCommittee/Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Litigation Management CommitteeAttorney
Carly Hare (Pawnee/Yankton Sioux)
Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Secretary/Editor/Technical Writer
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE STAFF
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Amy Bowers (Yurok) – Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk – AttorneyDavid Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw)
Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Attorney
Steven C. Moore – AttorneyMark Tilden (Navajo) – Attorney
Donald R. Wharton – AttorneyEric Anderson Legal AssistantRose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Carly Hare (Pawnee/Yankton Sioux)
Development Director
Chrissy Johnson – ParalegalMichael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Mireille Martinez
Development Projects Manager
Katrina Mora (Oglala Lakota)
Office Services Assistant
Christine Pereira
Systems Administrator/Webmaster
Donald M. Ragona
(Mattinecock/Oglala Lakota)Director of Planned Giving
Ray Ramirez
Editor/Technical Writer/PublicRelations
Jennifer Redbone 
(Apache/Comanche/ Kiowa)Development Assistant
Clela Rorex
Law Office Administrator
Jeff Schmidt – ParalegalJoanne Soklin – Legal AssistantDebbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo)
ControllerJennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
Accountant
NATIONAL INDIAN LAW LIBRARY
David SeldenLibrarian
James Bryant
Princeton University Reach Out 56-81 Fellow 
ANCHORAGE OFFICE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan)
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Attorney
Erin Dougherty
Skadden Fellow Attorney
Jonathan Briggs
Legal Administrative Assistant
WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE STAFF
Richard GuestAttorney
Colby Duren
Legal AssistantNARF S TAFF
The “Native American Rights Fund Statement on
Environmental Sustainability.”
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe, unsustainable 
and catastrophic climate change that adversely impacts the lives of people andecosystems worldwide. Native Americans are especially vulnerable and are experiencing disproportionate negative impacts on their cultures, health and foodsystems. In response, the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is committed toenvironmental sustainability through its mission, work and organizational values.Native Americans and other indigenous peoples have a long tradition of livingsustainably with the natural world by understanding the importance of preservingnatural resources and respecting the interdependence of all living things. NARF embraces this tradition through its work and by instituting sustainableoffice practices that reduce our negative impact on our climate and environment.NARF is engaged in environmental work and has established a Green OfficeCommittee whose responsibility is to lead and coordinate staff participation in establishing and implementing policies and procedures to minimize waste,reduce energy consumption and pollution and create a healthful work environment.”1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760 • www.narf.org