1NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
ANNUAL REPORT 2005
CONTENTS
Introduction .................................................................................................................. .......................... page 2
Executive Director’s Report .................................................................................................... ................ page 3
Chairman’s Message ............................................................................................................. ................... page 4
The Board of Directors ........................................................................................................ .................. page 6
The National Support Committee ................................................................................................ .......... page 7
The Preservation of Tribal Existence .......................................................................................... .......... page 8
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources .................................................................................... .... page 14
MAJOR ACTIVITIES 2005 - NARF CASE MAP .................................................................................... page 22
The Promotion of Human Rights ................................................................................................. ....... page 24
The Accountability of Governments ............................................................................................. ..... page 31
The Development of Indian Law ................................................................................................. ....... page 35
Treasurer’s Report ............................................................................................................ .................... page 37
Contributors .................................................................................................................. ........................ page 38
NARF Staff ..................................................................................................................... ......................... page 44
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760http://www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund420 L Street, Suite 505Anchorage, Alaska 99501907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1712 N Street, NWWashington, D.C. 20036202-785-4166In this Annual Report we have chosen to honor our relatives “the animal nations
”and in turn we honor the connectedness of all
things. The animal nations taught us the lessons of observationand how to live through and by this connectedness. Throughthese observations we learned how to formulate our relationshipwith the natural world and the human family. The animal nationstaught us these lessons through story and example. We wereshown how to respect life and all that it provides for us. NARFthanks you for all that you do to help us ensure that this sacredbalance continues.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District of Columbia.NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code. Contributions to NARF are taxdeductible.  The Internal Revenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “privatefoundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.  NARFwas founded in 1970 and incorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.2Fiscal year 2005 saw the Native American
Rights Fund (NARF), the nationalIndian legal defense fund, completeits thirty-fifth year of advocacy inIndian country.  NARF continuedto address the need in Indiancountry for creative legal assis-tance to enable Indian tribes, assovereign governments, to regaincontrol over their resources andtheir destiny.  NARF assisted tribesin protecting human health and envi-ronmental integrity for Indian peopleand on Indian lands; guided tribes in exercising more control over their most preciousresource, their children, through improvement ofIndian education and tribal societies; helped tribesto develop and improve their infrastructures and provide more responsive governments; and,supported tribes in their unwavering fight to insuretheir rights to practice their religious beliefs andprotect their cultures for generations to come.
NARF’s efforts could not exist without the contribution
of the thousands of individuals who have offeredtheir knowledge, courage, and vision 
to help guide NARF on its quest.  Of
equal importance, NARF’s financial
contributors have graciously 
provided the resources to 
make these efforts possible.
Contributors such as the Ford
Foundation have been with
NARF since its inception. 
The Rockefeller Foundation, the
General Service Foundation, 
the John D. & Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation, and the W. K. Kellogg
Foundation have also made consistent 
contributions over the years.  Federal funding fromthe Administration for Native Americans enablesNARF to carry on its social development efforts inIndian country.  Finally, the effects of NARF’s workare reflective in the financial contributions by agrowing number of tribal governments.  United,these financial, moral, and intellectual gifts providethe framework for NARF to fulfill its mission: the securing of sovereignty and right to self-determination to which all Native American peoplesare entitled. INTRODUCTIONNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF’s PrioritiesOne of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s firstSteering Committee was to develop priorities thatwould guide the Native American Rights Fund in itsmission to preserve and enforce the legal rights ofNative Americans.  The Committee developed five
priorities that continue to lead NARF today:• Preservation of tribal existence• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native
Americans
• Development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issues
Under the priority of the preservation of tribal 
existence, NARF works to construct the foundations
that are necessary to empower tribes so that theycan continue to live according to their Native 
traditions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insuretheir independence on reservations and to protecttheir sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European conquest 
and colonization of North America, Indian tribesexperienced a steady diminishment of their landbase to a mere 2.3 percent of its original size.Currently, there are approximately 55 million acresof Indian-controlled land in the continental UnitedStates and about 44 million acres of Native-ownedland in Alaska.  An adequate land base and controlover natural resources are central components ofeconomic self-sufficiency and self-determination,and as such, are vital to the very existence of tribes.Thus, much of NARF’s work involves the protection
of tribal natural resources.3Although basic human rights are considered a 
universal and inalienable entitlement, NativeAmericans face an ongoing threat of having theirrights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states, and others who seek to limit theserights. Under the priority of the promotion of
human rights, NARF strives to enforce and
strengthen laws which are designed to protect therights of Native Americans to practice their traditional religion, to use their own language, andto enjoy their culture.
Contained within the unique trust relationship
between the United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for all levels of government torecognize and responsibly enforce the many lawsand regulations applicable to Indian peoples.
Because such laws impact virtually every aspect oftribal life, NARF maintains its involvement in thelegal matters pertaining to accountability of 
governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law 
and educating the public about Indian rights, laws,and issues is essential for the continued protection
of Indian rights.  This primarily involves establishingfavorable court precedents, distributing informationand law materials, encouraging and fosteringIndian legal education, and forming alliances with Indian law practitioners and other Indianorganizations.ANNUAL REPORT 2005
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ’SREPORT
The Native American Rights Fund observed its 35thanniversary in 2005 and is honored to have playeda significant role in the progress that NativeAmericans have made over the last 35 years.  Wecontinued our program of providing legal adviceand assistance on many of the most pressing Nativelegal issues across the country and achieved somevery significant results during the year.
NARF assisted the Gwich’in Steering Committee
once again in their efforts to protect the ArcticNational Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) in Alaska from oil development and successfully worked with acoalition of environmental groups to stop theCongress from approving oil drilling in ANWR.7,000 Gwich’in people live on or near the migratoryroute of the Porcupine caribou herd and rely on thecaribou for food, clothing, tools and a source ofrespect and spiritual guidance. The calving groundsof the caribou lie inside ANWR and will be disturbed by any oil drilling.
In South Dakota v. United States , NARF assisted the
Lower Brule Sioux Tribe against the State of SouthDakota’s challenge to the authority of the UnitedStates to take land into trust for the Tribe under theIndian Reorganization Act of 1934.  South Dakotaargued that Secretary of
Interior lacks authority toplace land into trust fortribes because the Act is an unconstitutionaldelegation of legislativeauthority from theCongress. A federalappeals court rejectedthe argument.
NARF assisted the Nez
Perce Tribe of Idaho inapproving a Congressionalsettlement of its waterrights claims in the SnakeRiver and its tributaries that have been pending formany years.  By accepting the settlement, the Tribewill receive 50,000 acre-feet of water for on-reser-vation uses; instream flows on almost 200 Tribalpriority streams to be held by the State of Idaho;use rights to 600 springs on federal lands in theTribe’s 1863 ceded area; over 11,000 acres of on-reservation federal lands transferred to theTribe; and $96 million in three separate funds forTribal drinking water and sewer projects, waterdevelopment projects, and other Tribal projects
John E. Echohawk 4including cultural preservation and fishery habitat
improvements.
The United States Supreme Court denied review in
Wyoming Sawmills, Inc. V. United States andMedicine Wheel Coalition where a private timber
company unsuccessfully challenged the legality ofthe U.S. Forest Service’s Historic Preservation Planfor managing the Sacred Medicine Wheel inWyoming, an area sacred to many tribes, arguingthat the Plan was an unconstitutional establishmentof religion. NARF represented the NationalCongress of American Indians as amicus curiae inthe case supporting the constitutionality of the Plan.
In the Cobell v. Norton individual Indian trust fund
mismanagement case, the Senate Indian AffairsCommittee and the House Resources Committee settrust reform and settlement of the Cobell case as apriority.  The leadership of the Senate Indian AffairsCommittee introduced a bill that called for a settle-ment fund in the billions of dollars but did notspecify a number for the historical accountingclaim.  The courts have ruled that the federal government is in breach of trust for mismanage-ment of approximately 500,000 current and pastIndian trust accounts and must provide a legalaccounting. As co-counsel in the case, NARF isseeking a fair settlement of the case which has beenin litigation nearly ten years.In 2002, NARF, the Native Hawaiian Legal
Corporation and private counsel secured a courtruling for the Pele Defense Fund recognizing therights of Native Hawaiians to hunt, gather and worship on the Wao Kele’o Puna rainforest on theBig Island of Hawaii as part of traditional and customary rights recognized in the Hawaii StateConstitution.  In 2005, with NARF’s assistance, theTrust for Public Lands and the Office of HawaiianAffairs secured an appraisal of the property and thepurchase of these lands from a private party for thebenefit of Native Hawaiians became a reality.Native Hawaiians for centuries have consistentlyused the property for traditional hunting, gatheringand religious purposes and will continue to do sowithout interference.
These victories and accomplishments by NARF on
behalf of Native Americans and many, many moreover the past 35 years were made possible by thefinancial assistance of our donors and supporters.We thank all of you for your help and hope thatyou realize how much you have contributed to theprogress that Native Americans have achieved withNARF’s assistance.  We also hope that your supportwill continue as we continue our legal advocacyefforts on many of the most pressing issues facingNative Americans today. 
John E. Echohawk , Executive Director
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
CHAIRMAN ’SMESSAGE
Greetings from Pueblo Country.  On behalf of the
Board of Directors I welcome you to the NativeAmerican Rights Fund.  I am John Gonzales of SanIldefonso Pueblo, New Mexico.  I thank you for theprivilege of serving as Chairman and would like touse this opportunity to share with you one the mostimportant challenges facing NARF today. 
In 2005 the Native American Rights Fund celebrated
its 35th Anniversary of defending the sovereign andhuman rights of Native American Tribes and indi-viduals on important issues of water and fishingrights, authority to exercise civil and criminal jurisdiction and in protecting environmental and
treaty rights.  Over the past 35 years NARF success-fully undertook crucial legal battles, but it is nowfacing increasing financial challenges. My appeal toyou is to support the Native American Rights Fund. 
It has been within our lifetime that we as Native
People have witnessed Tribes that have achievedtremendous economic success.  These Tribes facenew challenges in developing and directing chari-table and philanthropic giving that enhances andsustains cultural, social and economic visions fortheir communities and their neighbors.  Yet, as is5often the case, the media chooses to focus on
Tribes who are caught in the lobbying web ofunscrupulous consultants and fails to recognizehow Tribes are utilizing their financial resources tosupport many worthwhile causes such as HurricaneKatrina relief efforts throughout the Southeasternstates.
The hard work of NARF is often within the court-
rooms, law libraries and in meeting with Tribes,Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and individualsto discuss cases or pending action directly affectinghuman and sovereign rights. It is a common misunderstanding, that NARF is supported by feesfrom clients which is not the case at all.  NARF is anon-profit organization that survives financially onthe donations and contributions of philanthropicgroups and on the generosity of Tribes, individualsand limited federal grants.  
Tribes across Indian Country must step in to 
contribute financially to NARF to ensure its surviv-ability.  NARF is at a critical stage in its history andwithout the support from Indian Country NARF’scontinued work may be in jeopardy, which is sovitally important to protecting and defending theexistence of Tribal Nations.  
For those Tribes who have contributed, our heart-
felt appreciation.  Your continued support is greatlyappreciated.  For Tribes who are in a position tosupport our efforts, now is the time to do so.Although one time donations are gladly accepted, it cannot sustain NARF as litigation and new casesare ongoing often for years. Please consider multipleyear financial commitments.  As NARF’s Chairmanand a former tribal leader, I am asking Tribes tocarve out a place in their annual budget a portionof their resources to go
to such a deserving organization that hasdone so much for IndianCountry. One only needsto flip through the pagesof this report to find outjust how worthy NARF isof your support.
What would it take for
Tribal philanthropy to bea major part of NARF’sannual operating budget?Is it tangible results to aparticular Tribe before itsTribal Council decides to support NARF? If so,NARF may never achieve financial independencethrough the generosity of Tribes.  It is the intangiblessuch as Supreme Court cases where the mostimpact is felt in Indian Country that NARF has beenmost effective.  Consequences of rulings cut acrossTribal boundaries no matter how large or small the Tribe.  Thus, the importance of sustaining anorganization such as NARF through Tribal supportis imperative. NARF is in dire need of your support.
As Chairman of the Board of Directors of NARF, my
term will be devoted to making NARF a financiallyindependent organization.  The task will be difficultto accomplish, but with your help this goal can be achieved.  I ask you to open your hearts andcome to the aid of this great organization.  IndianCountry can and must help its own. Won’t you do your part?
John Gonzales , 
Chairman
ANNUAL REPORT 2005
John Gonzales6The Native American Rights Fund has a governing
board composed of Native American leaders fromacross the country -- wise and distinguished peoplewho are respected by Native Americans nation-wide. Individual Board members are chosen based on their involvement and knowledge ofIndian issues and affairs, as well as their tribal affiliation, to ensure a comprehensive geographical 
representation. The NARF Board of Directors,whose members serve a maximum of six years,provide NARF with leadership and credibility, and the vision of its members is essential to NARF’s effectiveness in representing its NativeAmerican clients.BOARD OF DIRECTORSNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF’s Board of Directors: (Bottom row left to right) Lydia Olympic (Yupik/Aleut - Alaska); 
E. Ho’oipo Pa (past Chairwoman, Native Hawaiian - Hawaii); Elbridge Coochise (Hopi - Arizona) .
(Second row left to right) Delia Carlyle (Ak Chin Indian Community - Arizona); Woody Widmark (Sitka
Tribe - Alaska). (Top row left to right) John Gonzales (San Ildefonso Pueblo - New Mexico); Anthony
Pico(Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians - California); Kunani Nihipali (Native Hawaiian - Hawaii); Paul
Ninham (Oneida Nation of Wisconsin); Karlene Hunter (Oglala Lakota - South Dakota). (Not Pictured)
Jaime Barrientoz , Vice-Chairman (Grande Traverse Band of Ottawa & Chippewa Indians - Michigan);
Billy Frank (Nisqually Tribe - Washington); Jim Gray (Osage Nation - Oklahoma).7The National Support Committee (NSC) assists
NARF with its fund raising and public relationsefforts nationwide.  Some of the individuals on theCommittee are prominent in the field of business,entertainment and the arts.  Others are known
advocates for the rights of the underserved.  All ofthe 52 volunteers on the Committee are committedto upholding the rights of Native Americans.ANNUAL REPORT 2005
NATIONAL SUPPORT COMMITTEE
It is with great sadness that we say goodbye to ourNational Support Committee members who havepassed on. They have all served NARF long andwell and they will be missed. We send our heartfeltcondolences to the family and friends of Alvin 
M. Josephy, Jr., David Risling, Jr. (David Risling was an original NARF Board member), Walter S.Rosenberry, III, and Dennis Weaver.Owanah Anderson, Choctaw
Edward Asner Katrina McCormick Barnes John Bevan David BrubeckBen Nighthorse Campbell, Northern Cheyenne
Wallace Coffey, Comanche
Ada Deer, Menominee
Harvey A. DennenbergMichael J. Driver Richard DysartLucille A. Echohawk, Pawnee
Louise Erdrich, Turtle Mountain Chippewa
Jane FondaJames GarnerSy GombergCarol Hayward, Fond du Lac
Richard A. Hayward, Mashantucket Pequot
John Heller Emilie Heller-Rhys Alvin M. Josephy, Jr.Charles R. KlewinNancy  Klewin  Wilma Mankiller, Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma
Chris E. McNeil, Jr., Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala LakotaN. Scott Momaday, Kiowa
Clinton Pattea, Ft. McDowell Yavapai
Amado Peña, Jr., Yaqui/Chicano
David Risling, Jr., Hoopa
Pernell RobertsWalter S. Rosenberry, IIIMarc RudickPam RudickLeslie Marmon Silko, Laguna Pueblo
Connie Stevens Ernie Stevens, Jr., Wisconsin Onieida
Anthony L. Strong, Tlingit-Klukwan
Maria Tallchief, Osage
Andrew Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Studs TerkelTenaya Torres, Chiricahua Apache
Richard Trudell, Santee Sioux
Rebecca Tsosie, Pasqua Yaqui
Thomas TureenTzo-Nah, Shoshone Bannock
Aine UngarRt. Rev. William C. Wantland, Seminole
Dennis WeaverW. Richard West, Southern Cheyenne
Mary Wynne, Rosebud Sioux8NARF works to construct the foundations
that are necessary to empower tribesso that they can continue to liveaccording to their Native traditions,to enforce their treaty rights, toinsure their independence onreservations and to protect theirsovereignty.  Specifically, NARF’slegal representation centers onsovereignty and jurisdictionissues, federal recognition andrestoration of tribal status, and eco-nomic development.  Thus, the focus ofNARF’s work involves issues relating to thepreservation and enforcement of the status of tribesas sovereign governments. Tribal governments possess the power to regulate the internal affairs oftheir members as well as other activities within theirreservations.  Jurisdictional conflicts often arise withstates, the federal government, and others over tribal sovereignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The U.S. Constitution recognizes that Indian tribesare independent governmental entities with inherent authority over their members and territory.In treaties with the United States, Indian tribesceded millions of acres of land in exchange for theguarantee that the federal government would protect the tribes’ right to self-government.  Fromthe early 1800s to the 1980s, the Supreme Courtrepeatedly affirmed the fundamental principle thattribes retain inherent sovereignty over their internalaffairs. As many of the battles in Indian country arebeing fought in the courtroom, many judges, who lack an understanding of the fundamentalprinciples underlying federal Indian law and whoare unfamiliar with the practical challenges facingtribal governments, are making decisions thatthreaten the continued sovereign existence ofIndian tribes.  Perhaps the greatest threat to Indiantribes comes from the recent decisions of theUnited States Supreme Court.  In the past twodecades, Indian tribes have lost approximately 80%of their cases before the Supreme Court.  And theselosses have been severe.  The Court has in recentyears taken a very aggressive approach 
to eroding tribal sovereignty and 
jurisdiction.  At the same time, the
Court has been increasing state
jurisdiction over reservations
The Tribal Supreme Court
Project is part of the Tribal
Sovereignty Protection Initiative
and was launched in conjunction
with the National Congress of
American Indians (NCAI) in 2001.
The Project was created in response to
a series of United States Supreme Court
cases that negatively affected tribal sovereignty.The purpose of the Project is to promote greatercoordination and to improve strategy on litigationthat may affect the rights of all Indian tribes, and tothereby reverse – or at least reduce – the erosion oftribal jurisdiction by the Court.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is housed at
NARF’s office in Washington, D.C. and is staffed byone NARF attorney and support staff.  In an effortto foster greater coordination in advocacy, anAdvisory Board of tribal leaders, comprised of NCAIExecutive Committee members and other triballeaders willing to volunteer their time, also assiststhe Project. The Board’s role is to provide necessary political and tribal perspectives to thelegal and academic expertise.  The Project has alsoestablished a Working Group – a group of morethan 200 noted attorneys and academics fromaround the nation who participate in the Project astheir interest, time and resources allow.
To achieve the goals of the Tribal Supreme Court
Project, NARF monitors cases which appear to beheaded for the Supreme Court, and organizes, coordinates and contributes to a nation-wide Indianamicus brief writing network.  Also known as“friend of the court” briefs, amicus briefs allowthose not directly involved in litigation, but potentially impacted by the outcome, to provideinformation and arguments directly to the Court.By bringing together experienced Indian law 
THE PRESERVATION OF TRIBAL EXISTENCENATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND9practitioners and scholars to discuss and agree
upon a coordinated amicus brief writing strategy ineach case, NARF ensures that the most effectiveand focused arguments are made before the Courton behalf of Indian Country.   The Tribal SupremeCourt Project has already achieved measurable success.
Now in existence for just over four years, the Tribal
Supreme Court Project can look back to review its theory in practice.  Since 2001, the Project hasbeen involved in seven cases argued before theU.S. Supreme Court with four solid wins, two disappointing losses and one draw.  This winningpercentage is a vast improvement from thedeplorable win-loss record Indian tribes have suf-fered before the Court in the past two decades.And this winning record does not reflect a numberof cases where the Project has worked “behind thescenes” to ensure that victories won at the U.S.Circuit Courts of Appeal are denied discretionaryreview by the Supreme Court.  
In the most recent loss, the Supreme Court dealt
another blow to tribal sovereignty in the Wagnon
(formerly Richards) v. Kansas Prairie BandPotawatomi Nation case. The Supreme Court ruledthat the state could impose a tax on motor fuel sold
to a reservation gas station by non-Indian whole-salers. The Tribe imposes a tribal tax equal to thatof the state to build and maintain roads on thereservation. The Court focused on the incidence ofthe tax being on the non-Indian wholesalers anddid not apply the balancing test that considers theimpact of the tax on the Tribe. This decision couldhave dire consequences in the future for othertribes. In working on this case, the Tribal SupremeCourt Project worked closely with the attorneysrepresenting the Nation and attorneys fromthroughout Indian country, coordinating four tribalamicus briefs on behalf of NCAI, the IntertribalTransportation Alliance, the National Intertribal Tax Alliance, a group of Kansas tribes and over 30 individual Indian tribes. The Project also workedclosely with the Prairie Band in persuading the U.S.Solicitor General’s Office to support of the Tribe. 
In preparing for the October 2005 Term, the Tribal
Supreme Court Project evaluated the impact of theconfirmation of John G. Roberts as the new ChiefJustice of the United States. Before she withdrew,the Project was evaluating the qualifications andexperience of Harriet Miers, and also evaluatedSamuel A. Alito, Jr., as the new nominee to replace
ANNUAL REPORT 200510Justice Sandra Day O’Connor. The Project continues
to monitor numerous cases at various stages ofappeal within both state and federal courts, whiledirectly participating in the preparation of amicusbriefs in the U.S. Supreme Court and the U.S. CircuitCourts of Appeals. 
In the 1950s Congress experimented with terminating
the federally recognized status of Native Americantribes and forcing their assimilation under state law.This termination policy proved to be a disaster,compelling Congress decades later to restore federalrecognition to these tribes.  In turning the pageback to the 1950s, the Alaska Legislature has forseveral years engaged in litigation against theDepartment of the Interior and Alaska tribes to terminate the federally recognized tribal status ofAlaska Tribes.  The Alaska Legislature’s efforts havebeen actively supported by Alaska Senator TedStevens, who has directly urged Interior SecretaryGale Norton to reverse the Department’s recognitionof Alaska Tribes.  Pending the outcome of this litigation, Senator Stevens commenced a new campaign to undermine tribal sovereignty. 
This campaign has been undertaken under the
guise of “regionalization” of tribal funding sourcesand is being systematically carried out through riders to appropriations bills.  In 2003, legislativeriders to a consolidated spending bill eliminatedfunds to tribal courts and tribal law enforcementprograms in Alaska Native Villages, and authorizedthe establishment of a joint Federal-StateCommission to develop recommendations forbringing Alaska’s 233 tribes under a unified systemof government.  And again in 2004, the SenateAppropriations Committee (which was chaired bySenator Stevens) attached to an Indian HealthService spending bill a rider which makes perma-nent a previously temporary moratorium againstAlaska tribes operating local health care servicesunder the Indian Self Determination Act. The effectof these and similar measures, if enacted, would beto cut off the ability of Alaska Native Tribes to function by denying them the ability to provide forthe health, safety and welfare of their communities.
Senator Steven’s efforts were based on the assumption
or accusation that Alaska tribes are inefficient.However, recent GAO reports showed that Alaska
tribes were very efficient and accountable. A RuralJustice Commission report recommended that theState of Alaska needs to work closely with tribesand cooperate with tribal courts.  
Federal Recognition of Tribal Status
Achieving legal status as an Indian tribe is veryimportant to preserving tribal existence and self-government.  Some tribal groups do not have thisstatus because they have never been formally recognized as tribes by the federal government.NARF provides representation to those tribal groups who have a right to become federally recognized tribes.
NARF currently represents Indian communities who
have survived intact as identifiable Indian tribes butwho are not federally recognized.  These Indiantribes, for differing reasons, do not have a govern-NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND11ment-to-government relationship between them-
selves and the federal government.  Traditionally,federal recognition was accorded to a tribe throughtreaty, land set aside for a tribe, or by legislativemeans.  The majority of these NARF clients areseeking an administrative determination by theBureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) that they, in fact,have continued to exist as Indian tribes from thetime of significant white contact to the present dayand have continued to govern themselves and theirmembers.  NARF, therefore, prepares the necessaryhistorical, legal, and anthropological documentationto support a petition for acknowledgment. Formore than 100 years, these Indian communitieshave been denied the benefits of a formal relation-ship with the federal government.  Through theprocess of administrative acknowledgment, NARFis now trying to bridge that gap.
Federal recognition is an arduous process that takes
many years to complete.  Petitioning tribes mustprove that they have been identified by reliableexternal sources on a substantially continuous basisas an Indian entity; they must prove that they havemaintained a continuous community from historicaltimes to the present day; they must show that theyhave maintained political authority or influence ona substantially continuous basis from historicaltimes until the present day; they must prove thatcurrent tribal members, as a whole, descend from 
a historic tribe or tribes which amalgamated; theymust prove that their members are not mostlymembers of an already recognized tribe; and, theirmembers cannot be from groups which were terminated by legislation. This process requires the testimony of many experts and thorough documentation of each requirement.
The Shinnecock Indian Nation, located in
Southampton, New York, with NARF’s assistance,filed a petition for Federal recognition in 1998. Inresponse, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) sent aletter of technical assistance to the Nation thatpointed out alleged omissions or deficiencies in thepetition. Pursuant to the federal acknowledgmentregulations, the Nation filed a response to the letterin 2003 and the BIA placed the Nation’s petition onthe “Ready, Waiting for Active Consideration” list.The placement on the list is a milestone for theNation after years of hard work to fully documentthe petition. The Nation is well on its way to federal recognition.
In 1997, the BIA Branch of Acknowledgment and
Research (BAR) placed the Little Shell Tribe ofChippewa Indians of Montana’s federal recognitionpetition on active review status. In 2000, after many delays, the Assistant Secretary published a
ANNUAL REPORT 200512preliminary finding in favor of recognition.
Substantial work was done to strengthen the Tribe’spetition and the final submissions were made in2005. The Tribe has also secured representation fortheir efforts in seeking legislative recognition. 
Environmental Law and Policy Initiative
NARF has played a key role in the implementationof federal environmental law and policy that recog-nizes tribal governments as the primary regulatorsand enforcers of the federal environmental laws onIndian lands. NARF continued to work with tribes,the National Tribal Environmental Council andother Indian organizations to maintain the progressthat has been made with the EnvironmentalProtection Agency (EPA) and other federal agencies. With a representative on the Green Group, a coalition of national environmental leaders, NARFcontinues to coordinate with and educate the environmental community on the role of tribal governments in environmental law and policy.
In Alaska, NARF assists the Gwich’in Steering
Committee in their efforts to protect the ArcticNational Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) from oil develop-ment. The Gwich’in, which means ‘‘People of theCaribou’’, are the northernmost Indian nation livingacross northeast Alaska and northwest Canada.There are about 7,000 Gwich’in people who live onor near the migratory route of the Porcupine
Caribou Herd. For thousands of years, the Gwich’inhave relied on the caribou for food, clothing, tools,and a source of respect and spiritual guidance. Thecalving grounds of the Porcupine River caribouherd inside ANWR is considered sacred. TheGwich’in call it “Vadzaih googii vi dehk’it gwanlii”(The Sacred Place Where Life Begins). TheGwich’in will not journey into these sacred groundsfor hunting, even in times of great need or foodshortage. Oil development in ANWR would notonly harm the caribou and threaten the future ofthe Gwich’in people, but would also threaten morethan 180 species of birds, and numerous mammalsincluding polar bears, musk ox, wolves, wolverine,moose, Arctic and red foxes, black bears, brownbears, and the white Dall sheep. NARF successfullyworked with a coalition of environmental groupsand organizations to stop the U.S. Senate fromapproving oil drilling in ANWR in 2001 and 2002.Language was again introduced in the 2003Congress to allow for oil drilling in ANWR and wasonce again defeated in 2004. During the 2005Congressional sessions, drilling for oil in ANWRwas once again hotly debated in Congress as theSenate budget reconciliation bill language allowedfor drilling in ANWR and the House version did not,but it was defeated. It was then attached to thedefense spending bill and was once again defeated.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND13As the Administration has vowed to continue to
press for the passage of this bill, NARF will continueto assist the Gwich’in Steering Committee in theirefforts to stop the approval of oil development in ANWR. 
NARF, working with the Tribe’s Environmental
Health Technical Team (EHTT), has assisted theOglala Sioux Tribe (OST) of South Dakota in developing water-related environmental codes.NARF is working with the OST Department ofWater Maintenance and Conservation and the EHTTon the revision of the Tribe’s Ordinance for theProtection of the Oglala Sioux Rural Water SupplySystem and Other Public Water Systems Within thePine Ridge Indian Reservation [“Tap-in” ordinance],as well as a Solid Waste Management Code. The “Tap-in” ordinance, which was adopted by theTribal Council, will provide for the protection of the integrity of the pipeline which delivers drinking water to the public water systems on thereservation. NARF is working with the OSTDepartment of Water Maintenance andConservation to bring the final revisions to theTribal Council resulting from the creation of that
Department. A final Draft has been completed andwill go before the EHTT review and approval.
The Solid Waste Management Code will provide
enforceable standards and a fee structure for solidwaste collection and disposal of solid and hazardous waste. The EHTT has presented therespective codes to various communities on the Reservation for their review and comment. TheOST Solid Waste Team is developing the supportdocuments for the implementation of the Code;including the necessary forms, permits and modelapplications for the Department of WasteManagement. The Solid Waste Code was adoptedby the Tribal Council in 2005. The Tribe’sEnvironmental Protection Program has asked fordrafts of codes for the management of salvage vehicles and discarded automotive oil, as well asfor a regulatory agency to monitor the managementof solid waste. Drafts of these provisions have been provided to the Tribe’s EnvironmentalProtection Program.
ANNUAL REPORT 200514Throughout the process of European 
conquest and colonization of NorthAmerica, Indian tribes experienced asteady diminishment of their landbase to a mere 2.3 percent of itsoriginal size.  Currently, there areapproximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in thecontinental United States andabout 44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska.  An adequateland base and control over naturalresources are central components of economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, and as such, are vital to the veryexistence of tribes.
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal existence isdifficult to maintain.  NARF helps tribes establishownership and control over lands which are rightfully theirs.
NARF is working with the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe
against the State of South Dakota’s challenge to theUnited States’ decision to place approximately 91acres of land into trust for the Lower Brule SiouxTribe under Section 465 of the Indian ReorganizationAct. The State is alleging, among other things, that theSecretary lacks authority to place land into trustbecause Section 465 is an unconstitutional delegationof legislative authority. In an earlier proceedingregarding this same 91 acres of land, the EighthCircuit Court of Appeals did hold that Section 465was unconstitutional, but the U.S. Supreme Courtvacated that opinion and remanded to the Secretaryfor further reconsideration. The State challenged theSecretary’s reconsidered, and again favorable, decision to place the land in trust. In 2004, theFederal District Court upheld the Secretary’s decisionand was once again appealed to the Eighth CircuitCourt of Appeals. The Eighth Circuit issued a favor-able decision in 2005 upholding the constitutionalityof Section 465.  The Attorney General moved forrehearing and the Tribe, through NARF, filed an amicus brief opposing rehearing.NARF has been retained by the Eastern
Shoshone Tribe of the Wind River
Indian Reservation in Wyoming to
research the legal status of the
boundaries of their reservation.
In addition, NARF has been
asked to assist in researching
several other issues of impor-
tance to the Tribe.
Since 1981, NARF has represented
the Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texas
in their quest to secure compensation
for the loss of use of millions of acres of
fertile forest land they once occupied in southeastTexas.  In 2002, the United States Court of FederalClaims ruled in favor of the Alabama-CoushattaTribe of Eastern Texas in their breach-of-trust claimagainst the United States, holding the Governmentliable for the Tribe’s loss of use of over 2.85 millionacres of land between 1845 and 1954.  The Courtalso ruled that 5.5 million acres of aboriginal titlehas never been extinguished.  Negotiators for theUnited States and Tribe reached an agreement on theamount of damages for the loss of the land – $270 million – and the Court recommended the agreement to Congress in 2002. NARF, privatecounsel, and the Tribe are now working to garner Congressional approval for the payment 
of this amount under the Congressional reference procedure.
NARF represents the Pottawatomi Nation of
Canada, a band of descendants from the Historic Pottawatomi Nation, which from 1795 to 1833 signed a series of treaties with the United States.  These treaties provided for the payment of certain annuities, among other things.The ancestors of the present-day CanadianPottawatomi fled to Canada following the signing ofthe final treaty and were never paid their annuitiesas promised.  While the American Pottawatomibands recovered the payment of annuities in theIndian Claims Commission (ICC), the CanadianPottawatomi members could not bring a claim in the ICC.  
THE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCESNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND15In 1993, NARF brought suit on behalf of the
Canadian Pottawatomi in the Court of FederalClaims, by way of Congressional reference, to seekredress.  After years of fact-finding, discovery andbriefing in the case, the parties reached an agree-ment in principle which was approved by the Courtin 2000 and recommended to Congress in 2001.  In2002, Senator Inouye introduced a bill “For theRelief of the Pottawatomi Nation in Canada forSettlement of Certain Claims Against the UnitedStates.”  The bill was passed by unanimous consentin the Senate in 2002, but did not pass the Houseprior to the end of the session.  The bill was rein-troduced by Senator Inouye in 2003, was referredto the Senate Judiciary Committee, but did not passin 2004.  NARF continues to work with the SenateCommittee on Indian Affairs, the Senate JudiciaryCommittee and the House Resources Committee tosee this matter through to final resolution.
NARF represents the Native Village of Tuluksak in
Alaska in their quest to have the land owned by theVillage corporation transferred in fee simple to theVillage tribal council.  The Department of Interiorwould then be petitioned to place the land intotrust on behalf of the Village.  The Department ofthe Interior is in the process of revising regulationsgoverning the process of taking land into federal
trust for Native Americans.  NARF worked with theNCAI Tribal Leaders’ Task Force on Land Recovery,on behalf of Tuluksak, to develop comments to theproposed regulations and has been waiting for theSecretary of the Interior to issue final regulations.The Department of the Interior has decided to further postpone consideration of a new regulation,after an assessment of ongoing policy work, avail-able personnel and resources.  The Native Villageof Tuluksak has decided to pursue litigation toestablish the right of Alaska Tribes to petition theSecretary to place lands in trust.  Pleadings are inthe process of being drafted.
Water Rights
Establishing tribal rights to the use of water in thearid west continues to be a major NARF priority.The goal of NARF’s Indian water rights work is tosecure allocations of water for present and futureneeds for three Indian tribes represented by NARFand other western tribes generally. Under theprecedent established by the United States SupremeCourt in 1908 in Winters v. United States and 
confirmed in 1963 in Arizona v. California , Indian
tribes are entitled under federal law to sufficientwater for present and future needs, with a priority
ANNUAL REPORT 200516date at least as early as the establishment of their
reservations.  These tribal reserved water rights aresuperior to all state-recognized water rights createdafter the tribal priority date.  Such a date will inmost cases give tribes valuable senior water rightsin the water-short west.  Unfortunately, many tribeshave not utilized their reserved water rights andthese rights are unadjudicated or unquantified.  Themajor need in each case is to define or quantify theamount of water to which each tribe is entitledthrough litigation or settlement negotiations.  Tribesare generally able to claim water for present andfuture use of their practicably irrigable acreage,maintenance of treaty hunting and fishing rights,and municipal and industrial needs.
NARF represents the Nez Perce Tribe of Idaho in its
water rights claim in the Snake River BasinAdjudication (SRBA). The Nez Perce Tribe is locatedin northern Idaho near the confluence of the Snakeand Clearwater Rivers. The current reservationboundaries contain approximately 700,000 acres, orabout one-tenth of the original seven million acrereservation reserved in the Treaty of 1855 with the
United States. That treaty also reserved to the Tribeoff-reservation fishing rights at all “usual and accus-tomed” sites on and off the reservation. Subsequenttreaties and agreements reduced the size of thereservation, but expressly left intact the Tribe’s onand off-Reservation treaty fishing rights. Theserights are exercised by the Tribe's members at ceremonial, subsistence and commercial fisheries. 
The Nez Perce Tribe’s claims to water rights for
instream flows in the Snake River and its primarytributaries, the Salmon and Clearwater Rivers, tosprings on lands ceded by the Tribe in 1863, and toon-reservation consumptive uses of water, werefiled in the SRBA in 1993. The Nez Perce claimsdispute has been the biggest outstanding dispute inthe SRBA, which includes a legal inventory of about180,000 water rights claims in 38 of Idaho’s 44counties. The Tribe’s main claim is for sufficient in-stream flows to maintain its treaty rights to fishfor salmon and steelhead that migrate down theSnake River to the Columbia River and out to theocean before returning to spawn. 
In early 2005, the Nez Perce Tribal Executive
Committee (NPTEC) accepted the final terms of thewater rights claims in the State of Idaho’s SnakeRiver Basin Adjudication. By accepting the pro-posed settlement, the Nez Perce Tribe has agreedto: 50,000 acre feet of water decreed to the Tribe foron-reservation uses; instream flows decreed onalmost 200 Tribal priority streams to be held by theState of Idaho; 600 springs claims decreed on about6 million acres of Federal land in the Tribe’s 1863ceded area; over 11,000 acres of on-reservationBureau of Land Management land transferred to theTribe in trust; and, $96 million in three separatefunds, for Tribal drinking water and sewer projects,water development projects, in addition to variousTribal projects including cultural preservation andfishery habitat improvements.
NARF has represented the Nez Perce Tribe in Idaho
in the SRBA – both litigation and settlement phases– for over 16 years. Congress enacted the SnakeRiver Settlement Act of 2004 and President Bushsigned it into law the same year. The IdahoLegislature approved the agreement and theNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND17Governor signed the approval legislation in 2005.
The approval by NPTEC represented the final sign-off by the three sovereigns. The Idaho watercourt will now undertake the final approval of thesettlement and the entry of decrees to the waterrights for the Tribe.
This is a major accomplishment for the Nez Perce
Tribe and its members. This settlement representsthe merging of traditional Indian water rights settlement elements with other major environmentalissues confronting all of the people of Idaho. Itcould well be looked at by other states and tribesand federal land management agencies in the westseeking to sort out Indian water claims and otherchallenges presented by the federal EndangeredSpecies Act and the Clean Water Act. NARF willcontinue working with the Nez Perce Tribe tosecure final approval of the settlement by the SRBAwater court, and in the federal appropriationsprocess.
NARF represents the Klamath Tribes of Oregon
who hold reserved water rights in the KlamathRiver Basin to support their treaty hunting, fishingand gathering rights, as well as to satisfy the agricultural purposes of the Klamath Reservation.These reserved rights are currently being quantifiedin the context of a state-wide water adjudication inOregon. NARF represents the Klamath Tribes inasserting and defending their treaty-based water
rights in the adjudication, and prosecuting contestsagainst many junior water rights claims filed bynon-Indian water users.
NARF filed about 150 contests on behalf of the
Tribes against unsubstantiated private water rightclaims and actively prosecuted them for the pastfour years. During 2004 and 2005, in one of the largest contests, a four-week trial was held concerning water rights for the Bureau ofReclamation’s Klamath Project. A ruling on evidence issues allowed the introduction of NARF’sevidence and currently parties are preparing exten-sive post-trial briefs on the merits in this complexwater rights case. Adjudication of the Tribes’ waterrights claims became active and various briefingsand rulings on preliminary procedural issues werehad. The parties are currently in the summary judgment stage developing briefs to dispose oflegal issues.
NARF represents the Tule River Indian Tribe of
California in on-going negotiations to settle theTribe’s claims to reserved water rights on itsReservation. The Tule River Reservation is locatedin a mountainous region and is crossed by theSouth Fork of the Tule River. Flow from the river is abundant in the early spring, dropping off precipitously in the summer. With no reservoir andANNUAL REPORT 200518delivery facilities on the Reservation, water supply
for the Tribe’s growing domestic needs is severelylimited and water supply for significant irrigation isnonexistent. Without confirmation of its reservedwater rights, the Tribe will not be able to providefor its future water needs.
After legal and technical analysis of its water rights
claims, the Tribe decided to pursue a negotiatedsettlement of its water rights claims before engagingin litigation. Competing downstream users includea Ditch Company, riparians, and four irrigationcompanies. The Department of the Interior appointeda Federal Negotiation Team to assist the Tribe insettling its water rights claims. The Tribe’s goal is tonegotiate a settlement that will provide the Tribewith sufficient water to create a permanent sustain-able homeland for its people with no or minimaladverse impact on other water users. Settlementnegotiations among the Tribe, the United States,and non-tribal downstream users (the SettlingParties) have been in progress for several years.The Settling Parties have made great progresstoward reaching a water rights settlement agree-ment and continue to negotiate remaining issues. 
NARF is working with the Three Affiliated Tribes of
the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation’s Office ofEnvironmental Program, Tribal Reservation
Attorneys, and the Tribal Council to complete arevised application that has been pending beforeUSEPA Region 8 in Denver, Colorado since 1997.The application addresses the delegation to setwater quality standards for the surface water of theReservation.  USEPA recently responded to Tribalrequests to act on that application. The Tribes’Manager of Environmental Programs retained NARFto assist the Tribe in assuring that the application iscurrent, complete, and adequate to obtain delegation. 
NARF has also worked to address a major problem
in water rights settlements – the lack of federalfunding for settlements. To this end, NARF continuesto facilitate a favorable Indian water rights settle-ment policy in the Congress by working with ourstate and private partners in the Ad Hoc Group onIndian Reserved Water Rights, the WesternGovernors’ Association and the Western BusinessRoundtable. NARF participates in the Joint Federal-Tribal Water Funding Task Force in order to encourage the Administration to support fundingfor Indian water rights settlements.
Protection of Hunting and Fishing Rights in Alaska
The subsistence way of life is essential for the physical and cultural survival of Alaska Natives.
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND19Most of the two hundred small Native villages in
Alaska are located on or near the shores of a riveror a lake, or located on the coast of the NorthPacific or Arctic Ocean.  The proximity to water isno accident and reflects the dependence of Nativeson the harvest of fish stocks for sustenance and thebasis of their traditional way of life.  In many Nativevillages fresh meat, fish and produce are unavail-able except through the subsistence harvest.Annually, subsistence harvest amounts to less than10% of the total take of fish and game.
As important as Native hunting and fishing rights
are to Alaska Natives’ physical, economic, tradi-tional, and cultural existence, the State of Alaskahas been and continues to be reluctant to recognizethe importance of the subsistence way of life.  TheState views subsistence as nothing more than a takingof a natural resource, and as something that all citizens of the state should be entitled to engage inon an equal opportunity basis with little distinctionbetween commercial, sport and trophy hunting,and subsistence needs. 
NARF represents the Alaska Native Villages of Eyak,
Tatitlek, Chenega, Nanwalek, and Port Grahamseeking to establish nonexclusive aboriginal hunting and fishing rights to their traditional-useareas on the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) in theGulf of Alaska. The issue presented is whether thefive Chugach Villages may possess non-exclusive aboriginal hunting and fishing rights to waters on the OCS.  The lawsuit challenges theDepartment of Commerce’s Individual FishingQuota (IFQ) regulations for halibut and sable fishon the ground that they prohibit tribal membersfrom fishing within their traditional fishing groundswithout IFQ’s. In 1998, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that claims for aboriginal title,including exclusive hunting and fishing rights, onthe Outer Continental Shelf were barred by the federal paramountcy doctrine.  NARF argued thatthe paramountcy doctrine did not extinguish aboriginal title to the seabed and waters off Alaska because aboriginal title does not interferewith the federal government's ability to protect the nation or to regulate international trade. The Court, however, expressly reserved the question whether Native tribes might hold non-exclusive hunting and fishing rights.  
The question of whether the Villages have nonex-
clusive aboriginal fishing rights was remanded fordetermination by the District Court, which ruledagainst the Villages in 2002.  An appeal was filedby NARF to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals andoral argument was held in 2003. In 2004, the NinthCircuit en banc vacated the decision of the DistrictCourt and remanded for determination of whetherthe tribes can establish aboriginal rights in the traditional-use areas.  The District Court orderedthe parties to submit their views “as to how thecourt should proceed.”  NARF submitted a reporton behalf of the Villages requesting additionalbriefing on aboriginal use, to which the DistrictCourt agreed. The Chugach chose not to file amotion for summary judgment given the remainingfact disputes, but the government did submit one.After gathering updated evidence, the Chugachfiled their opposition in 2005. The government filedits reply, submitting with it a new expert witnessand eleven exhibits. Given the new evidence submitted, the Chugach have made a motion to thecourt asking for leave to file a sur-reply. Oral argu-
ANNUAL REPORT 200520ment on the motion for summary judgment should
take place in the summer of 2006. 
NARF is representing the Native Village of Venetie
Tribal Government, the Ninilchik TribalGovernment, and individuals as proposed intervenersin a case that was initially brought by the SafariClub, a sporting club, to challenge regulationspromulgated by the Secretaries of Interior andAgriculture implementing the subsistence preferenceestablished by the 1980 Alaska National InterestLands Conservation Act (ANILCA). ANILCA establishes a preference for customary and traditional uses of fish and wildlife by according apriority for the taking of fish and wildlife on federalpublic lands in Alaska for non-wasteful subsistenceuses by rural Alaska residents. The FederalSubsistence Board (FSB) has made over 180 deter-minations as to which areas or communities ofAlaska are rural and which are not, based on therecommendations of ten Regional AdvisoryCouncils (RACs).  The customary and traditional usedeterminations are critically important because eligibility to take a particular resource may then be limited to those residents of rural areas or 
communities so designated, and all other individualsmay be prohibited, in some manner, from takingthat resource based on the limitations.  The SafariClub challenged the validity of all 180 customaryand traditional use determinations under ANILCA,and challenged the composition of RACs as notadequately representing sport, recreational andcommercial interests.
NARF sought to intervene in the case on behalf of
its clients in order to defend the FSB’s subsistenceuse-determinations for their respective communitiesand to protect their entitlement to take fish andwildlife on federal public lands in Alaska.  NARFalso challenged a recent decision by the FSB toexpand RAC membership to include seats for sport,recreational and commercial interests.  The courtgranted the Tribe’s motion to intervene and issuedan order upholding the FSB’s customary and traditional use determinations and enjoining theFSB from implementing its new policy with respectto expanded RAC membership until a proper rule-making procedure is undertaken. Final rule-NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND21making expanding the RACs to accommodate a
quota for sport and commercial interests was issuedin 2004. The Court then lifted its stay and requesteda status report from the parties. Tribal intervenorsfiled their summary judgment motion (based on thenew record) in 2005. The Government and SafariClub filed their briefs in opposition, and the Plaintiffs filed their Joint Reply in late 2005. A decision is now pending.
In January 2005, the State of Alaska filed a lawsuit
in the District of Columbia challenging the final ruleimplementing the mandate in the prior subsistencecase, John v. United States . This prior NARF case
established that the United States must protect subsistence uses of fisheries in navigable waterswhere the United States possesses a reserved waterright. The State challenges the Secretaries’ imple-
mentation of the mandate by arguing that the
reserved waters doctrine requires a quantificationof waters necessary to fulfill specific purposes.Alaska Native subsistence user Katie John filed amotion for limited intervention for purposes of filing a motion to dismiss for failure to join an 
indispensable party. The United States filed amotion to transfer venue to Alaska. The courtentered an Order transferring the case to theDistrict of Alaska. The case was then consolidatedwith John v. Norton filed by Katie John.
Katie John had filed John v. Norton in the District of
Alaska challenging the Secretaries’ final rule imple-menting the prior Katie John mandate as being toorestrictive in its scope. Katie John’s complaintalleges that the Secretaries should have includedAlaska Native allotments as public lands and furtherthat the federal government’s interest in waterextends upstream and downstream from theConservation Units established under ANILCA. Thefederal government has moved for an extension oftime in which to file an answer. The Court enteredan order staying the case until September 2006 bywhich time the two cases should be consolidated.The Court has yet to schedule a status conferencein the consolidated cases.
ANNUAL REPORT 2005221718
19
20152425 23
27
2826
21
22 3635 3416
37
7
512
28
9
461 113
1014
13Alaska
HawaiiNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
MAJOR ACTIVITIES 2005
NARF C ASE MAP2332
3129
303321 Medicine Wheel National Historic
Landmark - Sacred Site (Wyoming)
22 Eastern Shoshone Tribe - Land Issue
(Wyoming)
23 Fort Peck Tribes -  Education
(Montana)
24 Chippewa-Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boys
Reservation - Trust Claims (Montana)
25 Little Shell Tribe - Recognition & Trust
Claim (Montana)
26 Fort Berthold Reservation - Education &
Water (North Dakota)
27 Turtle Mountain Reservation - Trust
Claim (North Dakota)
28 White Earth Band of Chippewa Indians -
Trust Claim (Minnesota)
29 NARF WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE30 Cobell v. Norton & Tribal Supreme Court
Project (Washington, D.C.)
31 Harjo et al v. Washington Redskin
Football - Cultural Rights (Washington,D.C.)
32 Northern Lakes Pottawatomi Nation -
Land Claim (Canada)
33 Shinnecock Indian Nation - Recognition
(New York)
34 Lower Brule Sioux Tribe - Trust Lands
(South Dakota)
35 Rosebud Sioux Tribe - Education &
Cultural Property Rights (South Dakota)
36 Oglala Sioux Tribe - Environmental
(South Dakota)
37 Alabama-Coushatta Tribe -  Land Claim
(Texas)
Draft Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples (International)1 NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE
2 Alaska Inter-Tribal Council v. Alaska
- Equal Protection (Alaska)
3 Curing v. Alaska - ICWA (Alaska)4 Katie John v. Norton - Subsistence
(Alaska)
5 English Only Initiative (Alaska)6 Native Village of Eyak, Tatitlek,
Chenega, Nanwalek, and PortGraham -  Subsistence & AboriginalTitle (Alaska)
7 Gwich’in Steering Committee -
Environmental/Subsistence(Alaska)
8 Native Village of Kiana - Education
(Alaska)
9 Native Village of Nulato - Education
(Alaska)
10 Ninilchick Tribe - Subsistence
(Alaska)
11 Native Village of Tuluksak - Trust
Lands (Alaska)
12 Native Village of Venetie -
Subsistence (Alaska)
13 Pele Defense Fund -  Aboriginal
Rights (Hawaii)
14 Rice v. Cayetano - Voting Rights
(Hawaii)
15 NARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
16 Nez Perce Tribe - Water Rights
(Idaho)
17 Klamath Tribes - Water Rights
(Oregon)
18 Bonnichsen v. United States
(“Kennewick Man case”) -Repatriation (Oregon)
19 Tule River Tribe - Water
(California)
20 Jicarilla Apache Tribe - Education
(New Mexico)United States of americaANNUAL REPORT 200524Although basic human rights are 
considered a universal and inalienableentitlement, Native Americans facean ongoing threat of having theirrights undermined by the UnitedStates government, states, andothers who seek to limit theserights.  NARF strives to enforceand strengthen laws which aredesigned to protect the rights ofNative Americans to practice theirtraditional religion, to use their ownlanguage, and to enjoy their culture.NARF also works with Tribes to improveeducation for and ensure the welfare of their children.  In the international arena, NARF is activein efforts to negotiate declarations on the rights ofindigenous peoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation that holds Nativecommunities and cultures together, religious free-dom is a NARF priority issue.  As a result, NARF hasutilized its resources to protect First Amendmentrights of Native American religious leaders, prisoners,and members of the Native American Church, andto assert tribal rights to repatriate burial remains.Since Native American religious freedom affectsbasic cultural survival of Indian tribes, NARFbelieves that American law and social policy mustprovide adequate legal protection.
NARF was a leading proponent of the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act(NAGPRA) which was signed into law in 1990.  TheAct requires federal agencies and private museumsthat receive federal funding to inventory their collections of Native American human remains andfunerary objects, notify the tribe of origin, andreturn the ancestral remains and funerary objectsupon request to the tribe.  It makes clear that Indiantribes have ownership of human remains and cultural items which are excavated or discoveredon federal or tribal land and that they alone havethe right to determine disposition of Indian humanremains and cultural remains discovered in theseareas.  The Act prohibits the trafficking of
Native American human remains and
cultural items where the items are
obtained in violation of the Act
and requires federal agencies and
private museums that receive
federal funds to create a 
summary of sacred objects in
their possession.  If a tribe can
prove a right of possession to
these objects then they must be
returned upon request of the tribe.
NARF continues to provide guidance to
tribes that are asserting NAGPRA claims.
NARF offered testimony in 2004 and 2005 before
the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs at anOversight Hearing on the implementation of theAmerican Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978concerning the manner in which the Act and followup legislation have been implemented in two mainareas, repatriation and the protection of sacredsites. On behalf of the Working Group on NativeAmerican Culturally Unidentifiable HumanRemains, NARF is working on legislation to amendNAGPRA to correct problems created by the NinthCircuit decision in the Bonnichsen case as well 
as providing comments on various proposed regulations and policies implementing NAGPRA.
NARF is part of a legal team working on an amici
curiae brief to be filed in the Spirit Cave repatriationlitigation captioned Fallon Paiute-Shoshone Tribe v.
United States Bureau of Land Management. NARF is
representing the National Congress of AmericanIndians, Morning Star Institute, Association ofAmerican Indian Affairs and the Medicine WheelCoalition of Sacred Sites in North America in thisimportant NAGPRA repatriation litigation. The briefsupports the Fallon Paiute-Shoshone Tribe’s effortsto repatriate the remains of their ancestor from theUnited States Bureau of Land Management. Thebrief will address the role of the NAGPRA ReviewCommittee, the standard in which BLM’s actions arereviewed and an evaluation of whether the BLMacted in an arbitrary and capricious manner. The
THE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTSNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND25brief will be filed in 2006 in the United States
District Court of Nevada. 
In addition to NAGPRA, NARF also played a key role
in the 1994 enactment of Public Law 103-344, whichexempts the religious use of peyote by Indians inbona fide traditional ceremonies from controlledsubstance laws of the federal and state governments.It also prohibits discrimination against Indians forsuch religious use of peyote, including the denial ofotherwise applicable benefits under public assis-tance programs.  The bill closed the door to gov-ernmental prohibition of  sacramental use of peyoteby Indians and effectively reversed a 1990 UnitedStates Supreme Court decision in Smith v. Oregon
that denied First Amendment protection to theNative American Church.
NARF is representing the Native American Church
of North America in the case O Centro Esprírita
Beneficiente União Do Vegetal (UDV-USA) v. Ashcroft.The UDV is a Christian religious organization duly formed under the laws of Brazil, with its head-quarters in Brasilia, Brazil.  The UDV-USA is theUnited States branch of the UDV whose principaloffices are in New Mexico. The UDV claims 
that the federal government is violating its constitutional right of equal protection by permitting Native American Church members topossess and use peyote for religious purposeswhile denying them the religious possession anduse of ayahuasca by UDV members. 
NARF and the Church assisted the United States
Department of Justice in defending current federallaw which protects the religious use of peyote byIndian Church members.  In 2002, the FederalDistrict Court in New Mexico rejected the UDV’sequal protection argument, but accepted its argument that it was protected under the ReligiousFreedom and Restoration Act (RFRA). The NACtook no position on the UDV’s RFRA claims againstthe United States.  The government appealed to theTenth Circuit Court of Appeals and the TenthCircuit affirmed in 2003 in favor of UDV’s RFRAclaim, but also rejected the UDV’s equal protectionclaims that threatened the NAC’s special statusunder federal law.  The government filed a petitionfor reconsideration and the Tenth Circuit Court ofAppeals en banc ruled in favor of the UDV. Oral
ANNUAL REPORT 200526were heard by the United States Supreme Court and
a decision is now pending.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth
Circuit, in 2004, affirmed a previous ruling by theUnited States District Court for the District ofWyoming regarding the legality of the United StatesForest Services Historic Preservation Plan for man-aging the Sacred Medicine Wheel in Wyoming. In Wyoming Sawmills, Inc. v. United States and
Medicine Wheel Coalition, a private timber company
in Wyoming challenged the legality of the UnitedStates Forest Service’s Historic Preservation Plan(HPP) for managing the Sacred Medicine Wheel onconstitutional (establishment of religion) and othergrounds. NARF first filed an amicus curiae brief inthe District Court on behalf of the NationalCongress of American Indians urging the Court touphold the Plan on statutory and constitutionalgrounds. The District Court did not address the constitutionality of the HPP because it found thatWyoming Sawmills lacked standing to raise a FirstAmendment Establishment Clause claim. WyomingSawmills appealed this decision to the FederalAppeals Court in Denver. The Appeals Court alsorejected Wyoming Sawmills First Amendment claim
for lack of standing, and affirmed the lower Courton federal statutory grounds.
The HPP recognizes explicitly that the cultural and
historic importance of the Medicine Wheel is anelement for many Native Americans religious traditions: “The purpose of this HPP is to ensurethat the Medicine Wheel and Medicine Mountainare managed in a manner that protects the integrityof the site as a sacred site and a nationally important traditional cultural property.” In 2005,Wyoming Sawmills filed its Petition for SupremeCourt Review. The U.S. Supreme Court denied cert
review, thereby ending the litigation.
The Medicine Wheel National Historic Landmark
was created in 1969 to preserve the MedicineWheel, a prehistoric stone circle that was constructedby the aboriginal peoples of the area. Archeologicalevidence indicates that human presence in the areagoes back for 7,500 years or more. The MedicineWheel is considered sacred to Native Americantribes indigenous to the area. The Medicine Wheelis located on Medicine Mountain in the BighornNational Forest in north central Wyoming.
Cultural Rights
While cultural rights are fundamental for everyhuman being, they are particularly important forNative Americans.  In the midst of the economic,political, social and other challenges they continueto face, traditional culture is a source of pride andstrength for Native Americans.
NARF, in conjunction with NCAI, is working with a
coalition of civil rights organizations under thedirection of the Leadership Conference on CivilRights (LCCR) to ensure that Congress reauthorizescertain remedial provisions within the Voting RightsAct (VRA) which are scheduled to expire in 2007.Section 4(b) of the VRA contains a formula definingwhich jurisdictions are subject to, or “covered” by,the special remedial provisions. Jurisdictions are“covered” if they used a “test or device” (e.g., literacytests; voting materials in English only) for votingand less than half of the voting age residents wereregistered or voting in the 1964, 1968 and 1972presidential elections. NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND27The remedial provisions include: (1) the language
assistance provision, §203 of the VRA, whichrequires certain states and local jurisdictions to provide voting materials in languages other thanEnglish, including Native American and AlaskaNative language; (2) the preclearance provision, §5 of the VRA, requires certain “covered” jurisdictionsto get approval prior to implementing any changesin their voting laws or procedures; and §§6-9 of theVRA which authorize the U.S. Attorney General toassign federal examiners and observers to certain“covered” jurisdictions to document and deter inappropriate conduct during elections. 
As part of this Project, NARF worked with Native
Vote 2004 to prepare a report, Native Vote 2004.
Published in 2005, this report documents the findings of the Native Vote Election Protectionefforts and identifies potential areas of voting rightslitigation in Indian country. NARF is currentlyworking with the Lawyers’ Committee for CivilRights Under the Law to evaluate potential §203 litigation in Alaska and has been contacted by theCivil Rights Division with the U.S. Department ofJustice in relation to other potential litigation. Alsoin 2005, NARF co-sponsored a national conference,Past and Prologue: The 40th AnniversaryConference Commemorating the Historic VotingRights Act of 1965, which included voting rights
experts and grassroots activists from around thecountry, including Indian country. 
In preparation for upcoming legislative hearings,
NARF prepared testimony and developed reports tobe included in the Congressional record. NARF, inconjunction with NCAI, provided written and oraltestimony at a hearing before the NationalCommission on the Voting Rights Act – Examining
the Degree of Racial Discrimination in Voting andthe Impact of the Voting Rights Act Since 1982: A Perspective From Indian Country – held in
September 2005, in Rapid City, South Dakota. Inaddition, NARF has participated in the preparationof two reports highlighting the status of the VotingRights Act in Indian Country covering the State ofSouth Dakota and the State of Alaska. We anticipatethat legislation will be introduced in April 2006,with committee hearings being scheduled shortlythereafter.In 1998, an “English Only” initiative was passed in
the State of Alaska.  The initiative was written invery broad terms and will have a major impactupon Alaska Natives.  Unlike other official Englishmeasures that are primarily symbolic, this measureprohibits the use of any language except English inall governmental functions and actions.  In responseto the initiative, NARF filed suit on behalf of twenty-seven Native individuals and organizations, challenging the constitutionality of the English Onlylaw.  In 1999, the Alaska Superior Court granted apreliminary injunction that enjoined the State ofAlaska from the operation and enforcement ofAlaska’s Official English Initiative.  Alaskans for aCommon Language sought and were allowed tointervene in 2000.  In 2002 the Alaska Superior
Court struck down the English-only law as a violation
of the free speech clause of the Alaska Constitution.The State of Alaska chose not to appeal, butAlaskans for a Common language filed an appeal to the Alaska Supreme Court.  Oral argument washeard in 2003 and NARF is now awaiting a decision.
NARF filed an amicus brief in the case of Harjo et
al v.Washington Redskin Football in the U.S. Court
of Appeals for the District of Columbia on behalf ofANNUAL REPORT 200528the National Congress of American Indians,
National Indian Educational Association, NationalIndian Youth Council, and the Tulsa IndianCoalition Against Racism in Sports in support of theIndian appellants. The brief argued that the federaltrademark for the football team should be cancelledbecause the use of the “Redskin” mark is raciallydisparaging in violation of federal trademark law. Adecision was rendered in 2005 holding that the casemay have been prematurely dismissed as to theyoungest Indian petitioner. The case was remandedto the district court to consider whether theyoungest Indian plaintiff, who was a year old whenthe Redskins trademarks were first registered,should be barred from bringing his claim becauseof delay in bringing the claim. NARF will continueto monitor this important case on remand. 
In 1978, the United States Congress enacted the
Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA).  The Act states asits purpose: “The Congress hereby declares that it isthe policy of this Nation to protect the best interestof Indian children and to promote the stability andsecurity of Indian tribes and families by the estab-lishment of minimum federal standards for theremoval of Indian children from their families andthe placement of such children in foster or adoptivehomes which will reflect the unique values ofIndian culture, and by providing for assistance toIndian tribes in the operation of child and familyprograms.”  The Act established substantive, proce-dural and jurisdictional protections for tribes andIndian families in cases of adoption, pre-adoptiveplacement, foster care placement, and terminationof parental rights proceedings involving Indianchildren.  Because these protections are challengedor may conflict with state law, policy or practice,there have been several hundred state and federalcourt decisions interpreting the Act.  Congress hasalso attempted to amend the Act to resolve concernsrelated to the enforcement of the Act.
Tribal courts, already understaffed, underfunded,
and lacking legal resources, are fighting an uphillbattle to fully implement the ICWA.  A thresholdobstacle to the success and implementation of theICWA is the fact that many tribes lack knowledge oftheir rights under the ICWA.  Tribes themselveshave acknowledged that there is an immediateneed for resources to enhance tribal court operations
in order to empower them to utilize ICWA.  Indiantribes, through their tribal courts, attorneys, andsocial workers, often respond to the receipt ofstatutory notice under the ICWA by intervening instate court proceedings to protect the interest oftheir children of the tribe.   Tribes have identifiedthat tribal courts and tribal officials need resourcesand assistance in intervening in such state courtproceedings and exercising their federal rightsunder the ICWA, such as moving the state court totransfer jurisdiction of the state court proceeding totribal court.  In addition, tribal court personnel andsocial workers currently lack the necessary knowl-edge and materials to fully exercise their rightsunder the ICWA.
To assist with this critical issue, the Administration
for Native Americans (HHS-ACF) has providedfunding to NARF to assist tribes in resolving theseissues through the development of an ICWAResource Guide that will address these issues andbenefit tribal courts and tribal social services programs.
In 2004, the Native American Rights Fund filed an
amicus brief on behalf of a number of Alaska Tribesin the Alaska Supreme Court in Curiung v. Alaska .
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND29The question presented in Curiung is whether 
federally recognized Tribes can bring suit underSection 1983 in state court on behalf of themselvesand their members to vindicate important statutoryrights under the ICWA and other federal and statelaws after the United States Supreme Court ruling inInyo County. Inyo County involved the core issue
of whether the Paiute Shoshone Indian Communitywas immune from execution of a state search warrant of tribal employment records issued inconnection with the investigation of potential off-reservation welfare fraud by certain unnamedtribal employees. The Tribe sought declaratory andinjunctive relief against the County and its officerson the ground that they had exceeded their jurisdiction because the warrant interfered with theTribe’s sovereign immunity and its right to self-government. The Tribe also sought compensatorydamages under Section 1983 for violation of theTribe’s rights. The Supreme Court held that Tribesare not persons for purposes of bringing Section1983 claims against a state for damages for infringe-ment of sovereign interests. In Curiung, however,
the amici tribes argue that Inyo County does not
preclude their Section 1983 claims because therights asserted are private rights that are groundedin statute. Oral argument took place in 2004 and weare now awaiting a decision.
In 2005, the Villages of Tanana, Nulato, Akiak,
Kalskag, Lower Kalskag and Kenaitze filed a complaint against the State of Alaska AttorneyGeneral and various state agencies challenging thepolicy adopted by the Attorney General stating thatstate courts have exclusive jurisdiction over childcustody proceedings involving Alaska Native children, and that Tribes in Alaska do not have concurrent jurisdiction to hear children’s casesunless the child’s tribe has successfully petitionedthe Department of Interior to reassume exclusive orconcurrent jurisdiction under the ICWA, or a statesuperior court has transferred jurisdiction of thechild’s case to a tribal court in accordance with 26 U.S.C.
Plaintiffs filed their opening brief for summary judg-
ment and the State filed a Petition for Review to theAlaska Supreme Court of the lower court’s decisionthat the case was ripe and should proceed on themerits.  The State also moved for a stay of the lower
court proceedings pending a decision by the AlaskaSupreme Court on the State’s Petition for Review.Such stay was granted and a decision on the State’sPetition from the Alaska Supreme Court is pending.
Education
From the founding of this country federal policyeffectively stripped Indian tribes of control over theeducation of their children. The federal govern-ment set up a boarding school system that removedmany Indian children from their families and communities. The government also contracted withChristian missionaries to educate and convertIndian children. The use of education as a meansto force assimilation of Indians continued as thesetwo education systems dissolved and werereplaced by public schools established on or nearreservations. Ninety percent of Indian children nowattend state public schools. The state public schoolsystems have also failed to honor and respect theculture and heritage of the Indian children that theyare serving. 
The disempowerment of tribes over education has
been devastating. In most tribal communities, formalschooling is resented and rejected. Tribal studentssuffer from generations of overall poor academicattendance, achievement, and attainment levels.Statistics show that when compared to other ethnic/race groups, Native American children arethe poorest academic performers; are the least likely to do well on assessment tests; are the leastlikely to enroll in advanced placement classes; andare the most likely to drop out.
Through a grant by the W.K. Kellogg Foundation,
NARF worked closely with six tribal communities –the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribe of the Fort PeckReservation in Montana, the Three Affiliated Tribesof the Fort Berthold Reservation in North Dakota,the Jicarilla Apache Nation in New Mexico, theNative Villages of Kiana and Nulato in Alaska, andthe Rosebud Sioux Tribe in South Dakota. NARFhas been able to assist these six Indian tribes increating a foundation for working collaborativelywith public school districts, states, and other parties.Partnerships were established; basic aggregate student data was gathered and analyzed; initial 
ANNUAL REPORT 200530collaborative strategies were determined; and, tribal
education codes and policy were developed andadopted. NARF’s client tribes are now on firmground for equal partnerships with school districtsand states in improving the education of tribal students. This remarkable progress solidifies ourbelief that partnerships and collaboration amongtribes and other key stakeholders in Indian educationare critical to effectuating needed change and toachieving the ultimate goal of improving the education of tribal students.
NARF is now seeking additional funding for a 
second project to improve education for AmericanIndian youth through community-based collaborativepartnerships. This project  is designed to assisttribes in moving to the next level of developing collaborative relationships with school districts andstates. NARF will provide legal and technical assistance to tribes, working collaboratively withschool districts and states to identify particular education challenges facing tribal children, to prioritize these challenges, to jointly plan tribal anddistrict responses to the challenges, and to implement the chosen action(s). 
There is great potential for change when communities
(including tribal governments, tribal departments ofeducation, school districts, individual schools, parents,and other service providers in the community)build coherence and strong collaborative relation-ships to focus on improving the education for community members. This collaborative approachis truly innovative in Indian education and NARFbelieves will ultimately result in systemic change inenvironments where formal education takes placeand within entities that historically worked inde-pendently of each other. Changes will occur incommunity education systems, including the tribalgovernments and schools, enabling them to worktogether to achieve greater student success in education. Community-based systems, whether tribal,state, or federal, will be united to improve Indianeducation by incorporating tribal knowledge andwisdom into the formal education of tribal students.
International Recognition of Indigenous Rights
The development of international laws and standards to protect the rights of indigenouspeoples can be beneficial to Native American 
people as well as other indigenous peoples aroundthe world. Native American tribes therefore need to be involved in these efforts and enlist the support of the United States since it is so influentialin international circles.
NARF and the National Congress of American
Indians entered into an attorney-client relationshipapproximately four years ago for the purpose of working in the international arena to protectindigenous rights. To date, this work has focusedon the Draft Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples being considered by theOrganization of American States (OAS). This docu-ment will be invaluable in establishing baselinerights for indigenous peoples in the WesternHemisphere. A caucus meeting was held inWashington, D.C. in 2005 to prepare for the nextdrafting session. The most recent drafting sessionwas held in Guatemala City in October 2005. The atmosphere between the states and indigenouspeoples was positive and during this session the provisions dealing with uncontacted peoplesand a large part of the labor law provisions were approved. These are the first provisions ever approved.
In addition, a strong document in this hemisphere
will bolster the process in the United Nations wherea Draft Declaration on the Rights of IndigenousPeoples is also being considered. Conversely, if theOAS document is adopted in weakened form, itmay be used to dilute the United Nations draft declaration, which has widespread indigenousapproval. 2004 was the last year of the WorkingGroup’s mandate. Drafting sessions conducted during2004 made sufficient progress so as to enable theWorking Group to ask the Human RightsCommission to extend the mandate to 2005. NARFand NCAI supported the request for an extension.The Human Rights Commission granted the extensionand additional drafting sessions were held in 2005.The session held in December was the most productive session ever, resulting in tentative adoptionof approximately 20 provisions and preambularparagraphs. This compares to two provisions tentatively adopted in the previous ten years.
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND31ANNUAL REPORT 2005
Contained within the unique trust 
relationship between the United Statesand Indian nations is the inherentduty for all levels of government torecognize and responsiblyenforce the many laws and regulations applicable to Indianpeoples.  Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect oftribal life, NARF maintains itsinvolvement in the legal matterspertaining to government accounta-bility to Native Americans. 
The Cobell v. Norton case was filed on June 30,
1996. It is brought on behalf of approximately500,000 past and present individual Indian trustbeneficiaries. The Courts have rendered over eightypublished decisions since the inception of this case. 
The individual Indian money account holders
(plaintiffs) seek a full accounting of their trust assetsfor the entire period that such assets have beenheld in trust – since 1887. Trustees, without exception,have a duty to provide accurate and complete statement of accounts to each beneficiary at regularintervals and a complete and accurate accountingupon demand. Yet, the United States has never provided an accounting to individual Indian trustbeneficiaries. It has never provided beneficiariesaccurate and complete statement of accounts. Inaddition, plaintiffs seek that the account balances ofthe Trust be corrected, restated and distributed tothe correct beneficiary in the correct amount.Finally, plaintiffs seek reform of the trust manage-ment and accounting system. Such reform willensure that trust duties are discharged prudentlyand the government’s liability does not continue to increase exponentially.
Plaintiffs have prevailed on the merits throughout
this litigation. The government argued, amongother things, that it did not have a duty to providea full accounting of trust assets in conformity withgenerally applicable trust law. The government’sposition was repudiated by the Federal DistrictCourt in Washington, D.C. in 1999. The
Court held that the government is in
breach of the trust duties it owes the
plaintiff class and must render a
complete and accurate accounting
of “all funds.” Defendants’
attempt to limit the accounting
to some “subset” of assets 
was expressly rejected by the 
District Court.
Despite the clarity of the District
Court decision and the D.C. Circuit
Court of Appeals ruling in 2001, affirming
that decision, defendants have continued to resistproviding plaintiffs the complete and adequateaccounting to which the each beneficiary is entitled.Defendants have refused to take affirmative steps tobring themselves into compliance with their trustduties. Indeed, at every turn defendants haveobstructed the proceedings and attempted toescape their plain legal obligations. It is because ofthis resistance and refusal to discharge their legalobligations that this case now approaches its tenthyear in the courts.
The Senate Indian Affairs Committee and House
Resources Committee have now set trust reformand settlement of the Cobell case as a priority. Atthe request of these Committees, NARF, theNational Congress of American Indians, theIntertribal Monitoring Association, other tribal leaders and the Cobell plaintiffs presented a set offifty trust principles for settlement.
In 2005, the Senate Indian Affairs Committee 
introduced a bill referred to as a starting point fordiscussion. Among other things, it called for a settlement fund in the billions of dollars - but didnot specify a number for the historical accountingclaim. Chairman McCain stated that further discus-sions would be held with the parties and hopefullyreach a consensus number for the settlement. Thereare some serious deficiencies with the bill as currently structured, but NARF continues to workwith Committee staff to address these concerns and
THE ACCOUNTABILITY OF GOVERNMENTScreate a bill that will lead to resolution in a fair
manner. Plaintiffs continue to seek prompt resolutionof the Cobell case, but NARF will not sacrifice 
fairness on the altar of political expediency to thedetriment of the plaintiff class of 500,000 individualIndians. 
In a related Court of Federal Claims action, NARF
represents the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewain North Dakota, the Chippewa-Cree of the RockyBoys Reservation in Montana the Little Shell Tribeof Chippewa in Montana, and the White Earth Bandof Minnesota Chippewa Indians against the Bureauof Indian Affairs for mismanagement of thePembina Judgment Fund.  The tribes allege misac-counting, misinvestment, and mismanagement bythe federal government of their $50 million tribaltrust fund since the inception of the fund in 1964.In 2005 the Court heard oral argument on threepending matters: Plaintiff’s motion for summaryjudgement on the existence and scope of a causeof action (whether the investment duties of thegovernment derive from “money-mandating”statutes; Defendant’s motion to dismiss on statuteof limitations grounds; and, Plaintiff’s motion forclass certification”).  A ruling on these matters isexpected at any time. The Court’s resolution of some or all of the issues will shape the future of litigation and negotiations in the case. 
In another related matter, NARF filed suit in the
Court of Federal Claims against the governmentseeking damages for breach of trust on behalf ofthe Chippewa Cree Tribe of the Rocky BoysReservation in Montana.  The Tribe alleges misaccounting and misinvestment of the Tribe’strust funds based on oil and gas, timber, and grazing resources.  NARF is seeking an accountingof certain Tribal accounts and has asked the Courtto assign the case to the judge in the Cobell case.
At this time, the litigation is on hold to allow the parties to explore a negotiated settlement of theTribe’s claims.
On behalf of the Alaska Inter-Tribal Council, ten
Native villages and seven Native individuals, NARFfiled a civil lawsuit in 1999 in the Superior Court forthe State of Alaska seeking declaratory and injunctiverelief against the State of Alaska for failure to provide minimally adequate police protection to
off-road Native villages and for discriminatingagainst them in the provision of State law enforce-ment services.  In Alaska Inter-Tribal Council v.
Alaska, NARF alleged that the actions of the State
in unlawfully prohibiting Native villages from keepingthe peace in their traditional ways, while failing toprovide them even minimally-adequate police protection under the State law enforcement system,violated the Villages’ rights to Due Process of lawand basic law enforcement protection guaranteedby the Fourteenth Amendment to the United StatesConstitution and Article I of the AlaskaConstitution.  NARF also alleged that the State’s discriminatory treatment of Native villages in theprovision of police protection is based on race andtherefore violates the Villages’ rights to EqualProtection of the law.  An adverse decision wasrendered by the Superior Court in 2002 in favor ofthe State of Alaska.  NARF appealed this decision tothe Alaska Supreme Court and argument was heardin 2003. In 2005, the Alaska Supreme Courtaffirmed the trial court and held that Alaska’s dual public safety system does not violate federalor state equal protection. A Petition forReconsideration was filed, but it was subsequentlydenied by the Alaska Supreme Court. The plaintiffsdecided not to petition for review in the UnitedStates Supreme Court.
NARF and the Colorado Commission of Indian
Affairs (“CCIA”) were first asked in 2003 to becomeinvolved in the City of Boulder’s process to decidewhether to site two facilities – a biosolids composting facility and a fire training center – atValmont Butte, located just east of the City. The Cityhad purchased the 105 acre parcel of land in 2000solely with these purposes in mind, and had begunvarious internal and external bureaucratic and legalprocesses to eventually annex the land and construct these facilities. In the midst of these legalprocesses, a curious phenomena began to unfold.Given a voice and means of expression by NARFand CCIA’s involvement, the Native American community came forward with powerful evidencethat (1) the Butte is a place of significant prehistoricconnections to Native peoples who inhabitedBoulder Valley long before Euroamerican settlerscame into the area in the 19th Century; and (2) the
32NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND33ANNUAL REPORT 2005
Butte is a place of contemporary religious impor-
tance to many Indian people in the metropolitanDenver area, as well as to Indian people of Ute,Arapaho and Cheyenne descent who reside onreservations in Oklahoma, Wyoming and SouthwestColorado. Important spirit voices are believed toreside in the around the Butte itself, and it is thelocus of an active sweatlodge being utilized by several Indian religious leaders.
In 2005, the City Council heard and respected the
wishes of the Indian Community, and rejected theplanning staff recommendations to locate the composting and fire training facilities on the Butteproperty. NARF is working with the CCIA, the localIndian community in the Denver metropolitan area,the interested tribes, and the residents of theValmont Butte area, to identify a means of acquiringthe property from the City. The ultimate goal is tobuild an Indian cultural center on the Butte propertythat would make the Butte a place of learning andeducation about the past, a place of healing, and aplace of reconciliation between Indian people andthose who have come to Boulder Valley since thetime of Chief Niwot. NARF has also been talkingwith the Trust for Public Lands, and its Tribal LandsProgram, about assisting in efforts to leverage capital to purchase the property.
In 1993, the United States Congress enacted the
Hawaiian Apology Joint Resolution, Public Law103-150, admitting that the role of the United States
military in removing the Hawaiian monarch, QueenLili’u’okalani, from power and installing the provi-sional government was illegal under American andinternational law.  Prior to the overthrow, Hawaiiwas regarded internationally as one of the family ofnations which had concluded numerous treaties of trade, commerce and friendship with severalcountries including the United States.  The Apologywas a watershed event in American history, seen bymany Hawaiian people as the first step in makingreparations for the illegal overthrow.  The over-throw has been viewed by Native Hawaiians as theultimate atrocity committed against their sovereignnation, the culmination of the enormous political,social, cultural, economic and spiritual changeswrought on the Hawaiian people since the 1778arrival of Captain Cook.
The Apology has fueled the passions of 
the Hawaiian people involved in the sovereigntymovement.  The United States’ admission that theoverthrow was illegal, immoral, and unjust is seenas but a first step in the long process of establishing“ho’opono’pono” – the Hawaiian traditional systemfor “making things right.”    
Rice v. Cayetano involved a challenge by a non-
Native to the voting restriction in the state constitutionallowing only Native Hawaiians to vote for trusteesof the Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA).  The OHAadministers income received from certain trust
lands for the benefit of Native Hawaiians.  Riceargued that the restriction violates the Fourteenthand Fifteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution.The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the votingrestriction, but the United States Supreme Courtreviewed that decision.  One of  Rice’s argumentsis that since there are no tribes in Hawaii,  the votingrestriction is purely race-based and subject to strictscrutiny.  The Supreme Court case of Morton v.
Mancari held that legislation as to Indian tribes is
based on the political relationship between tribesand the United States and need only be rationallyrelated to Congress’ unique obligation towardIndian tribes.  The question was whether the samestandard applies to legislation passed for the benefitof Native Hawaiians.  NARF filed an amicus curiae
brief in support of Native Hawaiians on behalf ofthe National Congress of American Indians in theSupreme Court.  However, in 2000, the SupremeCourt ruled against the Native Hawaiians declaringthat the state restriction on voting for OHA trusteesto Hawaiians was based on race and, therefore,violated the Fifteenth Amendment which prohibitsdenying anyone the right to vote based on race.
The aftermath of the Rice decision, while not 
technically deciding the equal protection issue, sentsignals to opponents of state Hawaiian programsthat it was open season on what some see as “race-based special benefits.”  Over the past five years aflurry of litigation has ensued.  NARF continues tomonitor numerous challenges by non-NativeHawaiians to programs and legislation that havebeen enacted to benefit to Native Hawaiians.
For many years, the Native American Rights Fund
has been involved in the Hawaiian rights move-ment, commencing with our assistance in thefounding of the Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation(NHLC) in 1974. For years, NARF has co-counseledwith the NHLC and private counsel in representingthe Pele Defense Fund in efforts to prevent large-scale geothermal development in the Wao Kele‘OPuna rainforest on the Big Island, and to regainNative Hawaiian access rights to Wao Kele lands.These efforts culminated with the entry in 2002 ofa stipulated judgment and order by the state courtin Hilo, Hawaii recognizing the rights of NativeHawaiians to hunt, gather, and worship on the Wao
Kele lands – as part of the bundle of “traditionaland customary rights” protected, preserved andenforced under the Hawaii Constitution. In 2005,with NARF’s assistance, the Trust for Public Lands(Hawaii Office) and the Office of Hawaiian Affairssecured an appraisal of the property and the purchase of these lands became a reality. NARF will continue to assist with the planning and management of the lands.
The rainforest is valuable on multiple levels. Wao
Kele o Puna is extremely important to NativeHawaiians, who for centuries have consistentlyused the property for traditional hunting, gathering,and religious purposes. In addition, the vast rain-forest provides essential wildlife habitat for morethan 200 native Hawaiian plant and animal species,including several that are listed as threatened or endangered. The vast forest will serve as a protected corridor for native birds traversing frommauka to makai. Wao Kele o Puna is also critical toprotecting drinking water quality in Hawaii County,covering over twenty percent of the Pahoa aquifer,the single largest drinking water source on the island.
34NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND35ANNUAL REPORT 2005
The systematic development of Indian law
is essential for the continued protectionof Indian rights.  This processinvolves distributing Indian lawmaterials to, and communicatingwith, those groups and individualsworking on behalf of Indianpeople.  NARF has two ongoingprojects which are aimed atachieving this goal, the NationalIndian Law Library and the IndianLaw Support Center.
The National Indian Law Library
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is a nationalpublic law library devoted to American Indian lawwhich serves both the Native American Rights Fundand the public. Over the past thirty-three years NILLhas collected nearly 9,000 resource materials thatrelate to federal Indian and tribal law. The Library’sholdings include the largest collection of tribalcodes, ordinances and constitutions in the UnitedStates; legal pleadings from major American Indiancases; law review articles on Indian law topics;handbooks; conference materials; and governmentdocuments. Library users can access the searchablecatalog which includes bibliographic descriptionsof the library holdings. In addition to making its catalog and extensive collection available to thepublic, the National Indian Law Library providesreference and research assistance relating to Indianlaw and tribal law. The Indian Law Bulletins arepublished by NILL in an effort keep NARF and thepublic informed about Indian law developments.NILL publishes timely bulletins covering new Indianlaw cases, U.S. regulatory action, law review articles, and news on its web site.
In an effort to provide Colorado Lawyers and the
general legal community with a useful guide toIndian law research, NILL published two short articles on Indian law research in the Colorado
Lawyer (a publication of the Colorado Bar Assn.).
“Basic Indian Law Research Tips - Federal IndianLaw” was published in the May, 2005 issue and“Basic Indian Law Research Tips - Tribal Law” waspublished in the August issue. NARF
expects that these practical guides will
be useful and will highlight the
research skills of the NILL staff.
The articles can be accessed
through NILL’s Law Review
Indian Law Bulletin website.
As part of NILL’s long-standing
goal to make the unique NILL 
collection more accessible to the
public, the library has joined the
world-wide bibliographic utility called
Worldcat, which allows librarians and
library users to find out what is in the collections oflibraries nationwide. NILL will report its holdingsover time beginning with items not found in othercollections. To date, it has reported that it owns 18different publications. Beginning this Fall, NILLbegan to report holdings of tribal law materials, andwas the first library nationwide to catalog the newedition of the Navajo Nation Code Annotated. 
This project allows NILL to make information about
its unique library titles (or catalog records) availableto other libraries for purposes of interlibrary loan;allows NILL to participate in a Library of Congressproject to help establish name authorities or namingstandards for tribal nations and other names to beused by librarians nationwide when cataloging orindexing their library holdings; and, NILL can moreefficiently and economically request and receivebooks and other materials needed by NARF attorneys and staff by processing interlibrary loansutilizing the Worldcat system.
Indian Law Support Center
Since 1972, NARF’s Indian Law Support Center(ILSC) has served as a national support center onIndian law and policy for the national Indian legalservices community and the 32 basic field programsserving Native American clients. ILSC continues tosend out regular correspondence to Indian LegalServices programs, handling requests for assistance,and working with Indian legal services programs tosecure a more stable funding base from the Congress. 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN LAW36In December 2000 Congress enacted the Indian
Tribal Justice and Legal Assistance Act of 2000which President Clinton signed into law. The Actauthorizes the Department of Justice to providesupplemental funding to Indian legal services programs for their representation of Indian peopleand tribes which fall below federal poverty guide-lines. Congress appropriated $2 million in FY 2003under the Act. NARF Indian legal services programsworked with the Department of Justice to devise anallocation methodology. The Department of Justiceawarded a grant of $1,987,000 to NARF in 2004.Most of the grant funds have been contracted out tothe Indian legal services programs with a small portion used to cover NARF administrative costs.NARF continues to be actively involved with localILS programs in the administration of the grant andin developing training events to meet local programneeds. NARF recently received notice of an awardof additional funding in the amount of $1,726,626for calendar year 2006 for the project.Other Activities
In addition to its major projects, NARF continued itsparticipation in numerous conferences and meetingsof Indian and non-Indian organizations in order toshare its knowledge and expertise in Indian law.During the past fiscal year, NARF attorneys and staffserved in formal or informal speaking and leader-ship capacities at numerous Indian and Indian-related conferences and meetings such as theNational Congress of American Indians ExecutiveCouncil, Midyear and Annual Conventions and theFederal Bar Association’s Indian Law Conference.NARF remains firmly committed to continuing its effort to share the legal expertise which it possesses with these groups and individualsworking in support of Indian rights and to fosterthe recognition of Indian rights in mainstream society.
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND37ANNUAL REPORT 2005
Based on our audited financial statements for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2005, the NativeAmerican Rights Fund reports total unrestricted revenues of $7,144,693 against total expenditures of$7,281,814.  Total net assets at the end of the yearcame to $5,285,944.  Due to presentation require-ments of the audited financial statements in termsof recognizing the timing of certain revenues, 
they do not reflect the fact that, based on NARF’sinternal reporting, operating expenses and othercash outlays actually exceeded revenue by
$259,482, causing a decrease to NARF’s reservefund. There have been cuts in federal awards aswell as in various foundation grants. Conversely,revenue from fee cases showed an increase, mostlyrelated to the Shinnecock Tribe case.
Revenue and Expense comparisons between fiscal
year 2005 and fiscal year 2004 are shown below. 2005 F INANCIAL REPORT
Contributions
Federal Awards
Foundation Grants
 Legal Fees
Other
TOTALS$ 2,599,669
 1,490,509 1,370,529
 957,609 709,026
 17,351
     $ 7,144,69336.4%
 20.9% 19.1% 13.4%
9.9%
  0.3%
 100%$ 2,622,033
 1,657,712 1,557,570
  785,570
 802,272
 26,582
 $ 7,451,73935.2%
 22.2% 20.9% 10.5%
10.8%
 0.4%
 100%dollars percents
2005
dollars percents2004
Return on Investments
dollars percents2005
dollars percents2004
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program ServicesManagement and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services                         TOTALS$ 4,850,670
 262,086
 5,112,756
 925,508
 1,243,550
 2,169,058
     $ 7,281,814 66.6%
 3.6%
 70.2%
 12.7%
 17.1%
  29.8%
 100%  66.6%
 4.4%
 71.0%
 11.5%
 17.5%
 29.0%
 100%$ 5,208,975
  340,277
 5,549,252
 902,913
 1,369,965
 2,272,878
 $ 7,822,130
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements on which the accounting  firm of JDS Professional
Group expressed an unqualified opinion.  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office or  at www.narf.orgUNRESTRICTED SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
EXPENSE COMPARISON38NARF A CKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS : NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Living Waters Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman Memorial FundJerome Davis Living Waters Endowment FundKathleen and Ruth Dooley Family FundEdward & Verna Gerbic Family FoundationSusan K. Griffiths Memorial FundThe Robert and Joy Hanson Leland EndowmentFrank J. McCormick Family FundMarvin W. Pourier, Sr./Donna M. Deans 
Memorial Fund
Mary Lou Mosca-Ragona Memorial FundErnest L. Schusky EndowmentHelen and Sidney Ungar 
Memorial Endowment Fund
Foundations, Corporations and
Organizations
American International Group, Inc.Aria FoundationBiedenharn FoundationBonderenko Direct, Inc.Computer Sciences Corporation Cooke, Roosa & Valcarce, LLCEducational Options, Inc.Eugene and Emily Grant Family FoundationEverett Philanthropic FundFocus Foundation, Inc. Gardner, Carton & Douglas LLPGerbic FoundationGorlitz FoundationHarrison FoundationHorn FoundationJohnson Family FoundationKathryn &  W. Harry Schwarzschild FundKey FoundationLoyola University/Gillis W. Long Poverty 
Law Center
LP Brown Foundation MTA New York City Transit AuthorityNational Analysts Research & ConsultingNorth Star Foundation
Panaphil FoundationRaymond James TrustRita S. Gold FoundationRMF FoundationRuth M. Knight FoundationSamsara FoundationSouthwest SeminarsStanley Family FundStettenheim FoundationThe Arches FoundationThe Aspegren Charitable FoundationThe Charles P . & Mary E. Belgarde FoundationThe Community Foundation 
of Santa Cruz California
Ungar FoundationWalton Avenue FoundationWells Fargo BankWhirlpool FoundationWhizin FoundationWinky FoundationZiff Brothers Investments, L.L.C.
Corporate Matching Gifts
Adobe Systems IncAmerican International Group, Inc.Amgen, Inc.Aon FoundationAspect Matching Gift ProgramAvon Products FoundationB.D. Matching Gift ProgramBank of America Foundation, Inc.Charitable Gift FundDavid & Lucille Packard FoundationEastern Bank Charitable FoundationExxonMobil FoundationFannie Mae Foundation Matching Gifts CenterFord FoundationGordon and Betty Moore FoundationHoughton Mifflin
Illinois Tool Works FoundationING Community & Volunteer 
Matching Gifts Programs
J.P . Morgan Chase FoundationMattel Children’s Foundation 
Matching Gifts Program
National Grange Mutual Insurance CompanyNUMMI, Team Member Giving CampaignPepsico FoundationPfizer FoundationPioneer Hi-Bred InternationalQualcommSun Microsystems FoundationThe Ford FoundationThe Millipore FoundationThe Pfizer FoundationThe Washington PostUnited Airlines Employee 
Charitable Giving Program
Vivendi Universal US Holding Co.World Reach, Inc.Xcel Energy FoundationZiff Brothers Investments, L.L.C.
Tribes and Native Organizations
Agua Caliente Band Of Cahuilla IndiansAhtna, Inc.Ak Chin Indian Community CouncilAmerican Indian Lawyer Training ProgramCoeur D’Alene Tribal CouncilColorado River Indian TribesColusa RancheriaComanche NationConfederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Cow Creek Band Of Umpqua TribeDrumbeat Indian Arts, Inc.Elk Valley RancheriaFort McDowell Yavapai NationFort Mojave Tribal Council
We thank each and every one of our supporters for their commitment to the goals of NARF.  NARF’s success could not
have been achieved without the generosity of our many donors throughout the nation.  We gratefully acknowledge thesegifts received for fiscal year 2005 (October 1, 2004 through September 30,2005).39ANNUAL REPORT 2005
FISCAL YEAR 2005
Grand Traverse Casinos & Resorts
Little Traverse Bay Bands of 
Odawa India
Lummi Indian Business CouncilMashantucket Pequot TribeMohegan Indian TribeMorongo Band Of Mission IndiansNational Center for American
Indian Enterprise Development 
Native American Bank Native American Bank, N A-
Blackfeet
Nulato VillageOneida Tribe of Indians 
of Wisconsin
Pechanga Band of Mission IndiansPueblo Of LagunaRuby Tribal CouncilSanta Rosa RancheriaSeminole Tribe of FloridaShakopee Mdewakanton Sioux
Community of  Minnesota
Southern Ute TribeSt. Regis Band of Mohawk IndiansSycuan Band of Mission IndiansTlingit and Haida Indian Tribes 
Of Alaska
Tuolumne Me-Wuk Tribal CouncilTwenty Nine Palms Band 
Of Mission Indians
Upper Sioux Community 
of Minnesota
Viejas Band of Kumeyaay InciansVillage of Old Harbor
Bequests and Trusts
Mary Kohr AaltoGertrude M. BellMarian BenedictMichael BerkeyMary Helen BickleyRobert BlumJohn N. CallenderJerome DavisAnnie Dix MeiersRuth T. DooleyCarolyn W. Ferriday
Verna GerbicEmma J. HoffmanFrances E. HorvathLeroy LoatsMarie Wanda NassbergC. SchornstheimerBessie E. SutterMaxine M. TaylorErnest Ziegfeld
Peta Uha Pipestone
John S. BevanFrances A. Velay
Peta Uha Turquoise
Mr. & Mrs. Robert HartPaulette LewisAxson Brown MorganRobert Friede
Peta Uha Granite
John DercksenJay ScheideCarol A. Roberts
Peta Uha Flint
James & Louise ArnoldTheresa BellRobert & Patricia BerryWilliam & Elsa BoyceLawrence BraggPeter BronerCatherine BrotzmanRaymond & Constance CarrollPolly ChernerPatricia deKovenPaul D’ErricoLyle DethlefsenLucille EchohawkDarren & Amy EilertHerbert FloydRico GenhartGloria Greenhill
Mary GriffinDuncan HaasCollier HandsMichael HanniganKarin HolserBob & Barbara HumesAdaline JyurovatRichard KimAlbert & Skaye KirkRobert KleigerCharles KoobScott & Ricki KresanPaul & Eileen LeFortMr. & Mrs. William LymanPeter ManningJames MarienthalDoris MarxThomas MooreJeanne Morrel-FranklinFrannie OatesJoan OsborneGeorge ParentMartha PhillippiClaude & Noelle PonceletHelene PresskreischerEsther RivinusRuth SchusterAlfred SchwendtnerPeter SheldonEdith SmithMary SpragueWayne & Nancy Starling RossLeRoy StippichWalter StockGilbert TauckElaine UmholtzMargaret VerbleCatherine WilliamsDavid Winston
Peta Uha Obsidian
Carole AragonMary Bane
Marjorie BlachlyDavid BlackMary BrookElizabeth CelioIlze ChoiBarbara Conlon MuthSubhuti DharmanandaAnne DeMuthKathryn ElstonAnne EvansRichard FergusonLyman FlinnPamela FordAndrew & Audrey FranklinRuby GarrettJames GilleyEric & Jeff GinsburgG. GreenbergRobert HallameckVirgina HaysMark HodgeW. HowellsGregory & Jennifer KaufmannJoan LesterRichard LightmanHal LitoffJanet McAlpinHarry McAndrewAntoinette PeskoffTina PetersonRobert PhillipsEdith QuevedoMichael ReynoldsMartin RitterGeorge & Jo Rainie RodgersSusan SlaughterSybille SmithEstelle StammDavid Stewart-SmithBridget StroudDorothy Therman
continued on following page40NARF A CKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS : 
FISCAL YEAR 2005NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Gordon & Margaret Torgersen
Margaret Travis
Circle of Life
Catches Bear & Judy  Adams Richard & Gloria  Adkinson Nina  Barghoorn Maxwell K Barnard Barbara  Beasley Joyce P . Beaulieu Diane Ben Ari Roy Benson Sandra C. Berger Bobby Bitner Betty E. Blumenkamp Dale E. Brand William Brown Gloria Burgess Patricia Burnet Thomas Campbell Lawrence Candel Arthur  Carter Robert Carter Mary Casmus Ed Chasteen Paul D. Clifton Charles Cole Janet M. Congero Judith A. Day Harvey A. Dennenberg Gary Dickerhoof Starr Dormann Patricia R. Duval Noelle Edwards Allison B. Emerson Judy H. Fair-Spaulding James K. Fee Debra K. Frazier Jan Freeman Lyle Funderburk Suzanne M. Gartz Lawrence H. Geller 
Deborah Ghoreyeb Estela Goldsmith Louise Gomer Bangel Arline M. Goodrich Bernard Gordon Gene Grabau Jean Gundlach Merrill Hakim Michael S. Hall Margaret Hartnett Theodora C. Haughton Patricia Heidelberger Alfred Hoose Judith S. Horton Elizabeth A. Johnson Vusama Kariba Rose Ann Keeney Emily S. Kirk Betty Kleczy Margo M. Kochruthe Ellyne Krakower - Rice Edward Kriege James Langharst Ingrid Leblanc James Lehnerer Franklin O. Loveland Richard B. Luers Rima Lurie Suzanne MacDonald Patricia Marks-Greenfield Marion McCollom Hampton Katrina McCormick Barnes Joseph McNamara Stanley D. Metzger Peter & Betty Meyer Leila V. Moore Jeanne D. Morrel-Franklin Jeanne Moskal Shirley Norton Sara Osborne Marc Pearce 
Moses Peter Randall Petersen Denise Pfalzer Thelma Populus Gordon B. J. Powell Horace Raines Robert & Mary Resnik Maureen Ripley Barbara H. Roberts Andrea Robinsong June B. Rosenthal Keith I. Ross William Rozier Mary Sacher B. W. Sampson Peter E. Schmidt LaRoy Seaver Michael Seeley Charlotte Selver Katey Lynn Simetra Mr. & Mrs. Charles Smith Sandra D. Speiden Kirk Sperry Carolyn Staby Herbert Stewart James & Patricia Straus Rennard Strickland Michael & Carol Sullivan Louis Tabois Valeria Tenyak Charlotte Thompson M. D. Turek John H. Tyler Rene’ Vivo’ William Joseph Wade Ted Weitz Robert & Mary Wellman Roger L. Welsch Gary White Karen Williams-Fast Horse Marcel E. Wingate 
David Yeoman Wayne W. Zengel Abraham Zuckerman 
NARF Endowment
Rose CunyJohn EchohawkGayla Fills PipeKim GottschalkHeather Kendall MillerYvonne KnightMelody McCoySteven MooreChris PereiraDonald RagonaRay RamirezClela RorexDavid SeldenJoanne SoklinMark TildenDon Wharton
Tsanáhwit Circle Members
Susan Anderson Paul & Janice Arcidiacono Dale  Armitage Kathryn  Askins Barbara A. Babcock Patricia  Bachleitner Moira G. Bailis Nancy  Barnett Leona F. Begay Pamela  Bennett Elsie S. Bleimiller Mary R. Brooks Bernice  Brust William  Calley Ethelyne  Carney Carolyn  Carter Doris M. Chapot 41ANNUAL REPORT 2005
Jane M. Christian 
Patricia  Collins Thomas  Colon Patty  Crews Michael H. Cummings Jerry  Dale V.  DeMars Jerome  Draves David A. Dresser Dan  Duranso Marlene  Fischer Ruby  Fitzgerald Richard  Ford Freda  Glenn Judy L. Goebel Weda  Gregorieff Mark E. Hannemann Patricia  Hayden Col. Arthur T. Hill Lindsey  Housel Charley F. Ice John K. Ivie Frances  Johnson Isabelle  Kabrielian Peggy  Kiracofe Gerald  Kirner B. C. Lavelle Stanley  Lewandowski Elisabeth  Lucree Jil  MacMenamin T.  McCombs Janette A. Mitchell Ross & Carolyn  Mitchell Patricia  Mixter Cynthia A. Morrison Jean  Moyer James  Nirenstein Donna  Normand Wanda  Paolillo Oranoca V. Parijo Ardell  Parsons Dorothy F. Patrick 
Barbara W. Peterson Deborah  Pomplun Robert L. Renner Thursa A. Revenaugh Gail E. Richardson Ronald E. Richer Susan  Roberts Susan C. Robinson Nancy SanCarlos Mr. & Mrs. Seaward Sand Darrell  Schramm Gregory  Schuh Brenda  Scott Laura  Siegartel Michael  Smith Lois  Sparks June St. James Pfouts Shirley R. Stabile Walter  Stevens Mr. & Mrs. Donald Tobler Rosalie Hyde Trevino .Jerry  Weiss Katie  White Arnold  Wilson Wm. C. Wissmueller Basil B. Wood Diane Carmody Wynne Melissa  Zook 
Special Events
Agua Caliente Band 
Of Cahuilla Indians
The Akihiko F. Washington 
Foundation
American Indian Lawyer 
Training Program
Jack AndersonRobert AndersonTim & Dorothy AppleEdward AsnerGene AutryBrad Ball, Ball 
Entertainment Group
Brenda BarbeKatrina McCormick BarnesThe Barry and Wendy Meyer 
Foundation
Robert Barth, Black EquitiesNoel Orton Benson EstateFrank & Carol BiondiGlen Bonderenko, Bonderenko 
Direct Inc.
Boulder WeeklyMystie BrackettCamille BradfordMary BrookThomas BucichRhonda BuderArthur BurgerBruce BurnhamBrooke Emerson & staff 
at Platinum Advisors
Castle Rock EntertainmentChick’s Harley DavidsonMindy CohnComanche NationElbridge CoochiseConfederated Tribes of the Grand 
Ronde Community of Oregon
Jean CraneyRose CunyThe Daily Camera - Erika StutzmanHelen DavenportKevin DayPatricia A. DeCory - RagonaSally DentonEvelyn DrakeThomas & Jane DunphyEagle Plume’s GalleryLucille A. EchohawkElk Valley RancheriaFrank EttawageshikJennifer FargnoliYoko FelterBlaine & Lynda Fetter
Karen FieldsReeta FlammondHillary FogartyJane FondaFort Mojave Tribal CouncilAlix FosterFour PointsFour Winds Trading CompanyRichard FriedbergDebbie FreemanMartina GauthierMike GhiorsoEric GinsburgUrban & Amelia GiffGary GoldbergJennifer GonringJohn GonzalesBernie Granados, Jr.Grant Tani Barash & Altman, LLCGrand Traverse Casinos & ResortsMatthew & Jasmine GorelikRodney GrantJohn GrayTitine GrossSheldon Haffner EstateHaglund, Kelley, Horngren 
& Jones, LLP
Carole HallAnderson & Suzanne HarveyLoy HerckBrandy HershbergerSara HinkleyRance HoodThe Horn FoundationJudith HortonQueen Alexandria HughesJoel & Susan HyattIndians & Victories Casino 
and Hotel
continued on following page
NARF A CKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS : 
FISCAL YEAR 200542NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Jim’s Environmental T-shirts 
Mary JohnsonAnn JonesThe Marilyn and Jeffrey 
Katzenberg Foundation
Bill KennedyCheryle Kennedy KGNU & Theresa HalseyAsher & Rebeca KimchiElizabeth KingPatricia KingsleyRay Kogovsek, Kogovsek &
Associates Inc.
Stacy JacobsMelinda JankoMary JohnsonDeWayne & Shirley JonesRichard Jongmok Kim Stuart & Louise KorshakLittle Traverse Bay Bands 
of Odawa Indians
The Richard Lovett Trust of 1996Debbie LevinKaren LoganCarol LujanDouglas LunaMaurice LyonsMark MacarroPatricia MaloneyJoe MarshallRobert MartinezGeorge McHendryMiccosukee Indian TribeMiccosukee Resort and GamingShirley Miolla Dale MillerMohegan Indian TribeTimoteo “Ikoshy” MontoyaJeanne Morrel-FranklenMorongo Band of Mission IndiansDel Mulder of Pak MailNative American BankStan Natchez
Native Voice NewspaperGregory PaulPechanga Band of Mission IndiansAmado Peña, Jr.Anthony PicoRay & Carmen RamirezRetired & Senior Volunteer
Program
Andrew RodriguezDavid RislingRosenberg PropertySanta Rosa RancheriaJoe RaynerJim ReichertLois RiceMichael RichtersJeffrey RobinovRES 2005Alicia SanchezAlice SeaburghSuzanne SenaShakopee Mdewakanton Sioux 
Community of Minnesota
Stanley Sheinbaum1989 
Sheinbaum Trust
Andy Spahn RMF FoundationMarti Stewart & staff at Tattered 
Cover Book Store, LoDo,Denver, CO
Tachi Yokut TribeTAG Partners LLCAndrew Thomas, Flute PlayerThe TR Family TrustTuolumne Me-Wuk Tribal CouncilFrances Velay, Panaphil FoundationJeffrey & Eva PetersonBill Soza WarsoldierWayne & Nancy Starling RossRon StriegelSycuan Band of Mission IndiansMargery TabankinDebbie ThomasSusan Toth
Richard TrudellDaniel TuckerTwenty Nine Palms Band 
Of Mission Indians
Aine UngarDora VanTodd VickViejas Band of Kumeyaay IndiansVolunteer ConnectionMike VukovWende WaggonerAnastasia WaldeckPaula WeinsteinWilson & AssociatesPatricia WincklerPaul WittLa Grange 
Management Inc.
Lonnie WittenbergMichael W. Young
NARF gratefully honors our 
many friends and partners whosponsored and supported our special events in 2005.  Thanks amillion for your support and forcaring so deeply about Indianrights advocacy.
In-Kind Contributions
Phil BangertPatton BoggsNicole BryantAnne CabanDaniel CordalisMartina GauthierJen GreenbergSandy GriessJill HerbertJaime JacobyJulie KlaussMarietta KukaDrummond Woodsum MacMahonNancy MeadJohn Moore
Robb’s MusicAaron PrattTim ReeseManuel SantosDavid TatuniWes TaukchirayAlexa TetzlaffNative Voice NewspaperKim WalshRick Williams, The American Indian
College Fund
Christina Juhasz-Wood
Boulder-Denver Advisory
Committee
Lucille EchohawkThomas W. FredericksDavid GetchesAva HamiltonJeanne WhiteingCharles Wilkinson
Federated Workplace
Campaigns
Thank you to the thousands of 
federal, state, municipal and privatesector employees throughout thecounty who through their payrolldeduction plans contributed$123,496 in fiscal year 2005.
Federal Programs
Administration for Native AmericansDepartment of Justice
NARF A CKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS : 
FISCAL YEAR 200543ANNUAL REPORT 2005
NARF receives contributions from foundations, 
corporations, religious organizations, tribes andNative organizations, bequests and trusts, benefactors,private donations, and in-kind contributions. Beloware descriptions of NARF’s donor programs andadditional ways you can get involved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the Lakota
(Sioux) language means firekeeper. One that honorstribal members who made a solemn commitment toensure that the sacred flame, source of light, heatand energy for his people, always be kept burning.Like the firekeepers of old, members of the PetaUha Council can demonstrate constancy and vigilance by helping to ensure that the critical workof the Native American Rights Fund continues tomove ever forward.  For benefits associated witheach level of Peta Uha membership, please contactDonald Ragona, 303.447.8760 or e-mail him atpetauha@narf.org.
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce word
meaning equal justice.  Tsanáhwit Circle membersprovide a regular source of income to NARF bypledging and making monthly contributions at anylevel of your choice. You may sign up to receivemonthly pledge reminders in the mail or your creditcard may be billed automatically.
Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han is the Lakota
Sioux word translated as giveaway. Otu’han is amemorial and honoring gift program modeled after the tradition of the Indian giveaway in whichitems of value are gathered over a long period oftime to be given away in honor of birthdays, marriages, anniversaries, and in memory of adeparted loved one.
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life are donors
who provide a lasting legacy to the NativeAmerican Rights Fund by including NARF in estateplanning or deferred gifts. The circle is an importantsymbol to Native Americans representing unity,strength and the eternal continuity of life. Theselasting gifts help ensure the future of NARF and ourIndian clients nationwide.Endowments – NARF has two established endow-
ments, the 21st Century Endowment and the LivingWaters Endowment. The 21st Century Endowmentis a permanent fund in which the principal isinvested and interest income is used for NARF’sprograms. This endowment is designed to providea permanent, steady income that can support the ever-increasing costs of providing legal representation to our tribal clients.
The Living Waters Endowment directly funds the
21st Century Endowment. It allows donors to honorfriends and loved ones by making an endowmentgift of $10,000 or more.  By designating a gift toeither endowment, you can be sure that your contribution will continue to generate annual fundsin perpetuity. Endowment supporters are recognizedon a special wall plaque displayed at NARF.Supporters will also receive a memorial piece for theirhome and be acknowledged in NARF’s annual report.
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of
America’s Charities, a national workplace givingfederation. Giving through your workplace is aseasy as checking off box #0450 in the CombinedFederal Campaign (CFC) pledge form authorizingautomatic payroll deduction.  NARF is also a member of Community Shares of Colorado (CSC),member #5037.
Matching Gifts – Currently, more than 30 founda-
tions and corporations nationwide make matchinggifts to NARF on a regular basis.  Employers matchtheir employees’ contributions sometimes doublingor even tripling their donation. Please check withyour human resources office and request a matchinggift form.
E-Action – Sign up for our e-action network by 
providing NARF with your email address. This is agreat way to get periodic case updates, calls-to-action, special events information, invitations andother activities. Your e-mail address is confidentialand we will not share it with any outside sources.For further information about any of the programsor services, please contact NARF’s DevelopmentDepartment at 303-447-8760.  Thank you.
SHOW YOUR SUPPORT IN NARF’ S PROGRAMS44CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Yvonne T. Knight (Ponca-Creek)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Donald M. Ragona (Mattinecock/Oglala
Lakota)Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Secretary/Editor/Grant Writer
Clela Rorex
Chief Financial Officer/Law OfficeAdministrator
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE STAFF
Walter R. Echo-Hawk (Pawnee)
Attorney
David Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw)
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)Attorney
Steven C. Moore
Attorney
Mark Tilden (Navajo)
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
Attorney
Eric Anderson
Legal Assistant
Rose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Karen DeHerrera (Oglala Lakota)
Legal Assistant
Gayla Fills Pipe (Oglala Lakota)
Receptionist
Martina Gauthier 
(Menominee/Ho-Chunk)Legal AssistantStephanie Hutton
Development Staff Assistant
Michael Kennedy
Assistant Controller
Mireille Martinez
Development Projects Coordinator
Christine Pereira
Micro Computer Specialist
Susan Irwin-Savage (Dineh)
Office Services Clerk
Joanne Soklin
Legal Assistant
Debbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo)
Assistant Controller
Johanna Zeh
Accountant
NATIONAL INDIAN LAW LIBRARY
David Selden
Librarian
Monica Martens
Assistant Law LibrarianANCHORAGE OFFICE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan)
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Attorney
Anne Thomas
Legal Assistant
WASHINGTON, D.C. 
OFFICE STAFF
Keith Harper (Cherokee)
Attorney
Richard Guest
Attorney
Darian Balcom
Legal Assistant
Mari Keenan
Legal AssistantNARF S TAFFNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND