Bringing Human Rights Abusers to Justice 
2016 AnnuAl RepoRt   Dear Friends,
At the Center for Justice and Accountability, we stand up for the rights of all people, challenge impunity, and 
demand accountability for human rights abuses.  As new global realities reshape our world, this mission - and your steadfast support - are more vital than ever before.
We will continue our fight for justice and accountability, shoulder to 
shoulder with our clients; we remain undaunted in the face of those who would erect barriers to justice.  It is only when the rights of all people are protected and ensured that true peace and security is possible. It is only when we respect others and move forward together to challenge injustice that human rights become real. Nothing deters us.  And our clients deserve no less.
This year, CJA:
• Filed the first Syrian war crimes case against the Syrian regime;
• Won a case against a Pinochet officer living in Florida for the torture and murder of renowned 
Chilean folk singer Victor Jara; and 
• Secured the extradition of a former Salvadoran Minister of Defense found liable for torture and crimes against humanity.
We could not have accomplished any of this without you.  You are a mainstay in our struggle against injustice. With your support, together, we work to build a society that denies human rights abusers a safe haven, guards against future human rights violations, and contributes to a global community where no human rights abuse goes unchallenged.  
With deep appreciation,
 
                                  
                                        
C. Dixon Osburn      Farah Brelvi
Executive Director      Chair, Board of Directors/T_he Center for 
Justice & Accountability
We remain 
undaunted in the face of those who would erect barriers to justice. Bringing Human Rights Abusers to Justice   Mission 
The Center for Justice and Accountability is an international human rights organization dedicated to deterring 
torture, war crimes, crimes against humanity and other severe human rights abuses around the world through litigation, policy advocacy and outreach in pursuit of truth, justice and redress for victims and survivors.
  strategy  
CJA uses the fullest extent of the law – often in savvy and innovative ways – to bring human rights abusers to 
justice. We use a unique combination of tools – litigation, transitional justice, and policy – to hold these perpetrators accountable. 
Litigation:  CJA prosecutes human rights abusers. Our cases address some of the world’s worst atrocities—
from the genocide in Guatemala to the campaign of terror led by Pol Pot’s regime in Cambodia. We are relentless in the pursuit of justice and truth for those who have endured the horrors of torture, crimes against humanity and other severe human rights abuses.
Transitional Justice: CJA has pioneered efforts in post-conflict countries to hold human rights abusers 
criminally accountable in national courts. We have worked on historic trials – including the Ríos Montt trial in Guatemala and the Accomarca Massacre trial in Peru. CJA believes that global justice requires a multi-
layered approach, and we are proud to partner with NGOs worldwide in building the rule of law.
Policy:  CJA has played a significant role in developing human rights policy in the United States, including 
testifying before Congress in support of the Child Soldiers Accountability Act and the Genocide 
Accountability Act. Working with policymakers and civil society groups, CJA crafts and supports policies that 
ensure the effective prosecution of atrocity crimes, deny safe haven to their perpetrators, and protect and 
rehabilitate their victims.
  Where We Work
The Center for Justice and Accountability and pro bono 
co-counsel Chadbourne & Parke filed a civil suit against Mr. Barrientos near the fortieth anniversary of the Pinochet 
coup.  CJA spearheaded a multi-year investigation that 
led its investigators from one end of Chile to the other to speak with soldiers who often remain reluctant to speak out about what happened even today.  We filed lawsuit under the Torture Victim Protection Act designed to hold 
perpetrators who flee to the U.S. accountable for torture 
committed elsewhere.
Mr. Jara’s songs about poverty and injustice are played 
throughout the world today.  Chile Stadium, where he was killed, is now named in his honor.  Rolling Stone Magazine 
called him one of the top protest artists of all time.  Bono, Bruce Springstein, Holly Near, and Joan Baez have all paid tribute to his legacy. Mr. Jara’s legacy grows a little brighter, as do the hearts of all the victims and survivors, now that a Florida jury has delivered some measure of justice.  
CHILE
...one of the...most significant 
legal human rights victories.
-The Guardian, June 27, 2016
Forty-three years after Victor Jara was tortured and 
murdered during a military coup by General Augusto Pinochet that rattled Chile, his 88-year-old widow and two 
daughters found truth and justice in a Florida courtroom in 
June 2016.
A federal jury found a former Pinochet officer, Pedro Pablo 
Barrientos, liable for Mr. Jara’s torture and execution, awarding $28m in damages to his widow and daughters.  
The jury heard testimony from soldiers, including one 
who said that Barrientos repeatedly bragged about killing Mr. Jara, brandishing the pistol he said was the gun that delivered two bullets to Victor’s head. 
Mr. Jara’s daughter Manuela said, “These eight days have been emotionally 
intense. They concentrated all of the pain, sadness and anger Chile has gone through, and specifically the horrors at the Chile Stadium. The culture of lies, cover-ups and bullying was pulverized by the weight of the truth in this courtroom.” The New York Times, June 28, 2016JUSTICE FOR VICTOR JARAE L  S A L V A D O R 
“Every rock that was in the path 
is being thrown to one side.”  CJA made significant progress in the past year leveraging 
courts in the U.S, Spain and El Salvador to advance justice and accountability for the deaths of 75,000 Salvadorans 
that occurred during a brutal civil war.
In January 2016, following CJA’s successful civil case and 
subsequent U.S. immigration proceedings, the US deported former Salvadoran Minister of Defense General Garcia.  Garcia played a key command role in the El Mozote mas-sacre, the murder of Archbishop Oscar Romero and the 
murder of four U.S. churchwomen. He now risks criminal 
prosecution in El Salvador.  CJA’s client in the Garcia  case, 
Dr. Juan Romagoza, told The National Catholic Reporter, “It was a special moment to be standing with other ‘victims of the war and relatives of the disappeared and shouting with 
them and longing for justice in our country.’”
In February, a North Carolina magistrate judge ruled that 
the former Salvadoran Vice Minister of Public Security, 
Colonel Inocente Montano, is eligible for extradition to Spain to face criminal trial in the Jesuits Massacre case filed by CJA and the Association for Human Rights in Madrid.  
ABC News called the decision an “historic ruling.” CJA client 
Carlos Martín Baró, brother of Father Ignacio Martín Baró, 
BUILDING A GLOBAL NET OF ACCOUNTABILITY
one of the murdered Jesuit priests, said, “The fact that the 
Colonel Montano may face trial in Spain won’t heal the pain but is a victory for all people who seek justice.”
In July 2016, the Salvadoran Supreme Court struck down 
a 1993 amnesty law, a decision CJA has long advocated.  
CJA Senior Advisor Patty Blum told The New York Times, “Every rock that was in the path is being thrown to one side.”  The judgment clears the way to try perpetrators of atrocities committed during the civil war.
In October, with the amnesty law invalidated, a Salvadoran 
judge reopened the investigation into the 1981 El Mozote Massacre, where an elite army unit is accused of murder -
ing at least 900 civilians.  General Garcia was Minister of Defense at the time. CJA will advocate that he stand trial in El Salvador.
PERU  
The impact of CJA’s work is rarely immediate. Meticulous 
investigations require years of research, and legal proceedings can be long and arduous. This year, another 
CJA case reached a full-circle victory. From the ashes of a 
mountain village to a U.S. courtroom to the National Court of Peru, CJA stood with our clients as they finally achieved justice in Peru.
Teofila and Cirila were just 12 and 13 years old when 
their Quechua 
community in the Andes was caught in the crossfire 
between 
the Peruvian government and a Maoist 
rebel group known as the Cendero Luminoso, or the 
Shining Path. On August 14, 1985, soldiers stormed the 
village of Accomarca, inexplicably massacring its citizens after finding no rebels. The two girls hid behind a rock and watched in horror as soldiers rounded up women and children into the local school, shot them, and burned the 
building to the ground.
Sixty-nine people lost their lives in what became known 
as the Accomarca Massacre, the first massacre against the 
Quechua people in Peru and the last one to receive any 
justice for its victims. AChIEVING JUSTICE IN-C OUNTRY
In 2007, CJA, along with pro bono counsel at Morgan 
Lewis filed two civil suits against soldiers who fled to the U.S. to escape responsibility for the massacre, one against 
Juan Rivera Rondón in Maryland and the other against 
Telmo Hurtado in Florida. In Florida, a judge found Hurtado liable for crimes against humanity and ordered he pay $37 million in damages to our clients. 
In 2011, Hurtado was extradited to Peru to face criminal 
charges, marking the first time ever that U.S. authorities had honored an extradition request for torture and genocide. We suspended our civil case in Maryland against Rondón so that 
he too could be deported to Peru to stand criminal trial. CJA 
assisted the Peruvian criminal prosecutors in their case.
On September 1, 2016, a Peruvian national court found 
Hurtado and Rondón guilty of grave human rights violations 
for their role in the massacre. Thirty-one years later, Teofila 
and Cirila saw their family’s killers held accountable in their home country at last. 
SOMALIA &   
S O M A L I L A N D 
More than 1,900 war criminals from 50 countries are living 
freely in the United States today. One of them works at Dulles International Airport.
Colonel Yusuf 
Abdi Ali (aka 
“Tukeh”) 
perpetrated horrific crimes in northern Somalia in the 1980’s as 
a high-ranking 
commander under the Siad Barre regime.  One of his victims is Farhan Mohamoud Tani Warfaa, an Isaaq Somali survivor whom Tukeh shot five 
times at point blank range, leaving him for dead, after he 
had been tortured.
CJA, along with pro bono counsel at DLA Piper, have 
represented Farhan for fourteen years.  In February, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit ruled that Tukeh could not claim immunity for torture, building on a precedent CJA had previously established.  The court 
ruled that the case could finally proceed to trial for claims 
brought under the Torture Victim Protection Act.
Tukeh has asked the U.S. Supreme Court to take his case 
and reverse the immunity precedent – the effect of which DEVELOPING LEGAL  PRECEDENT  
would allow war criminals to flee to the U.S. to escape 
accountability for their actions. CJA has asked the Supreme Court to let the precedent stand.  Should the Supreme 
Court take the case, we argue that it should also consider 
whether to reverse a prior Supreme Court decision in Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum that, as interpreted by lower courts to date, has precluded claims under the Alien Tort Statue for crimes against humanity, giving perpetrators a 
means to escape punishment for the most terrifying crimes.  
“If the [Supreme Court] agrees to hear [Warfaa v. Ali], it 
could become a landmark case over whether foreigners 
living in the U.S. can be held accountable for crimes allegedly committed overseas. ” 
–CNN, June 2, 2016
...a landmark case
At the Fourth Circuit Court of AppealsSYRIA  
In 2012, renowned American war correspondent Marie 
Colvin was one of several foreign journalists who traveled to Homs, Syria to report on the Assad regime’s assault on 
civilians.  A veteran reporter with London’s Sunday Times, 
Marie had covered conflict zones in Chechnya, Iraq, Libya and Sri Lanka during her 25-year career. Working out of a basement apartment converted into a makeshift media center in the opposition-held neighborhood of Baba Amr, 
Marie reported back to audiences across the world that 
the atrocities being committed by the regime of President Bashar al-Assad were more harrowing than anything she had seen throughout her career. She said to CNN’s 
Anderson Cooper, it is “a complete and utter lie that they’re 
only going after terrorists. The Syrian army is simply shelling a city of cold, starving civilians.” 
That was her last broadcast.  Syrian forces bombed the 
media center within hours, killing Marie and French 
photographer Remi Ochlik, and wounding others. Marie’s 
death sent a harrowing reminder to all of the grave danger of reporting in areas where the government does not want the world to know what is happening. CJA Staff PROTECTING JOURNALISTS
Attorney Scott Gilmore said, “The [Assad] regime 
wanted to wage 
a war without witness….  To do that, they needed to neutralize the 
media.”
After a three-year 
investigation, on July 9, 2016, we 
filed the first war crimes lawsuit against the government of Syria for the murder of Marie Colvin on behalf of Marie’s sister, Cathleen Colvin; her niece, Justine Araya-Colvin; and other surviving family members. We have joined with co-
counsel Shearman & Sterling LLP, and are grateful to our 
partners at the International Commission for Justice and Accountability and Reporters Sans Frontieres.  Cat said, “I want to keep Marie’s voice alive by refocusing attention on the unimaginable suffering endured by innocent civilians 
in Syria. They are living under siege, bombed relentlessly, 
tortured, starved and killed every day.  I want the world to pay attention to what is happening and realize that none of us would know of the atrocities being committed without the dedication of journalists who risk their lives to show us.”
“She’s… responsible of 
everything that befall on her…”
-President Bashar al-Assad on the murder of  
 Marie Colvin, NBC Evening News
OThER WORK
BOLIVIA: In June 2016, the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit sided with the arguments 
made in CJA’s amicus brief and 
affirmed denial of the motion to dismiss Torture Victim Protection Act (TVPA) claims.  Our partners 
at the Center for Constitutional Rights filed an Alien Tort 
Statute/TVPA lawsuit against 
the former President of Bolivia  and former Minister of Defense 
for the use of deadly force against unarmed civilians during anti-government demonstrations in 2003. The case is now 
one step closer to moving to trial.
CAMBODIA:  CJA represents 45 Cambodian-American civil 
parties before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) in cases against two senior leaders 
of the Khmer Rouge, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan in 
Case 002/02. CJA has actively provided evidence for the case, which covers atrocities including genocide, forced marriage and rape, cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment 
of Buddhists, and internal purges.  In a prior case against 
the same two leaders, Case 002/1, the ECCC cited CJA’s 
clients’ testimony extensively in rendering a guilty verdict concerning the forced evacuation of Phnom Pehn.GUATEMALA:  CJA has been asked by a prosecutor in 
the Attorney General’s office in Guatemala to coordinate efforts with the victims and survivors of the CREOMPAZ 
massacre.  On January 8, 2016, the Guatemalan government 
ordered the arrest of 26 soldiers for their role in the murder 
and disappearance of civilians related to the mass graves found at a military site. CJA has a long-standing relationship with many of the families based on our engagement on the Guatemala Genocide case in Spain.
HAITI:  On June 30, 2016, the New York State Board of 
Parole denied parole for Emmanuel “Toto” Constant.  In 
October 2006, CJA and the Center for Constitutional 
Rights (CCR) won a civil suit against Constant, who had 
headed the paramilitary death squad known as FRAPH, which orchestrated a systematic campaign of rape and other torture, arson, and executions against the residents of the poorest communities in Haiti.  CJA and CCR filed a 
submission urging the parole board to consider evidence of Constant’s long history of human rights crimes in weighing whether to grant him an early release.  In July 2008, a New 
York state court had sentenced Constant to 37 years for 
his role in a criminal mortgage fraud scheme.
CJA plays “key role in bringing 
war criminals to justice.”
-San Francisco Chronicle, February 16, 20161,900  
war criminals  
from 50 countries 
living  
in the 
U.S.150  
journalists  killed by 
Syrian regime since 2011Up to 1.3 million  
refugee torture survivors in U.S.
$4.2 million  
in donated pro bono services
Get Involved! 
1. Volunteer:  Countless hours of difficult work are 
required to secure justice for our clients and
support our cause. CJA relies on our volunteers to help 
us in a myriad of ways, from providing pro bono legal 
assistance, to assisting with events highlighting our clients’ situations, to supporting outreach to diaspora communities. By volunteering your time, you become an important part of our team. Sign up to be on our volunteer 
roster and let us know how you can help.
2. Advocate:  As CJA works to strengthen the global 
accountability network, we encourage the United States 
and other nations to enhance their domestic legal 
frameworks to end impunity for gross human rights 
violations, sign and enforce relevant international treaties, and create new, meaningful protections and redress for 
victims of torture and other human rights abuses. Learn 
more about CJA by subscribing to receive information about our work, including our advocacy efforts, and then lend your voice to the call for action.
3. Donate:  Now more than ever, CJA’s work helps 
define the world we want to see – a world where those responsible for the most egregious human rights abuses are 
held accountable, a world where survivors receive justice 
and rule of law prevails, a world where we all are working together to combat violations of the most basic rights. Our work could not happen without the generous support of individuals like you. Interviewing torture survivors, gathering 
evidence in the U.S. and overseas, and assisting our 
counterparts around the world to investigate and prosecute human rights abuses requires significant resources. Your meaningful contribution makes a critical difference.CJA by the Numbers
CJA donors.  
Thank you!  125   
            CJA news stories   
            in 2016 $28 million   
awarded to the wife and  
daughters of Victor Jara  for his murder24  years  
Telmo h urtado sentenced 
to prison for Accomarca Massacre in Peru2 human  
rights awards 
received6,301  
Facebook likes2,194  
Twitter followersPro Bono Law Firms, 
Investigative Firms  and Attorneys
Akin Gump Strauss  
Hauer & Feld LLP
Kevin Eide
Joanna NewdeckSteven SchulmanPratik ShahJames TysseJoseph Whitehead
Chadbourne & Parke LLP
Mary T. Barbetta
Mark Beckett
Amy BelsherChristina Hioureas Adriana IngenitoChristian Urrutia
Dentons US LLP
Bonnie Lau
Ivor Samson
DLA Piper
Lindsay R. Barnes IIIJoe DavisTara M. LeeCourtney SaleskiPaul D. SchmittStanley PanikowskiEthan Townsend
Fenwick & West 
Hilarie AtkissonShannon Raj Singh
Foley Hoag 
Amaryllis BernitsaBenjamin GuthrieMelissa Stewart
Hogan Lovells
Jan BlockxBukola OwaMelanie PerezT. Clark Weymouth
Lowndes, Drosdick, Doster, 
Kantor & Reed, P .A.
Richard Dellinger
The Mintz Group
Staci DresherEsther Rhee
Morgan Lewis LLP
Lincoln Bisbee
Andrea Fitonides
Amanda SmithOllé & Sesé
Manuel Ollé Sesé
Ropes & Gray LLP
Paul Cohen
Kevin Daly
Jonathan Schmidt
Three Crownes
Lydie E. Glynn
Wilmer Hale
Sonia FleuryRon Meltzer
Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & 
Rosati PC
Whitney Costin
Leo Cunningham
Luke Liss
Stacy Love
Jasmine Owens
Y ouman, Madeo & Fasano
Christina Xenides
Volunteer Attorneys
Gregory GordonJuan-Guillermo Sandoval 
Coustasse
Law School Partners
Cardozo Law Institute in 
Holocaust and Human Rights
International Human Rights 
Law Clinic, UC Berkeley School 
of Law 
Katrina Natale
Tara BraileyCynthia Huynh
Melanie Ramey
UNROW Human Rights Impact 
Litigation Clinic, American University’s Washington College 
of Law
Ali Beydoun
Legal Interns 
Paul Bennetch 
Hope Kwiatkowski Anna Manuel Leslie MoralesAustin ShangrawLydia Sinkus Elizabeth Topolosky Junteng Zheng Young Professional  Committee  for Human Rights
Mary Kate Bacalao
Jennifer Barnette
Nithin Coca
Jong ChoiJacob Foster, Co-Chair 
Victoria Hartanto
Maya Karwande
Cassandra Kildow
Amit KumarR. Kamela Laird 
Lauren Locke Paddon
Becca MinkoffSteven NamLeah Price, Co-Chair
Shannon Raj Singh
Emily Rosendahl
Janisha SabnaniNushin SarkaratiKara Slack
Heather Warnken
Volunteers 
Mariel Bird Stephanie Cain 
Theresa Cameranesi 
Nina Maria Catalano 
Azucena Crespo Krystal Farias Jaime Flores-Lovo 
Patricia Gibson 
Somiah Handy 
Windi Hazzard Kamela Laird Erin Lindberg 
Lori Lujan 
Kristina Maalouf
Gabrielle Parris Kelsey Quigley 
Krupa Raj 
Emily Rosendahl 
Akniet Rysbek Nicole Sault Lydia Sinkus 
Erich Snow 
John Spagnolo 
Isaac Van Aelstyn Maria Zhukowski 
Consultants
Mytili Bala
Lisa CohenErik NelsonPartners and Supporters
Advocates for Human Rights
California Consortium of Torture 
Treatment Centers
Canadian Center for International 
Justice
Center for Constitutional RightsCenter for Latin American 
Studies, UC Berkeley
Center for Victims of Torture
Civitas Maxima
Coalition for Justice in Liberia Comisión Colombiana de Juristas
EarthRights International
El RescateElectronic Frontiers FoundationEquipo Peruano de Antropología 
Forense
Fundación de Antropología 
Forense de Guatemala
Global Justice Research ProjectHorn of Africa Human Rights 
Watch Committee
The Human Rights Center at 
Berkeley Law
Human Rights Data Analytics 
Group
Human Rights Watch
Institute for Justice and 
Democracy in Haiti
Institute for Redress and Recovery
International Center for 
Transitional Justice
Legal Aid of CambodiaMarjorie Kovler Center for the 
Treatment of Survivors of Torture
Media Defence
National Consortium of Torture 
Treatment Providers
National Security Archive
REDRESS
Reporters Without Borders / 
Reporters Sans Frontières
San Francisco Bar Association
Skylight Pictures
Spanish Embassy, El Salvador
Survivors International
Survivors of Torture, InternationalTRIAL (Swiss Association Against 
Impunity)
United States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum
Washington Office on Latin 
America
Women’s Link Worldwide
   organizational support$100,000+
Anonymous 
Dominican Sisters of San Rafael Oak Philanthropy (UK) Limited 
Open Society Foundations 
$25,000-99,999
Firedoll Foundation 
Kabam, Inc. 
James Mintz and Deborah 
Stewart 
Gerald B. Rosenstein 
Tides Foundation 
$10,000-$24,999
A.M. Fund Anonymous Medea Benjamin Kathleen Blamey and Jack 
Londen
Lois Blum Feinblatt  Chadbourne & Parket LLP Mary Patricia Davis and Wesley 
Callender 
DLA Piper 
Joan Haratani 
Planethood Foundation Santa Clara University Steward R. Mott Foundation United Nations Voluntary Fund 
for Victims of Torture 
Beth Van Schaack and Brent 
Lang
Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & 
Rosati 
$5,000-$9,999
Anonymous Farah Brelvi and David Ball Cotchett, Pitre & McCarthy Dentons US LLPLokelani Devone and Annette 
Brands 
Molly and Scott Forstall Gap FoundationHenry J. Kaiser Family 
Foundation 
Jay and Jennifer McNally The Mintz Group, Inc. Joey and Lucy Neugart William and Sally Neukom Stephan Shaw and Sunita 
Viswanath 
Samuel Rubin Foundation 
$2,500-$4,999
John Bare and Ignatius BauBeveridge & Diamond PC  Jerrold Mark Dion 
Gerald Gray and Coleen Higa 
Richard Hill and Susan Levine 
Keker & Van Nest LLP 
Paulette Meyer and David 
Friedman 
Douglas Schmidt and Steven 
Martin 
Louis Vasquez and Alison 
Thoreau 
Wilma Wallace and Richard 
Meyers $1,000-$2,499
William and Seema Aceves 
The Rt. Rev. Marc Handley 
Andrus and Dr. Sheila 
Andrus 
Anonymous
Chester Atkins and Jessica Stern Clara Basile Jeffrey Bleich
Blum-Kovler Foundation  
Joseph and Annelise Brand 
Dr. Syed Waseem Brelvi and 
Mrs. Shehnaz Brelvi 
Thomas and Caitlin Brown 
Toby Cadman 
Tessa Rouverol Callejo 
Kristine Collins Gregory and Margaret CraigJames Deane 
Jennifer and Len Dulski 
Maria Echaveste and 
Christopher Edley
Melvin and Helen Eisenberg 
Rev. Joseph Eldrige and Maria 
Otero 
Entheogen Fund Michael Ermer First Republic Bank G. Lee FitzGerald and George 
Kohn 
Jacob Foster and Sandile 
Hlatshwayo 
Michelle and Brett Galloway Michele GavrasRebecca Gordon Susan and Gary Halling Lisa Honig David and Pamela Hornik Peter and Terri Keogh Karen Knudson and Terri 
Tachovsky 
Cynthia Krumme Amit Kumar Tim Lane Bonnie Lau Mina Titi Liu and Eric 
Rosenblum 
Berta and Allen Low Mastercard Regina McConahay Pamela Merchant and Kirby 
Sack 
Ann Merrill Minami Tamaki LLP H. Andrea Neves C. Dixon Osburn and Jeremy 
Hodder 
Mark Osiel Eric Roberts 
Kathy Roberts and Aaron Loeb
Maria and Larry Roberts 
Jane Rocamora
Ropes & Gray LLP 
Rosen Bien Galvan & Grunfeld 
LLP 
Peter Sanders 
Betty and Jack Schafer 
Sheppard Mullin 
Carlos Siderman 
Ralph Steinhardt and Donna 
Scarboro
Chinami Saida Stern and Peter 
Stern Kassie and Luke Stone 
David Strand and M. Bridget 
Duffy 
Donald P . Sullivan and R. 
Steven Taylor 
Tom Swift Mark Tauber and Julie Roley Celia Tejada Michael Traynor Union Bank Philippe and Kate Villers Volkswagen Group of  
America, Inc. 
Hon. Rebecca Westerfield and 
Ivy Fine 
Christopher Wolf Paul Wolfson and Neil Cohen 
$500-$999
Melody and Colin Anderson Anonymous Dan Appelman and Deborah 
Soglin 
Daniel Barton Pamela Bass-Bookey Almudena Bernabeu Raymond Bonner Alex BroekhofSanjay Bulchandani and Akiko 
Bristol 
Margaret CederothCohen Milstein Sellers & Toll 
PLLC
Cindy Cohn and Patrick Ball  Kris Davis and Erin Kennedy Diane Dixon Jeron and Marjorie Donalds Edward DuMont Louise and Jim Eisenbrandt William Eisenstein Van EllisThe Episcopal Church in the 
Diocese of California  
Mary Fabri Mary Beth Fama Elizabeth Farsnworth Mark Fishman Laurel Fletcher and Jefrey 
Selbin 
Mary Anne FordRuth Ford and Richard Owens  Robert Fram and Jeanne 
Blamey 
Louise Francis and Dennis 
Cusack 
Hon. Eric Garcetti and Amy 
Wakeland  
Alexis Gevanter and Robert 
Gould 
Tyler Giannini Scott Greathead Simon and Sylvia Guendelman Rodrigo E. Guerra Y Guerra Katherine Hallward Thomas and Mary Heyman Stuart and Rhoda Hing Susan Hirsch and Susan Leal Human & Civil Rights 
Organizations of America 
Sanford Ibrahim Kara Kelly and Rahsaan 
Thompson 
Jill Kirshner Avi Klein David Krimm and Peter Bradley Maria and Stephen Lans Holly Laurent Michael Leonhard Sarah Lowe Brinton Lykes Crystal Miran and Justin BergerMariam and Jamil Momand  Nicole Phillips Hilary Plews and Celine Barry Lisa ReinsbergRobert Half Legal Dana Rosenfeld and Eric Biel  Janisha Sabnani and Arthur 
Roberts 
Courtney Saleski Isabelle Salgado Arlene Schaup Steven and Karen Schneebaum Amitai Schwartz Caroline Scullin Shannon Raj Singh and Deepak 
Singh 
Sisters of Charity of 
Leavenworth Social Justice Network
Alberto Solis and Katie Tamony Nicola Sumner Marc Van Der Hout Van Der Hout, Brigagliano & 
Nightingale, LLP 
Pamela Vossenas Rev. William Wipfler Michael Withey 
$250 - $499
Anonymous Elizabeth MacKay Balderston Thomas Bertelsen Carolyn Patty Blum and Harry 
Chotiner
Lawrence Blum and Judith 
Smith 
Jeff Blum Blaine Bookey Billy Boughton David Brody and Erin 
Dumbacher 
Frank Buffum Geralyn Busnardo Aldo and Crisitna Cabello Jong Choi Fritzi Cohen Nancy Conover Susan Corke Dan Costello Catherine R. Cusic Ana Deutsch Robert DockendorffDavid and Natasha Dolby Katharine Doyle Staci Dresher Margaret DrewMarta Drury and Kerry Lobel Katherine Durgin and Elaine 
McKinley 
Moira and Daniel Duvernay Todd Elmer Tasha Elsbach David Esquivel Natasha Fain and Mark Leonard Margo Feinberg and Fred Ross Joseph Gagnon Rachel Geman and Andy Nash Genentech Google Nalayini Gunanayagam Brittan Heller Lorraine HonigSarah Johari Carmen Johnson John and Claudia Lamperti Ellen LaPointeBelinda Liu Lois Mae Hobson and Amb. 
Princeton Lyman 
Lisa MargarrellSean McCormick and Kate 
Kabagambe 
Ellen and Harold McElhinny Chiseche Mibenge Nancy Morris Faris NatourPeter Nestor Eileen O’Connor and John 
Bilotta
Milton and Elizabeth Otto Jacqueline Peabody Geetha Reddy and Matthew 
Brocchini 
Lorna Reith Sylvia Rosales-Fike Edward and Susanne Sack Anja C. Schleth Alexandra Sepulveda Reza Shahi Ellen Shea Conrad Sheck Rebeca Sheff Joninna Sadoff Simpson Michael Sorgen Nancy Spear Jack Spence and Katherine Yih David Spener Eleanor Swift Ibo Tejada and Nina Anderson 
Tejada
Mariel Vargas Jim Wallace David and Janet WattsLeah Werchick Ron Wong and Mike Tekulsky Jason and Carolina Wright Raymond Yu 
$249 & Under 
Briana AbramsLeila AfsharMabel Aguilar and Robert 
Fabela 
Edward Ahn Alliance Bernstein Mark Allen Julie Alley Margarita Altamirano Phillip Althouse AmazonSmile Foundation Dorothy Anderson Marvin Anderson and Terrance 
Mayfield 
AnonymousApple, Inc. Vickie Argueta Lajuanda M. Asemonta Christine Azevedo 
  DonorsJoan and Albert Baca 
Mary Kate Bacalo 
Alicia Baiardo 
Jeremy Bardin Jennifer Barnette and Joe 
Farsakh 
Janis and Charles Barquist
Jesse Basbaum 
Linda BassMichael Bass Sophany and Sarit Bay 
Kate Bearman 
John Beaulaurier 
Daniel Becker Eliott Behar Jimmy Bell 
Constance Bernstein 
Abigail Blodgett 
Mary Bonauto and Jenny 
Wriggins 
Jeffrey Borenstein Karen and Steve Bovarnick Matthew Braithwaite Mark Brooks Matthew Bullock Lisa Burger Karin Cabello-Moriarty Carmen Callil Theresa Cameranesi Harry Cantwell Tara Capsuto Boris CardenasLucy Salcido Carter Anna-Marie Castrodale and 
Ken Corts 
Sylcana Mariangel Cavada John Cavanagh and Robin 
Broad 
Renato Cellucci Christine Charneski Stephen and Laurel Chessin Jaime Cifuentes Gillian CleggMardge Cohen Jaclyn Cotto and Matthew 
Hagedorn 
Jennifer Cowan and Dan JacobJohn Cross and Ben Diamond Gabrielle Colville Jorge Contesse Leonard Conway Ann and Loring Dales Julia Dalzell Craig Daniel Connie de la Vega Meg and Anthony deGuzman Diana DellamereJenna Derickson Kathryn DeReimer Cary Devorsetz Jerome and Rebecca Donnelly Joyce Dubensky Heather Duchowny Dixon Dudderar Erin Dunigan Noah DzubaRonald Elson Joelle EmersonGillian Emmons and Eric 
Cohen  
Charity Espiritu Stephanie Farrior Steve and Elena Finestone David Forman 
Vincente Franco 
James Freake 
H. Susan Freireich Sibyl Garner Nanette Gartrell and Dee 
Mosbacher 
Mike Gatehouse Brenda Gates-Monasch Dan Gatti Margie Gelb and Mark 
Aaronson 
Shahin Ghazanshahi Abby Ginzberg Ernest Goitein and Claire Feder Brian Goldman 
Diana and Mark Goldstein 
Silvia Gonzalez 
Nora Goodfriend-Koven and 
Edwin Reano Vasquez 
William Gorman Y ael Goshen Carol Hurd GreenChris Greenwood and Rev. 
Marc Shargel  
Martin Griffith Vivian Grimaldo David Grosser Janet and Richard Grossman Barbara Enloe Hadsell and 
Douglas Hadsell 
Mark Hanis Hadar Harris Victoria Hartanto and David 
Vallejo 
Alice Harley Jaime HarveyRachel HillLarry and Terry Hill  Harold Hodes Melissa Hooper Hilary Hopkin Joyce Horman Todd Howland Una Hrnjak Jeremy Hughes Deena Hurwitz and Doug FordMarisita and Tu Jarvis  Venilde A. Jeronimo Julia Johari Elaine Johnson Francisco Rivera and Claudi 
Josi 
Philip G. Judge Megan Karsh Maya Karwande Karen Kash Redden and Joe 
Redden, Jr. 
Maria Katsoulis Edward Keefe and Richard 
Branson 
Cassandra Kildow Carol King and Allan Brill Jeff Kragel Daniel M. Krainin and Amy 
Woolever 
Marshall Krause and Janet 
Navsky 
Randy and Nazaria Kreher Kate Kroeger Anne Kroemer Lauren KronerMatthew Krumme R. Kamela Laird 
Lucille Layne 
Katherine Lewis
L.G. Lindsay  Lynn Lindsay Mark Lippolt 
Lauren Locke-Paddon 
Anenette Lomont and Charles 
Raaberg 
Joseph Lovewell 
Jon Luccese 
Vincent Macino 
Carol Mackinnon 
Donald Macmillan Jeff MageeAnne Mahle and David 
McCarthy 
Julia Mailander Mary Maloney David Mandel-Anthony Rita Maran Marc Martin Arnold Matlin Elaine McAdam Deborah Elaine McCrimmon Jessie McDaniel Timothy McDonough and Leah 
Bonvissuto 
Daniel McLaughlinMatthew McManus Stephen McNeil and Brian 
Mailman 
Margery Meadow Dermot Meagher Alberto MedinaHector E. Mendez Melissa Meth Jamie Miller Elizabeth Milos Lynette MinerBecka Minkoff Marjon Momand Andrea Monemzadeh Diane Moore Alberto Mora and Susan TalalayPatricia Morales Eugene Moreland Sarah Morris Cecilia Moss Gail and Peter Mott Lynette Mullens and Stephen 
Dilly 
Kathleen Mullins Michael Murray and Danielle 
McArthur 
Mary and Michael Murphy Padden Murphy Sean and Julie Murphy Jasvir Nagra Steven Nam Gregory Naranjo Bonnie Nelson Carolyn Nguyen Tom Nolan and Daniel BartonCristian Orrego Deirdre O’Shea Jasmine Owens Lynette Parker Deb ParsonsJordan and Paula Paust Michael PearceNancy Pemberton Marc and Jacqueline PerryGail and Robert Phares 
Patricia Piasecki 
Stephen Pohl 
Susan and Donald Polden Leach Price and Patrick 
Callahan 
Eileen Purcell
Kathryn Pyle 
Stanley Raggio Donald RayMatthew Reagan 
Alex Reese 
Hanna Regev
Alexander Reichert Pamela Reis Evangelina Remoundos 
Florence and Paul Roberts 
Theresa M. Eliot Roberts 
Claudia Patricia Rodriguez Alas Mary Rogier Mercedes Rojas David Rorick Bruce and Irina Rosenblum Emily Rosendahl Alexey Rostapshov Fran Roznowski Jeff Russell Sarah Ryan Martin Sabelli Jonathan Sack Rodrigo Santelices Vivian Sarratt and Boris 
Nemchenok 
Joel Schaffer Sr. Antona Schedlo Elizabeth Scheffee Jonathan Schmidt Mark Robert Schneider Franz Scheiderman Jessica Schwartz Michael Sears and Ben Redcross Everett Secor Jeffrey Seelbach Phoebe Seligman Jessica Sharp Steven Shatz and Nina Rivkind Kathleen Shay David Shayer Eve and Ernest Simon Marco Simons Dane Skidmore Kara Slack Gregory Smith Mark Smith Clifton Smoot Steven Smoot and Kevin Rich Judith Somberg and Lawrence 
Rosenberg 
Dale Sorensen Efrain Staino Sonia Stan Sandra C. Steele Gary Stenger Julia Stephanides Jay Stern and Meg Sweeney 
Lawless 
Peter Stern and Holly Badgley Kristy Stevenson Norman Stockwell Mike and Crystal Stonebreaker Arthur Strimling Jamienne Studley and Gary 
Smith Stephen Sugarman and Karen 
Carlson 
Enrique Tamayo Chris Tarbell Kristi Lentz Taylor Colby Teller 
Altaf Mike Termezy
Arkadiy Tetelman 
Angie Thew Camille Thomasson Christina Thompson
Steven Thompson 
Chris Thomson 
Lauren Trenor Kessa Turnbull Rachel Ungar
The University of Texas at 
Austin  
Y alda Vahdani 
John E. Valdez Alejandro Vallejo Carole van Aelstyn Zenaida VelasquezAnne Johnson Veldhuis Rose Mary Wadman Gladys and Lewis Wallace Lisa Wallace Heather Warm Heather Warnken and Andrew 
Grinberg
Elaine Warner Julie Watters Daniel Wayne Judy Weiss Peter and Cora Weiss James and Judith Wentzel Thurman Wenzl Rebecca Wersan Dan Wohlfeiler Alex Wright-Gladstein Tadaishi Y atabe RodriguezOmar Y ousuf and Mulky Abdi Julie Zigoris Yvette Zinaman 
In-Kind
BareMinerals Burn SF Contigo CORE40Davis Family Vineyards DestinoHafner Vineyards Hotel Nikko San Francisco Indosole J Vineyards & Winery Lagunitas Brewing Company Living Wines Collective Milton Road Trading Company Nicholson Ranch Ninebark Pop Physique Sandro Shotgun Players The Corner Store ThirstyBear Brewing Company Uforia Studios Uva Enoteca Uvaggio Veer & Wander Operating Revenue & Expenses*
July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2016
operating revenues
Foundation Grants** $1,237,000
UN Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture $20,000
Individual and Corporate Contributions $483,673
In-Kind Contributions*** $4,393,282
Investment Income -$540
Total Operating Revenues $6,133,415
operating expenses
Program $5,512,777
Administration $224,909
Fundraising $173,568
Total Operating Expenses $5,911,254
prograM expenses
Program 93%
Administration 4%
Fundraising 3%
*Based on audited figures for July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2016. An audited financial statement is available upon request.
**This figure includes $1,079,167 in temporarily restricted grants.**CJA partners with outside law firms and investigation firms to investigate and litigate cases on behalf of its clients.  Eleven firms and individual 
attorneys provided over 9,000 hours of pro bono services valued at $4,185,533. In addition, six firms made contributions of $190,532 to cover out 
of pocket expenses. The total donated pro bono legal and other services was $4,393,282.  FINANCIALS
Program
Administration
FundraisingFoundation Grants
72%20%
8%
93%4% 3%Individual & Corporate 
Contributions
In-Kind Contributions
Expenses by CategoryIncome by Category
Program
Administration
FundraisingFoundation Grants
72%20%
8%
93%4% 3%Individual & Corporate 
Contributions
In-Kind Contributions
Expenses by CategoryIncome by CategorySTAFF  
C. Dixon Osburn, Executive Director
Almudena Bernabeu, Transitional Justice  
   Program Director
Carolyn Patty Blum, Senior Legal AdvisorMira Chernick, Legal Fellow
Lisa Cohen, Communications Consultant
Scott Gilmore, Staff Attorney
Lisa Hammond, Finance &  
   Operations Director
Daniel McLaughlin, Senior Staff Attorney
Felipe Navarro, International Law Fellow
Jennifer Rasmussen, Director of  
   Strategic Partnerships
Kathy Roberts, Legal DirectorNushin Sarkarati, Staff Attorney
Susana Solis, Office Manager
Kelsey Waxman, Development  
   & Communications AssociateBOARd OF  dIRECTORS 
Farah Brelvi, Chair
William Aceves, Vice Chair
Lokelani DevoneTyler Giannini
Joan M. Haratani
Rochelle King 
Mina Titi Liu
James MintzJoey NeugartC. Dixon Osburn, President  
& Executive Director
Jane Rocamora
William Schulz
Caroline L. ScullinWilma B. WallaceGLOBAL  AdVISORY  COUNCIL  
Chester Atkins
Carlos Castresana Fernandez
Sandra Coliver Benjamin Cuellar
Gerald Gray
Jennifer M.  Green 
Paul Hoffman
Naomi Roht-ArriazaSteven M.  Schneebaum Ralph G. Steinhardt
Beth Van Schaack   STAFF, BOARd & COUNCIL/T_he Center for 
Justice & Accountability
Bringing Human Rights Abusers to Justice 
One Hallidie Plaza, Suite 406 | San Francisco, CA 94102
(415) 544-0444 | www.cja.org