 
 
The United States’ Compliance with the United Nations Convention Against Torture with 
Respect to Arbitrary Detention at Guantánamo  
 
53rd Session, Geneva, 3 November – 28 November 2014  
 
 
I. Reporting Organization   
 
This submission is by the Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR), a non governmental 
organization based in the United States that is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights 
guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  CCR has 
been  at the forefront of defending the rights of men detained at Guantánamo since the beginning 
of the prison’s operation.  We were counsel in Rasul v. Bush , 542 U.S. 466 (2004), which first 
established the right of detainees to challenge the legality of their  detentions in U.S. courts, and 
have coordinated the legal representation of detainees by hundreds of pro bono counsel for over 
a decade.  We have also directly represented dozen s of current and former detainees in  their 
efforts to ensure  humane treatment during detention,  timely release,  reintegration , and 
rehabilitation after release.  
 
II. Issue Summary  
 
In its Concluding Observations of 2006,1 the Committee expressed its concern about indefinite 
detention of individual s held at Guantánamo  Bay, at the time with no access to any meaningful 
procedures to review the lawfulness of their detention.  Much has changed  since  then, but 
indefinite detention is as much an issue  today as it was eight years ago.  Despite repeated public 
assurances that the government is committed to closing Guantánamo , 149 men remain 
imprisoned.  Most have never been charged and will never be charged.  More than h alf of them  – 
79 – have been  approved  for transfer , the vast majority of them by the unanimous consent of an 
inter-agency task force over four years ago .2 
 
In 2013 , detainees staged a prolonged prison -wide hunger strike to protest their treatment and 
indefinite detention – the la rgest and longest in Guantánamo ’s history.  Our clients , like the 
majority of the other detainees , sacrificed their health, and in some cases endangered their lives  
in an effort to draw attention to their plight .  At Guantánamo , hunger striking detainees are o ften 
made to endure highly painful and humiliating procedures to remove them f rom their cell 
(“forced cell extractions”) and forcible feedings  via nasogastric intubation .  During the height of 
the 2013 hunger strike, our clients reported that some detainees had become “skeletal ,” were  
“barely moving,” and had  coughed up blood or lost consciousness.   
                                                 
1 Committee Against Torture, Conclusions and recommendations: United States of America , adopted at the 36th 
session of the Committee Against Torture, CAT/C/USA/CO/2 (Jul . 25, 2006) . Available at  
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CAT%2f C%2fUSA%2fCO%2f2
&Lang=en . 
2 Four men out  of the 79 currently cleared detainees were cleared by a Periodic Review Board (PRB) over the course 
of the last year . The PRB process also relies on interagency consensus in reaching its decisions.  
 
 
2 
 
 
According to our clients , under the restrictive  conditions of detention at Guantánamo , hunger 
striking is the only way to raise concern over  their detention  after years of inaction by the United 
States and to resist the regime of sec recy at the prison that keeps their torment out of the view of 
the international community .  More importantly, our clients explained that the hunger strike was 
compelled  out of an abiding hope that they might one day regain their freedom .  During a March 
2013 meeting, our client Fahd Ghazy stated it this way: “Hunger striking is not my choice.  [The 
United States government] cleared me for transfer.  My choice is to be home and to live as a 
human being.”  
 
In response to the protest, the Unit ed Nations and regional human rights bodies joined in the call 
for a prompt closure of Guantánamo.  President Obama promised to renew efforts to close the 
facility i n a speech on  May 23, 2013.  He pointed to his deep unease with holding men without 
charge for so many years and the ongoing forced feeding of thirty men who were then on hunger 
strike .  “Our sense of justice is stronger than that ,” the President concluded .3 
 
More than a year later , those words have not translated into action .  The government’s goal of 
closing Guantá namo appears aspirational at best .  An estimated twenty detainees continue their 
hunger strike  and the government continues to submit them to forcible feeding and solitary 
confinement .  We find the government’s report unsatisfactory, as it does not fully explain why, 
despite the “absolute commitment” of the government to close the facility , transfer s continue to 
proceed  at a glacial speed.  The government lifted the moratorium on transfers to Yemen in May 
2013, but no t a single Yem eni ha s left the prison alive since July 2010 .  As of this submission, 
well over half of the 149 remaining Guantánam o detainees are from Yemen.  Sadly, Guantánamo 
is devolving into an indefinite detention camp housing exclusively Muslim men from Yemen – 
all while p roposals for new restrictions on transfers are pending in Congress .  The lack of 
certainty over their fate creates unbearable anguish  for our clients and the other detainees, a 
situation that the government has so far failed to address.  
 
III. Legal Framework  
 
Article 1  
1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term “torture ” means any act by which severe pain or 
suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as 
obtaining from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or 
a third person has committed or is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or coercing 
him or a third person, or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind, when such  pain or 
suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public 
official or other person acting in an official capacity. It does not include pain or suffering arising 
only from, inherent in or incidental to lawfu l sanctions.  
                                                 
3The White House, Remarks by the President at the National Defense University  (May 23, 2013) , 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the -press -office/2013 /05/23/remarks -president -national -defense -university .  
 
3 
 
2. This article is without prejudice to any international instrument or national legislation which 
does or may contain provisions of wider application.  
Article 2  
1. Each State Party shall take effective legislative, administrative, judicial or other measures to 
prevent acts of torture in any territory under its jurisdiction.  
2. No exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of war, int ernal 
political instability or any other public emergency, may be invoked as a justification of torture.  
3. An order from a superior officer or a public authority may not be invoked as a justification of 
torture.  
Article 3  
1. No State Party shall expel,  return ( “refouler ”) or extradite a person to another State where 
there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to 
torture.  
2. For the purpose of determining whether there are such grounds, the competent authori ties shall 
take into account all relevant considerations including, where applicable, the existence in the 
State concerned of a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights.  
Article 11  
Each State Party shall keep under systema tic review interrogation rules, instructions, methods 
and practices as well as arrangements for the custody and treatment of persons subjected to any 
form of arrest, detention or imprisonment in any territory under its jurisdiction, with a view to 
preventi ng any cases of torture.  
Article 13  
Each State Party shall ensure that any individual who alleges he has been subjected to torture in 
any territory under its jurisdiction has the right to complain to, and to have his case promptly and 
impartially examine d by, its competent authorities. Steps shall be taken to ensure that the 
complainant and witnesses are protected against all ill -treatment or intimidation as a 
consequence of his complaint or any evidence given.  
 
IV. The CAT Committee General Comments  & List of Issues  
 
The Committee prepared its list of issues for the United States in 2010.4 
 
In question 8, the Committee asked the United States government, inter alia , to clarify the steps 
it has taken to ensure it does not detain suspects indefinitely, without charge, and the legal 
safeguards available to the detainees.  It also asked about safeguards to ensure no detainee is 
                                                 
4 Committee Against Torture , List of issues prior to the submission of the fifth periodic report of the United States of 
America , CAT/C/USA/Q/3 -5 (Jan. 20, 2010).   Available at  
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CAT%2fC%2fUSA%2fQ%2f3 -
5&Lang=en .   
 
4 
 
transferred to a country where they could face a real risk of being tortured, and the type of post -
transfer monitoring arrangements the government has adopted.   For detainees who are 
undergoing criminal prosecution, the Committee asked for information on the type of court and 
fair trial safeguard s available to the accused, and which steps the government has taken to ensure 
such prosecutions correspond to international fair trial  standards .  
 
In question 10, the Committee enquired about steps taken to ensure the respect for the principle 
of non-refoulement , in particular the establishment of judicial mechanisms to challenge all 
removal decisions and the safeguards in place to cross -check the reliability of diplomatic 
assurances.  
 
In question 38, the Committee enquired about current conditions of det ention, the availability of 
contacts with the detainees’ families, and the opportunities for detainees for education and 
recreation.  The Committee also wished to know how effective measures to improve conditions 
of detention were.  
 
In question 43, the Co mmittee encouraged the government to accept the requests to visit the 
Guantánamo  detention facility by the UN Special Rapporteur on the question of torture and other 
special procedure mechanisms.   
 
In its General Comment No. 2, the Committee has reiterate d the absolute character of the 
prohibition of torture , allowing no exceptions in emergencies and armed conflict.5  The 
Committee also recently reiterated its recommendation that “ solitary confinement might 
constitute torture or inhuman treatment and shoul d be regulated as a measure of last resort to be 
applied in exceptional circumstances, for as short a time as possible, under strict supervision 
including being subjected to judicial review.  Indefinite solitary confinement is prohibited.” 6 
 
V. The Government’s Response  
 
In December 2013, t he government provided a detailed reply to the Committee’s questions 
summarized above.7  It reaffirm ed its “commitment to close the Guantánamo  detention  facility ,” 
and list ed a number of procedural steps it has take n to work towards the closure of the site, 
                                                 
5 Committee Against Torture, General Comment No. 2, Implementation of article 2 by States parties , CAT/C/GC/2 
(Jan. 24, 2008).  Available at  
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layo uts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CAT%2fC%2fGC%2f2&Lang=e
n. 
6 Committee Against Torture, CAT observations on the revision of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of 
Prisoners (SMR), for the Expert Group meeting, Brasilia. 28 to 31 Janua ry 2014 , CAT/C/51/4 (Dec. 16, 2013), 
para. 32 . Available at http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CAT/CATObservationsToSMR.doc  (internal 
citations omitted) . 
7 Committee Against Torture, Consideration of reports submitted by States parties under article 19 of the 
Convention pursuant to the optional reporting procedure. Third to fifth periodic reports of States parties due in 
2011: United States of Americ a. CAT/C/USA/3 -5 (Dec. 4, 2013) . Available at 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CAT%2fC%2fUSA%2f3 -
5&Lang=en  [hereinafter CAT/C/USA/3 -5 (Dec. 4, 2013)] .  
 
5 
 
which it call ed a “difficult and complex” process.8  It asserted  its authority to detain “ʽpersons 
who were part of, or substantially supported, Taliban or al -Qaeda forces or associated forces that 
are engaged in hostilities against the Unite d States or coalition partners.’  Such detention is 
permitted by the law of war until the cessation of hostilities covered by the AUMF.”  The 
government explain ed the work of the 2010 Guantánamo  Task Force, which designated 126 
detainees for “transfer subject to appropriate security measures ,” 36 for military prosecution, 48 
for continued detention, and 30 Yemeni nationals for detention conditional to the evolving 
security situation  in Yemen  and realization of plans for a rehabilitation program in Yemen, or the 
availability of  a third country resettlement option.  At the time of the government’s submission , 
the Obama administration  had transferred 71 detainees home or to third countries, one detai nee 
was tried in a federal court in the United States, and four detainees had died,  three of them 
through suicide , according to the military’s claims .9 
 
The government then described  the process set up after the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in 
Boumediene v. Bush , 553 U.S. 723 (2008) affirmed the detainees’ right under the U.S. 
Constitution to seek judicial review of the lawfulness of their detention (“habeas corpus”) , 
assisted by  counsel of their choice, who may view classified evidence  after receiving app ropriate 
security clearances .10  The government “ has the burden in these cases to establish its legal 
authority to hold the detainees.”11 
 
In addition, the government established an inter-agency  Periodic Review Board  (PRB)  to 
evaluate whether the 48 detainees slated for continued detention  in 2010  continue to pose “ a 
significant threat to the security of the United States .”  A recommendation by the Periodic 
Review Board for transfer or release commits the United S tates to “vigorous efforts […] to 
identify a suitable transfer location outside the United States ,” in line with the security interests 
of the United States, and subject to its obligation of non-refoulement .12  
 
As to transfers, the government referred to its “longstanding and firm commitment not to transfer 
any detainee from Guantánamo  to a State where it is more likely than not that he will be 
tortured .”13  The government will seek diplomatic assurances from the possible country of 
transfer and take into account “the foreign government’s past practice and capacity to fulfill its 
assurances ,” relevant political and legal developments, and the “U.S. diplomatic relations with 
that country .”14  Since the 2009 Special T ask Force recommendations on diplomatic 
assurances,15 the government “is not aware of any cases in which humane treatment assurances 
have not been honored in the case of an individual transferred from the United States or 
                                                 
8 CAT/C/USA/3 -5 (Dec. 4, 2013), para 42.  
9 Id., para 44.  Three additional detainees committed suicide before  the last United States submission  to the 
Committee against Torture  in 2006 .  See note 25 below.   
10 Id., para 60 -61. 
11 Id., para 61.  
12 CAT/C/USA/3 -5 (Dec. 4, 2013), para 62.  
13 Id., para 48.  
14 Id., para 49.  
15 Id., para 67.   
 
6 
 
Guantánamo .”16  The government also made efforts to identify “credible, independent 
organizations” for post -transfer monitoring, and would take “corrective steps” in case of “any 
credible report of conduct contrary to those assurances .”  The government had also refrained 
from transferring in dividuals where it felt assurances were not satisfactory.17  
 
As to conditions of detention, the government asserted it “exceeded” its obligations under 
Common Article 3 of the 19 49 Geneva Conventions.18  The government implemented 
recommendations made by th e Department of Defense review in 2010 and continues to review 
its procedures and make “ improvements wherever possible for the comfort of detainees and the 
safety of the guard force .”19  The report describes  the newly established communal living 
facilities  and measures in place to account for religious needs of the detainees, both in terms of 
meals and of praying.  The government has introduced opportunities for linguistic, educational, 
and vocational training, indoor and outdoor recreation, and maintains a  library with “thousands 
of books, magazines, and DVDs, ” from “picture books to doctoral -level reading .”20  The report 
also describes  the medical facilities and the health care available to detainees.21  For family 
contact, the government continued  to avail itself of the videoconferencing system administered 
by the I nternational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) , phone calls where families do not have 
access to such a system, and an “unlimited amount of mail .”22   
 
As to invitations for U.N. Special Rapporteurs to visit Guantánamo , the government repeated its 
position that it has issued such invitations subject to the limitations on access “consistent with 
the nature of those facilities ,” in particular the prohibitio n on communicat ing in private with 
“enemy forces .”23 
 
VI. Compliance by the United States  
 
The U.S. government has generally made improvements to conditions  of confinement for most 
detainees since 2009 ; however , such changes do not offset the harmful effects on our clients 
resulting from  their uncertainty about when and whether they will ever be released.  Currently, 
79 men are approved for transfer. 56 of them are Yemeni nationals . CCR clients Mohammed Al 
Hamir i, Fahd Ghazy, and Tariq Ba Odah of Yemen remain detained  despite being  approved for 
transfer several years ago.  In May 2014 , CCR Client Ghaleb Mohammad Al Bihani was 
approved for transfer by the Periodic Review Board, an inter -agency mechanism which star ted 
its work in late 2013 .   
 
Our clients carry with them the aftereffects of previous ill-treatment .  The persistent uncertainty 
over their fate freezes their minds in place and time, making it impossible to overcome the 
                                                 
16 Id., para 75.  
17 Id., para 49.  
18 Id., para 216.  
19 Id., para 218.  
20 Id., para 220.  
21 Id., para 222.  
22 Id., para 223.  
23 CAT/C/USA/3 -5 (Dec. 4, 2013) , para 251.   
 
7 
 
trauma of physical and psychologic al abuse.  Improvements in their living conditions , while 
essential, are not experienced as meaningful changes in such circumstances .  Yet, o ur clients do 
grasp at welcome opportunities to educate themselves and prepare them for a life of freedom 
with their families .  
 
Numerous studies have shown that the experience of indefinite detention psychologically 
torments detainees and compromises their health , with long -term effects that are hard to undo 
even after release.24  This is exacerbated by the detaine es’ lack of control over their situation and 
limited means of express ing their grievances .  Indefinite detention, particularly in the 
Guantánamo context, also generates  justifiable resentment in the outside world at the treatment 
meted out to a prison popu lation that has only ever consist ed of Muslim foreign nationals .  Since 
the opening of Guantánamo , six detainees have committed suicide (according to the military’s 
claims) as they were unable to cope with their situation, and many more have attempted to do 
so.25  Such  incidents also increase the anxiety of other detainees.  
 
Lack of Effective Legal or Administrative Review  
Any preventive detention regime requires a mechanism to review the  need for continued 
detention  on an ongoing basis, but neither the hab eas courts nor the Periodic Review Board 
process can ensure that detainees will be release d in the foreseeable future.  Federal courts have 
refuse d to grant detainees’ habeas petitions even where the government has recommended them 
for transfer , and have b een unwilling to mandate release (outside of rare cases where the 
government has assented to release ).  The Secretary of Defense has publicly declared he would 
hesitate approving the transfer of detainees for fear of recidivism.26  Instead of hastening the 
release of elderly, seriously ill or disabled detainees to accelerate the rate of transfers, the 
government fights such petitions, with success, in the courts.27  
 
The Periodic Review Board, established by Executive Order in 2011, with a mandate of 
comp leting initial reviews within one year, started to review detainee cases only two years later, 
in 2013.  It has reviewed only nine detainees so far, and made final determinations for only seven 
men, recommending three men for continued detention, and four men for release, including our 
client Ghaleb Al -Bihani.  None of these four  have actually been released, however; they have 
only been put in another cycle of endless wait ing after a brief surge of hope.  At his PRB 
hearing, Mr. Al -Bihani expressed in deepl y-felt words his hope for a new start in a new country, 
                                                 
24 See, e.g.,  Physicians for Human Rights, Punishment Before Justice: Indefinite Detention in the US  (Jun. 2011) , 
http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/library/reports/indefinte -detention -june2011.html#sthash.8Q6ugnPs.dpuf .   
25 See, e.g.,  Charlie Savage , As Acts of War or Despair, Suicides Rattle a Prison , N.Y. Times (Apr. 24, 2011) , 
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/25/world/guantanamo -files-suicide -as-act-of-war-or-despair.html  (describing the 
shift in the government’s attitude from treating suicidal te ndencies as a sign of depression to stigmatizing them as 
another form of “asymmetric warfare”) ; James Risen & Tim Golden, 3 Prisoners Commit Suicide at Guantánamo , 
N.Y. Times (Jun. 11, 2006) , http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/11/us/11gitmo.html?pagewanted=all  (quoting official 
statistics of 41 suicide attempts by 25 detainees between 2002 and 2006).  
26 Nedra Pickler, Obama Goal of Gitmo Closure Stalled at Pentagon , Associated Press  (Sep. 30, 2014, 2:45 PM 
ET), 
http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory/obama -goal-gitmo -closure -stalled -pentagon -25854351?singlePage =true .  
27 See, e.g. , Aamer v. Obama , 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85343 (D.D.C. Jun. 24, 2014).   
 
8 
 
and his efforts in prison, despite the difficulty, to prepare himself for the life he wants.28  In 
approving Mr. Al -Bihani for transfer, the PRB found him “credible on his commitment to living 
a peacef ul life,”29 and recommended his resettlement in a third country, in line with Mr. Al -
Bihani's own wishes.  Yet five months later, he – like 78 other men cleared for transfer – 
continues to languish at Guantánamo with no sense of whether or when he will fina lly be 
released.  
 
Detainees recommended for prosecution are likewise caught in a system marked by uncertainty 
and delays.  In an effort to establish some certainty about his fate, CCR client Sufyian Barhoumi 
offered to plead guilty before a military commis sion to any  charge the government would be 
willing to bring against him.  He hoped only that once he was sentenced he would obtain a 
certain date by which he could return home to Algeria.  Despite the fact that Mr. Barhoumi was 
designated for prosecution by the Task Force , the military prosecutors refused to accept his plea.  
As a result, Mr. Barhoumi continues to sit in limbo, neither cleared nor charged, without 
explanation.  
 
The government claim s that detentions at Guantánamo are lawful as part of the conflict 
authorized by the post -9/11 Authorization of Military Force (AUMF).   When detention is 
justified as a means to prevent detainees from returning to an armed conflict, as here, the end of 
hostilities should mark an end to detention.  The government, h owever , continues to describe 
new military operations against organizations such as ISIS/ISIL as continuations of the conflict 
covered under the AUMF.  The government may be expected to argue that these developments, 
entirely outside of the control of our clients, and unrelated to their initial capture, nonetheless 
justify their continued detention even after the expected withdrawal of U.S. combat forces from 
Afghanistan later this year.  This, cont rary to the U.S. government’s assertion in its reply to the 
list of issues adopted by the Human Rights Committee in 2013,30 does constitute indefinite 
detention.  
 
Detention Based on Yemeni Nationality  
For prisoners from Yemen, t he prolonged mental anguish caused by continuing indefinite 
detention at Guantánamo is particularly acute.  More than half  of all remaining prisoners  – and 
three -quarters of the men currently approved for transfer  – are of Yemen i descent .  Yet, no 
Yemenis ha ve left the prison alive since July 2010 , when the U.S. government was ordered by a 
federal court to release Mr. Mohammed Odaini.   Predictably , Guantánamo , always a prison 
exclusively for Muslim men and boys , is increasingly becoming a prison for Muslim men and 
                                                 
28 Statement of Ghaleb Nasser Al Bihani , Periodic Review Board, Ghaleb Nasser Al -Bihani, ISN 128 (Apr. 8, 2014), 
http://www.prs.mil/Portals/60/Documents/ISN128/140408_ISN128_U_DETAINEE%27S_WRITTEN_SUBMISSI
ON_PUBLIC.pdf . 
29 Unclassified Summary of Fin al Determination , Periodic Review Board, Ghaleb Nasser Al -Bihani, ISN 128 (May 
15, 2014), 
http://www.prs.mil/Portals/60/Documents/ISN128/140515_U_ ISN128_FINAL_DETERMINATION_PUBLIC.pdf .  
30 Replies of the United States of America. Addendum to: List of issues in relation to the fourth periodic report of the 
United States of America (CCPR/C/USA/4 and Corr.1), adopted by the Committee at its 107th sessio n (11 –28 
March 2013) , CCPR/C/USA/Q/4/Add.1 (Sep. 13, 2013), para 89.  Available at 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/tre atybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CCPR%2fC%2fUSA%2fQ%2f4
%2fAdd.1&Lang=en .   
 
9 
 
boys from a single country – Yemen .  In response, the United States has offered only rhetoric.  In 
May 2013 , the government announced that it would formally lift its self-imposed moratorium on 
transfers to Yemen  and pledged to review the Yemeni Guantánamo population for tran sfer on a 
“case by case basis.”31  To date, however, there still appears to be no plan  for gradual repatriation 
of Yemeni detainees based on an individualized assessment of their probability  of successful 
adjustment to civilian life after release , or to res ettle cleared Yemenis who would accep t transfer 
to a third country.32 And a s of October 2014, federal draft legislation again threatens to prohibit 
transfers from Guantánamo  to Yemen  until 2016 .33   
 
In light of the above, i t is indisputable that Yemeni men are detained at Guantánamo based on, or 
because of, their citizenship and nationality.  If they were not from Yemen, most would not be in 
Guantánamo today.  As such, the continuing detention of Yemeni prisoners is classic arbitrary 
detentio n based on nationality , which violates U.S. law as well as international humanitarian law 
and human rights law, and which causes severe pain and suffering that amounts to torture or 
other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment .34 
 
Hunger Strikes, Forcible F eedings and Poor Conditions of Confinement  
Detention in the Guantánamo  context enhances detainees’ feeling s of helplessness and despair.  
It adds to the trauma they experienced under the coercive inte rrogation methods – many of which  
amounted to torture – of the Bush administration.  Detainees feel compel led to endanger their 
health as the only means to make their voices  heard.  Those on hunger strike have to undergo 
humiliating and painful forcible feeding  that a medical expert, based on publicly available 
information, described as “an extraordinary departure from customary medical practice .”35  The 
                                                 
31 The White House, Remarks by the President at the National Defense University  (May 23, 2013) , 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the -press -office/2013/05/23/remarks -president -national -defense -university  
32 Note that t he proposed rehabilitation center in Yemen, establishment of which the government has long treated as 
among the pre condition s for repatriation  of Yemenis in large numbers , has barely entered in its planning phase.  See 
Yemen moves to set up rehab center for Gitmo detainees,  Al Jazeera America (May 14, 2014 5:30PM ET) , 
http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/5/ 14/yemen -moves -to-setuprehabcenterforgitmodetainees.html  (reporting 
that the Yemeni government has created a committee to “advance the project” of the rehabilitation center, but no 
funds have been earmarked yet);  David S. Cloud U.S. holds talks about Yeme n detention center for Guantanamo 
inmates , L.A. Times (Nov. 6, 2013) , http://articles.latimes.com/2013/nov/06/world/la -fg-yemen -gitmo -20131107  
(describing disagreement  over funding and type of facility as well as the insecurity in Yemen as obstacles to moving 
forward with the plan to build a rehabilitation center in Yemen).  
33 U.S. Senate Committee on Armed Services, Senate Armed Services Committee Roll Call Votes on Nat ional 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015  (May 23, 2014) , http://www.a rmed -services.senate.gov/press -
releases/senate -armed -services -committee -roll-call-votes -on-national -defense -authorization -act-for-fiscal -year-
2015 .  
34 The U.S. government’s failure to transfer Yemeni detainees is indefensible.  It is no excuse to say that Yemen is 
too unstable to accept its citizens back.  Even if that were true, which CCR disputes, it would not explain the failure 
to resettle these men in third countries.  It is also no excuse for the government to blame the U.S. Congress for 
enacting legi slation that makes it more difficult to transfer detainees.  Congress has twice changed the law at the 
request of President Obama, but the rate of transfers has not increased in any meaningful fashion.  Since January 
2011, only 22 detainees have left Guant ánamo alive, most between August and December 2013.  So far in 2014, 
apart from five detainees exchanged for a U.S. soldier held prisoner by the Taliban, only one detainee has left 
Guantánamo.  None was Yemeni.  
35 Declaration of Steven H. Miles, MD,  Hassan v. Obama , No. 04 -cv-1194 (UNA) ( D.D.C. Mar. 5, 2014), para 8(d). 
Available at http://www.reprieve.org/uploads/2/6/3/3/26338131/2014_03_07_steven_miles_declaration.pdf .  
 
10 
 
daily re -insertion of a tube that is wider than normally used in nasogastric feeding, the speed and 
quantity of enter ing fluids , and the use of olive oil as lubricant – the latter abandoned since June 
2014 – are all non -standard, painful and potentially dangerous to the detainees’ health.36  During 
the forcible feeding , detainee s are often secured to a restrain t chair  designed to immobilize their 
hands, legs, and head,  where they remain  for up to two hours to ensure the liquid supplement is 
digested.37  When a detainee stated in his petition to a federal court he would consent to less 
intrusive and painful ways of enteral f eeding, the government refused to consider such an 
option.38  It also did not offer him the option of a more comfortable procedure that was already in 
use with six other hunger strikers.39   
 
In addition, detainees who refuse this painful procedure have to endure what the government 
calls “forcible cell extraction ,” another humiliating protocol .  According to CCR client and long -
term hunger striker, Tariq Ba Odah, forcible cell extractions are conducted in an unnecessarily 
punitive manner .  He reports that though his weight often dips to just approximately 100 pounds 
(45 kilograms) during cell extractions, he is often violently subdued by up to six military guards 
in riot equipment who transport him to feeding sessions .  Despite this, Mr. Ba Odah says that th e 
humiliation of having his will overborn during cell extractions and nasal force feeding is far 
worse than the physical pain  either  causes .  
 
We estimate that between 15 and 25  detainees remain on long -term hunger strike.40  In 2014, the 
government refused  to publish the number of detainees who  are committed to hunger strike , and 
prefers now to call their protest “long term non -religious fasting .”41  The cynical euphemism 
notwithstanding, nothing has been done to address the concerns related to the treatment of men 
who continue to protest their unbearable situation.  Also, we question how publishing the number 
of detainees on hunger strike would compromise detention operations, and would “detract [] from 
the more important issu es, which are the welfare of detainees and the safety and security of 
                                                 
36 Id. 
37 Brief of appellants , Aame r v. Obama,  742 F.3d 1023  (No. 13 -5223 ) (D.C. Cir. Jul. 22, 2013 ), at 22 (quoting from 
the superseded Joint Task Force Guantánamo Bay , Cuba, Joint Medical Group, Medical Management of Detainees 
on Hunger Strike  (Mar. 5, 2013) ).  The government revised those procedures in December 2013, but many details 
have not been made public.  See Joint Task Force Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, Joint Medical Group, Medical 
Management of Detainees with Weight Loss  (Dec. 16, 2013) . Available at 
http://media.miamiherald.com/smedia/2014/03/11/08/40/8qyQk.So.56.PDF .  
38 Dhiab v. Oba ma, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 116072 (D.D.C. Aug. 5, 2014).  
39 Carol Rosenberg, Guantánamo ‘experiment’ didn’t break hunger strike but gets judge’s attention , Miami Herald 
(last update Oct. 9 , 2014 12:25 AM) , http://www.miamiherald.com/news/nation -
world/world/americas/guantanamo/article2618030.html .  
40 Carol Rosenberg, Obama to Congress: Close Guantánamo prison  (Jan. 29, 2014 8:38 AM, last update Feb. 9, 
2014 10:10 PM) , http://www.miamiherald.com/news/nation -world/world/americas/article1959749.html  (noting that 
at the  time of the last official disclosure in December 2013, fifteen detainees were on hunger strike and all force -fed 
through nasogastric tubes.  According to lawyers of the detainees, that number had risen to 25 by the end of January 
2014, 16 of which were be ing force -fed). 
41 Carol Rosenberg, U.S. now calls Guantánamo hunger strike ‘long term non -religious fasting’,  Miami Herald (last 
update Mar. 12 2014 5:24 PM) , http://www.miamiherald.com/news/nation -
world/article1961235.html#storylink=cpy .   
 
11 
 
[U.S.] troops ,” as the government has argued .42  Transparency  and independent oversight by 
established experts on how to ensure compliance with international lega l and ethical standards 
would improve  the welfare  of detainees and safety of prison staff , as well as  the image of the 
United States  abroad .    
 
The World Medical Association, the ICRC, and the American Medical Association all have 
issued ethical guidelines for medical personnel f aced with a protesting hunger -striker  in 
detention .43  The painful and coercive manner of forcible feeding , as it is practiced at 
Guantánamo , contravenes these standards, does not serve a medical interest, and appear s  
designed  to discourage the hunger strikers from continuing their protest . 44  It thus amount s to 
cruel, i nhuman, and degrading treatment  under the Convention against Torture.45  Our clients 
who are on hunger strike experience it as such.  In an April 2013  letter to CCR , Tariq Ba Odah 
likened the fast insertion of too much liquid, while being strapped into a chair, to th e practice of 
water -boarding:  He explained that in some feeding sessions it was impossible to keep down the  
large amount of  supplement, making him choke up vomit and blood .  He has endured forcible 
feedings thousands of times, and now complains of physical ailments, including damaged 
nostril s, excruciating abdominal pain, and a racing heartbeat.  
 
Long -term hunger strikers are also penalized for thei r protest through placement in blocks with 
stricter procedures as to searches, access to open air and exercise, and limited communication 
                                                 
42 Jason Leopold, Gitmo officials alter hunger strike protocols , Al Jazeera America (last updated Dec. 6 2013 
13:09) , http://www.aljazeera.com/humanrights/2013/12/gitmo -officials -alter-hunger -strike -protocols -
2013126124042381368.html  (quoting prison spokesperson Navy Cmdr. John Filostrat) . 
43 Article 6, World Medical Association, Declaration of Tokyo - Guidelines for Physicians Concerning Torture and 
other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in Relation to Detention and Imprisonment  (1975, 
revised, 2006).  Available at http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/c18/   (“Where a prisoner refuses 
nourishment and is considered by the physician as capable of forming an unimpaired and rational judgment 
concerning the  consequences of such a voluntary refusal of nourishment, he or she shall not be fed artificially.”); 
Article 13, World Medical Association, Declaration of Malta on Hunger Strikers  (1991, revised 2006). Available at 
http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/h31/  (“Forcible feeding is never ethically acceptable. Even if 
intended to benefit, feeding accompanied by threats, coercion, force or use of physical restraints is a form of 
inhuman and degrading treatment. Equally unacceptable is the forced feeding of some detainees in order to 
intimidate or coerce other hunger strikers to stop fasting.” ); International Committee of the Red Cross, Hunger 
strikes in prisons: the ICRC’s position  (Jan. 31, 2013).  Available at 
http://www.icrc.org/eng/resources/documents/faq/hunger -strike -icrc-position.htm ; Jeremy A. Lazarus, MD, 
President of the American M edical Association, Letter to Chuck Hagel, U.S. Secretary of Defense  (Apr. 25, 2013). 
Available at http://media.miamiherald.com/smedia/2013/04/30/07/58/FRs25.So.56.pdf . 
44 See Lacey Johnson, Guantanamo force feedings aimed at discouraging other prisoners – witness , Reuters (Oct . 7, 
2014 9:51pm BST) , http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/10/07/uk -usa-guantanamo -forcefeeding -
idUKKCN0HW1VZ20141007   (summarizing the testimony of a medical expert before a federal district court); Josh 
White, Guantanamo Force -Feeding Tactics Are Called Torture , Washington Post  (Mar. 1, 2006) , 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp -dyn/content/article/2006/02/28/AR2006022801344.html  (quoting then 
commander of U.S. Southern Command, Arm y Gen. Bantz J. Craddock, stating “that the new techniques of 
[strapping detainees to the padded chair and using a larger tube that was removed after each feeding] were designed 
to end the strike.”) .  
45 Article 13, Declaration of Malta on Hunger Strikers , see note 42 above ; Declaration of Steven H. Miles, MD,  
Hassan v. Obama , Civil Action No. 04 -cv-1194 (UNA) ( D.D.C. Mar. 5, 2014), para 4.  Available at 
http://www.reprieve.org/uploads/2/6/3/3/26338131/2014_03_07_steven_miles_declaration.pdf .    
 
12 
 
with their fellow inmates.  Prolonged solitary confinement, as indefinite detention, adds to the 
anguish  of detainees whose mental health is already fragile from years of abuse and promises not 
kept.   Our client , Mr. Ba Odah has been held in solitary confinement for at least six years of his 
time in Guantánamo.  He is allowed only a few hours every day outside the cell, a nd reports that 
he regularly goes days with  virtually no human contact  other than the military personnel 
responsible for forcibly feeding him .  Because of his hunger strike, he is often too weak to 
exercise outside, but instead tries to pace inside his cel l.  Now in year twelve of his indefinite 
detention, Mr. Ba Odah, meditates, prays, and reads to ready himself for the day when he is free d 
and will have the opportunity to care for his aging mother.   
 
All of these measures – the force feeding protocols, the use of the restraint chair, the forced cell 
extractions, and the warehousing of long -term hunger strikers in isolation blocks – appear 
punitive  in intent , calculated to break the will of the hunger strikers . 
 
Furthermore,  our clients fear the humiliating genital search procedures they have to undergo 
whenever they ar e taken out of their cell .  This also makes it difficult for them to meet with 
counsel  in person at the base or receive phone calls from counsel .  While a dist rict court judge 
agreed with the detainees that genital searches for the purpose of making phone calls or meeting 
with counsel had no legitimate security justification, the appeals court found it had to defer to the 
judgment of the prison commander, even w here prison policies interfered with the detainees’ 
ability to interact with counsel and, therefore, to litigate  their habeas corpus  cases .46 
 
The detainees’ contact with their families is too infrequent  and impersonal, as video calls, phone 
calls, and mail  are the only options for the detainees.  The scarcity of contact and the lack of 
family visits make it even more difficult for detainees to bear their isolation at Guant ánamo.  
 
Non-refoulement  
While we welcome recent transfers, one of our clients , Djamel Ameziane,  was transferred in 
December 2013 to his home country  Algeria  , despite his declared fear he would be ill -treated 
there.  He inform ed us after his return that upon arrival, the Algerian authorities placed him in 
secret detention, interrogated him repeatedly, and kept him in “deplorable prison conditions .”  
Mr. Ameziane fell seriously ill as a result.  Algeria has blocked the access of human rights 
organizations, and even the ICRC, to provide material and psychological assistance to Mr. 
Ameziane, wh ich would help him adjust to his new life.   In addition, the U.S. government had 
failed to return his personal property to him upon transfer.47  
 
We do not consider the government’s reply to the Committee’s question satisfactory.  It does not 
describe a cle ar plan and timeline to close the facility.  Every review and new mechanism is 
beset w ith delays.   Detainees with Yemeni nationality have no control over the political and 
security situation in Yemen, and plans for the rehabilitation center in Yemen are ad vancing too 
                                                 
46 Hatim v. Obama , 2014 U.S. App. LEXIS 14759, 1 (D.C. Cir.2014).  
47 Motion for Grant of Habeas Relief in the Form of an Order Requiring the Government to Return Petitioner’s 
Personal Property,  Ameziane v. Obama , 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 98334 (No. 05 -392 (ESH) ) (D.D.C. Mar. 7, 2014). 
Available at http://cc rjustice.org/files/2014 -03-
07_Ameziane_MotionGrantHabeasReliefReturnPersonalProperty.pdf .  
 
13 
 
slowly to present a viable option for a foreseeable release.  While we do not underestimate the 
complex nature of negotiations at the domestic and foreign level, we believe that detainees 
should not continue to bear the burden of this lengthy p rocess.  The government’s response 
avoids the heart of the matter : the unlawfulness of indefinite detention and the heavy toll it takes 
on the mental and physical health of the detainees .  Its vague answers  prevent meaningful review 
of the United States’ c ompliance with its international obligations under the Convention.  We 
strongly urge the Committee to continue to press the government delegation for adequate 
answers to questions about how and when the United States will finally close Guantánamo and 
relea se the detainees to their home countries or resettlement countries.  
 
VII. Other UN Body Recommendations  
 
April 2013 Statement by UN High Commissioner for Human Rights :  In April 2013, UN 
High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay stated that  the “continuing indefinite 
incarceration of many of the detainees [at Guantánamo ] amounts to arbitrary detention and is in 
clear breach of international law.”48 In response to the mass hunger strike at the prison, Pillay 
said that “given the uncertainty and anxi eties surrounding their prolonged and apparently 
indefinite detention in Guant ánamo, it is scarcely surprising that people’s frustrations boil over 
and they resort to such desperate measures.”  As a first step towards closing the prison, Pillay 
urged the go vernment to first release detainees who have been cleared for release.49 
 
May 2013 Joint Press Release:  The I nter-American Commission on Human Rights , the UN 
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, and the UN Special Rapporteurs on Torture, Human 
Rights and Counter -Terrorism, and on Health called “the indefinite detention of individuals […] 
“beyond a minima lly reasonable period of time ,” “even in extraordinary circumstances […] a 
flagrant violation of international human rights law and in itself a form of cru el, inhuman, and 
degrading treatment.”  The y condemned as “unjustifiable” the “forced feeding of individuals 
contrary to their informed and voluntary refusal of such a measure.”  The restrictions on transfers 
of Yemeni nationals, “based solely on their nat ionality and on the political situation in Yemen 
[…] constitute a clear violation of the principle of non -discrimination.”  The press release urged 
the United States to “take concrete, decisive steps toward closing the detention center at the 
Guantánamo Na val Base once and for all.”50 
 
October 28, 2013 Statement by Juan Méndez  to the Inter -American Commission on 
Human Rights : In his statement as independent expert to the Inter -American Human Rights 
Commission , UN Special Rapporteur Juan Méndez  noted that the  uncertainty arising from 
                                                 
48 Pillay says Guantanamo detention regime is in “clear breach of international law” and should be closed  (Apr. 5, 
2013) , 
http://www.ohchr.org/SP/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=13212&LangID=E#sthash.vUK9QHJg.d
puf.  
49 Id. 
50 IACHR, UN Working Group o n Arbitrary Detention, UN Rapporteur on Torture, UN Rapporteur on Human 
Rights and Counter -Terrorism, and UN Rapporteur on Health Reiterate Need to End the Indefinite Detention of 
Individuals at Guantánamo Naval Base in Light of Current Human Rights Crisis  (May 1, 2013) ,  
http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/media_center/PReleases/2013/029.asp .   
 
14 
 
indefinite detention “increases the risk of serious mental pain and suffering to the inmate that 
may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or even torture.”   He 
considered the situation in Guantánamo  amoun ted to indefinite detention .51 
 
December 2013 Statement by UN SRs Juan Méndez  and Ben Emmerson on Ameziane 
Forced Transfer :  When the U.S. government forcibly transferred Algerian national , Djamel 
Ameziane, against his will from Guantánamo  to Algeria, United Nations Special Rapporteurs on 
torture, Juan E. Méndez, and on human rights and counter -terrorism, Ben Emmerson , recalled 
their concerns over the unreliability of diplomatic assurances as a safeguard against torture and 
other -forms of i ll-treatment, and called upon States not to make use of  them.52   
 
2014 ICCPR Concluding Observations :  The Human Rights Committee, in its Concluding 
Observations to the 2014 periodic review of the U.S. , regretted the lack of a timeline for the 
closure of Guantánamo  Bay.  It recommended ending the system of indefinite detention, and try 
those accused of crimes in civilian courts, in full respect of the fair trial rights of Article 14 
ICCPR, rather than the protracted military commissions.53 
 
2014 ICERD Conclu ding Observations :  The Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Racial Discrimination, also in 2014, expressed its concern over the continued arbitrary detention 
of non -citizens at Guantánamo  Bay.  It called upon the United States to “end the system o f 
administrative detention without charge or trial and ensure the closure of the Guantánamo  Bay 
facility without further delay.”54 
 
VIII.  Recommended Questions  
 
1) Does the United States have a specific plan and timetable for the closure of Guantánamo? 
What is that plan and timetable?  
 
2) Does the United States expect or intend, before the end of this year, to transfer 
Mohammed Al Hamiri, Ghaleb Al -Bihani, Fahd Ghazy, Tariq Ba Odah, or any other 
                                                 
51 Juan E. Méndez, UN Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment, 
Re: Hearing on the human rights situation of detainees at Guantánamo Naval Base, United States  (Oct. 28, 2013) . 
Available at http://antitorture.org/wp -content/uploads/2013/10/SRT -IACHR -Hearing -Guantanamo -statement -Oct-
28-13.pdf . 
52 UN rights experts on torture and counter -terrorism concerned about the fate  of Guantánamo detainees  (Dec. 10 
2013) , 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=14084&LangID=E#sthash.08sCxKHV.d
puf.  
53 Hum an Rights Committee: Concluding observations on the fourth periodic report of the United States of America  
U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/USA/CO/4, para. 21 (Apr. 23, 2014) .  Available at 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CCPR%2fC%2fUSA%2fCO%2f
4&Lang=en .  
54 Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination: Concluding observations on the combined s eventh to 
ninth periodic reports of United States of America  U.N.Doc. CERD/C/USA/CO/7 -9, para 22 (Aug. 29, 2014) .  
Available at 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CERD%2fC%2fUSA%2fCO%2f
7-9&Lang=en .   
 
15 
 
Yemeni detainees  currently held at Guantánamo ?  
 
3) Is the Periodic Review Board limited to making recommendations for transfer, or can it 
provide any concrete relief to Guantánamo detainees?  
 
4) Will the United States address the le gitimate grievances of detainees on long -term hunger 
strike, and does it plan to adapt its detention protocol for artificial feeding  in order to 
comply with relevant standards under the Convention against Torture?   
 
5) What are the measures used to ensure so litary confinement is only used as a temporary 
measure under exceptional circumstances, in accordance wit h international 
recommendations?  
 
6) Does the United States intend to “expand program content for intellectual stimulation, 
and provide for wider detainee access; maximize interaction between detainees, 
communal living and recreation interaction; approve and implement family visits; and 
consi der inviting non -governmental organizations and appropriate international 
organizations to send representatives to visit Guantánamo,” as recommended by the 
government’s review of conditions at Guantánamo in 2009?  
 
IX. Suggested Recommendations  
 
1) Exercise auth ority under the 2014 NDAA to effect additional transfers without further 
delay . 
 
2) Close Guantánamo by transferring all men whom the government does not plan to charge 
to their home or resettlement countries.  
 
3) Provide the anticipated date by which the Admini stration expects to complete Periodic 
Review Board  hearings for all detainees slated for review.  
 
4) Disclose the number of detainees currently on hunger strike and currently being forcibly 
fed. 
 
5) Disclose the number of detainees currently being held in solitary confinement at 
Guantánamo.  
 
6) Adapt procedures for treatment of detainees on hunger  strike, including medical 
counselling, in accordance with international recommendations for  ethical procedures in 
protest hunger strikes  and limited use of solitary confinement.  
 
7) Ensure all detainees who express a fear of being subjected to torture, or cruel, inhuman, 
and degrading treatment after transfer to their home country or a resettlement country, 
have access to  meaningful  judicial review of this decision.   