ANNUAL  
REPORT
2021VISION
The Center for Constitutional Rights fights for a world 
without oppression—where people use their power to 
achieve justice and guarantee the rights of all. 
© 2021 CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS    
666 BROADWAY FL 7  |  NEW YORK, NY 10012  |  212.614.6448  
CCRJUSTICE.ORGMISSION
The Center for Constitutional Rights stands with social 
justice movements and communities under threat—fusing 
litigation, advocacy, and narrative shifting to dismantle 
systems of oppression regardless of the risk.TABLE OF CONTENTS
Message from the Outgoing Board Chair  ......................................................................................................... 5
Message from the Executive Director  ............................................................................................................. 6
Introducing Our New Board Co-Chairs .............................................................................................................. 7
New Directions: Legislative Advocacy & Southern Justice Rising ................................................................... 8
Structural Racism: Dismantling White Supremacy  ......................................................................................... 9
Patriarchy: Fighting Gender Oppression ......................................................................................................... 13
Oppressive Economic Structures: Combating Abusive Corporate Power  ....................................................... 17
Abusive State Power: Challenging Unjust Government Policies ..................................................................... 21
The Center for Constitutional Rights in the News .......................................................................................... 27
Building the Next Generation of Movement Lawyers
 Bertha Justice Fellowship Program ..................................................................................................................... 28
 Ella Baker Internship Program .............................................................................................................................. 29
Events  ........................................................................................................................................................... 30
Thank You
 Donor Spotlights ................................................................................................................................................... 32
 In Memoriam ......................................................................................................................................................... 35
Financial Report  ............................................................................................................................................ 36
Board, Staff, Interns ....................................................................................................................................... 37
Ways to Support the Center for Constitutional Rights .................................................................................. 38
Thank You and Attributions ........................................................................................................................... 395 |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | Fifty-five years ago the call 
went out from activists in 
the U.S. South: we need your 
help securing the right for 
Black people to vote, especially in 
Mississippi. Organizers working to 
get people of color to the polls were 
beaten, firebombed, shot at, run out 
of town, and killed. When Fannie Lou 
Hamer led a group of eligible voters 
to the polls in Indianola, Mississippi, 
they were turned away because of the 
state’s racist literacy test, and on their 
way home their bus was pulled over.  
The police fined them $100 for the bus 
being “too yellow.”  
Their call for help was answered by 
a group of progressive, smart, bold 
lawyers: Arthur Kinoy, Morty Stavis, Bill 
Kunstler, and Ben Smith. The Center for 
Constitutional Rights was born in that 
struggle and the partnership with Hamer, 
Ella Baker, and the other leaders of the 
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.
Kinoy, Stavis, Kunstler, and Smith passed 
the torch to the next generation of 
courageous lawyers who continued 
the Center for Constitutional Rights’ 
unwavering commitment to show up for social justice advocates under 
fire: Michael Ratner, Rhonda Copelon, 
Philip Weiss, Nancy Stearns, and 
Joan Gibbs to name only a few. Their 
legacies are carried on today—and 
deepened—by the  fierce staff who are 
standing shoulder to shoulder with 
environmental activists in Louisiana’s 
Cancer Alley, challenging cruel and 
unusual treatment of trans people 
incarcerated in Georgia prisons, ending 
the New York Police Department’s 
unconstitutional and discriminatory 
stop-and-frisk practices, defending 
Palestinian-rights advocates who have 
been fired from their jobs and sued in 
frivolous litigation by right wing Zionists, 
and holding private military contractors 
liable for torture of detainees at Abu 
Ghraib prison.
The torch is also now being passed 
on at the Center for Constitutional 
Rights’ Board of Trustees. This 
June Lisa Crooms Robinson and 
Leila Hessini succeeded me as co-
chairs of the board. Lisa is a law 
professor at Howard University 
and an internationally recognized 
scholar of racial and gender justice. 
Leila is Vice President of Programs at the Global Fund for Women and 
brings to the organization over 20 
years of organizing and grantmaking 
experience promoting an intersectional 
lens to advancing human rights, 
gender equality, and economic and 
reproductive justice in the United 
States and globally. I’m delighted 
that Lisa and Leila, together with the 
other impressive activists/advocates 
on the board, will lead the Center for 
Constitutional Rights into the next 
stage of its work—including expanding 
our presence in the U.S. South with 
a new office in Mississippi, the place 
where we were born 55 years ago.
We are especially grateful to the 
Thelma Newman Society Members, 
Michael Ratner Campaign Donors, 
and Justice Sustainers. The Center for 
Constitutional Rights’ family is stronger 
than ever and ready for the fights that 
lay ahead. 
Katherine Franke 
Chair, Board of Trustees  
2015-2021
MESSAGE FROM THE OUTGOING BOARD CHAIR
MESSAGE FROM THE OUTGOING BOARD CHAIRTODAY, THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 
ENJOYS THE STRONGEST 
FINANCIAL, POLITICAL, AND 
LEADERSHIP POSITION IT 
HAS EVER HAD THANKS 
TO EXCEPTIONAL STAFF 
LEADERSHIP , BOARD 
VISION, AND COMMUNITY 
PARTNERSHIPS. |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 6
In April, I was in my office when I 
got a call that one of our clients 
imprisoned at Guantánamo Bay had 
been cleared for release after being 
held there without charge for almost 
20 years. It was an emotional day. 
Earlier in the year we had received 
equally good news when a military 
judge sided with us and ruled that 
another of our clients, Majid Khan, 
could be released from the prison  
as early as February 2022.  
I wish I could put into words what the 
prospect of freedom from this hell 
means for these two men, but I don’t 
have the writing skills to adequately 
capture that. What I can tell you is 
how it was for us: bittersweet, jubilant, 
enraging, and affirming. The Center 
for Constitutional Rights has been at 
the forefront challenging indefinite 
detention and torture at Guantánamo 
since the prison opened in 2002. We 
were the first to send civilian lawyers 
there to represent detainees.  
It was a radical move by a radical 
organization with the blessing of our 
radical supporters.  As we celebrate our 55th anniversary, 
it should not be lost on any of us that 
some of our biggest victories over the 
past year came in our legacy cases 
—the protracted battles that require 
tremendous dedication. It takes time 
and some incredible will to make 
change. It requires resilience and an 
immovable commitment to justice.  
Not once during this long fight did you 
ever question our work or abandon us. 
This annual report is dedicated to you.
It highlights the lives and communities 
you are changing for the better and 
represents the best of who we are 
and what we do. The report includes 
a New Directions piece summarizing 
our growing legislative advocacy 
work, as well as our progress with the 
long-awaited rebirth of our Southern 
Regional Office.
Whether you have been with us  
since the early days or are new to 
the Center for Constitutional Rights' 
family, none of this work happens 
without you. So often during the 
long hours, days, weeks, months, 
and years it takes to fight for social 
transformation, I am overwhelmed with gratitude for the way you stand 
with us no matter the odds. Your will 
forces our society to change.  
Your belief in the Center for 
Constitutional Rights ensures we can 
continue to partner with grassroots 
movements to advance liberation and 
justice, dismantle structural racism 
and patriarchy, push back against 
economic exploitation, and challenge 
government abuse. Together, we have 
built the Center for Constitutional 
Rights into a powerhouse in the social 
justice movement.
We will never give up, because we 
know you won’t give up. Thank you.
In solidarity,
Vince Warren 
Executive Director
MESSAGE FROM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORMESSAGE FROM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORWE NEED TO REMAIN  
RADICAL. WE NEED TO 
REMAIN COMMITTED. WE 
NEED TO REMAIN OUTRAGED. 7
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | INTRODUCING OUR NEW BOARD CO-CHAIRSINTRODUCING OUR NEW BOARD CHAIRS
Lisa Crooms-Robinson  
is a professor of Law at Howard 
University School of Law and an 
internationally recognized scholar of 
race, gender, and human rights. She 
has written shadow reports for the UN 
Committee on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Racial Discrimination and on 
U.S. compliance with the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
Lisa got to know the Center for 
Constitutional Rights in the 1980s, 
during the anti-apartheid movement and 
while organizing against police brutality 
and white supremacist violence in New 
York. After 9/11, she appreciated how 
the organization “was brave enough 
to challenge the national narrative 
that justified suspending basic legal protections in the interest of ‘national 
security.’” That, combined with our 
fight against stop and frisk, support 
for Palestinian self determination, and 
organizing around Law for Black Lives, 
confirmed for Lisa that radical lawyers 
and movement lawyering were two 
characteristics of the community in 
which she wanted to do the work of 
training the next generation of lawyers 
committed to serving communities.
Crooms-Robinson is excited to co-
chair the board as we relaunch our 
Southern Regional Office, determining 
“how best to move forward in concert 
with individuals and communities who 
are most affected by the unfinished 
business of the movements for civil 
and human rights and Black liberation.”  “I AM LOOKING FORWARD TO 
WORKING WITH LEILA HESSINI 
TO HELP THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 
CONTINUE TO MODEL WHAT 
IT LOOKS LIKE TO BE A BLACK 
AND PEOPLE OF COLOR-LED 
ORGANIZATION COMMITTED 
TO RADICAL LAWYERING IN 
THE INTEREST OF SECURING 
BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS FOR 
ALL REGARDLESS OF IDENTITY, 
STATUS, OR LOCATION.”
—LISA CROOMS-ROBINSON 
Leila Hessini  
is the Vice President of Programs 
at Global Fund for Women. She 
has over 20 years of organizing and 
grantmaking experience promoting an 
intersectional lens to advancing human 
rights, gender equality, and economic 
and reproductive justice. 
“I bring to the Center for 
Constitutional Rights my identities 
as a reproductive justice activist, an 
immigrant from North Africa, and 
someone who has made the U.S.  
South their home,” Hessini said.   Hessini served on the senior leadership 
team of Ipas, co-founded a feminist 
consulting firm, and led the Ford 
Foundation Cairo office’s gender work. 
She serves on Prospera’s board and 
previously served on the boards of 
SisterSong, Women’s Global Network 
for Reproductive Rights, and others. 
“Center for 
Constitutional Rights 
folks are my people 
because they believe 
in radical change, in 
revolutionary love, 
and in the power of 
collective action.” “GIVEN THE INTERSECTING 
CRISES IN TODAY’S WORLD, 
WE NEED MORE THAN EVER 
THE RADICAL, STRATEGIC, 
MOVEMENT-FOCUSED 
VISION OF THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS.”
—LEILA HESSINI
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 8rooted in human rights, international 
law, and our values of social change, 
the agenda provides a roadmap to the 
Biden administration and Congress for 
enacting policies that meet this moment. 
Stay tuned as we continue building a 
bold and streamlined legislative advo-
cacy program that is accountable to 
our clients and movement partners and 
builds toward our shared vision of a just 
and equitable world. Your partnership 
makes it possible for us to dream big. 
Thank you!
Southern 
Justice Rising: 
Our New 
Southern 
Regional Office 
The Center for Constitutional Rights 
was founded by lawyers working on 
behalf of Black civil rights movement 
activists in the U.S. South. Throughout 
the 1980s and ’90s, from our office in 
Greenville, Mississippi, we supported 
Southern communities in the fight to 
defend Black people's voting rights, 
combat racist police and hate groups, 
and stand up for low-income workers 
of color. We closed the Greenville Legislative Advocacy– 
Increasing Our Impact
The overlapping crises facing our 
global community are the result  
of generations of political decisions. 
And while we must collectively uproot 
oppressive ideologies and institutions, 
we must also demand policies today 
that will mitigate harm, improve 
material conditions, and move us 
closer to the society we deserve. 
The Center for Constitutional Rights 
has long engaged in principled, strategic 
advocacy with our clients and movement 
partners. Over the past year, recognizing 
a unique opportunity to advance our 
work at the federal level, we expanded 
the capacity of our advocacy team to 
heighten the impact of our congressional 
and legislative advocacy. In defining 
actionable, rights-based policy demands, 
we are guided not by what is practical, 
but by what is necessary, just, life-giving, 
and liberatory. 
Highlights from this past year include:   
> December 10, 2020  International 
Human Rights Day, we released a 
"Rights-based Vision for the First 100 
Days"  of the Biden administration and 
the 117th Congress. Demands include 
instituting an affirmative and equitable 
COVID-19 response; providing repair 
and remedy for historical injustice; 
investing in safe communities and 
divesting from criminalization; ensuring 
a rights-based foreign policy; and 
committing to international human 
rights norms and global solidarity.
> May 2021  We released "Shifting 
Power to the People",  our policy agenda 
for the coming two years. Building on 
our demands for the first 100 days and 
NEW DIRECTIONS
 |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 8
office in 1998, but our commitment 
to communities in the South never 
diminished. We have continued to 
stand with individuals and movements 
in the South throughout our 55-year 
history and have deep relationships 
with frontline, grassroots organizations 
in the region that are taking on some 
of the most urgent challenges of our 
time, from climate disaster to gender 
injustice and the criminalization  
of dissent. 
We are returning to our roots  
and taking a strategic step for  
the future by establishing a 
renewed and strengthened 
presence in the U.S. South, 
opening a new Southern regional 
office in Jackson, Mississippi. 
The U.S. South is where the most 
pernicious forms of racial violence  
and oppression persist and where laws 
and policies that operationalize white 
supremacy are often incubated. The 
South is also where lived and historical 
experiences of systemic racism 
powerfully inform movements  
of liberation, justice, and accountability. 
Developed in conversation with 
leaders of our former Southern regional 
office and other dedicated movement 
lawyers, activists, and grassroots 
organizations, our new Southern 
Justice Rising Project aims to amplify 
the impact of social justice work 
already underway through movement 
lawyering, visionary advocacy, and 
strategic communications. We will 
continue our important work, now  
from a new strategic regional hub.  
Your partnership made this possible  
and for that we are so grateful!NEW DIRECTIONS9
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 
“As mothers of  
faith, we will continue 
fighting to keep our 
families united until we 
can leave the shadows 
and have peace and 
tranquility with our 
families without fear  
of being intimidated  
or persecuted.”
—Edith Espinal Moreno  
Immigration activist and sanctuary 
seeker in Ohio on the ending of a  
Trump-era policy targeting sanctuary 
leaders with fines up to $500,000  
for failing to depart the U.S.STRUCTURAL RACISM: 
DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY
STRUCTURAL RACISM: DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 10
The Center for Constitutional Rights was born out of support for civil 
rights movement activists, and we have spent decades challenging 
anti-Blackness, settler colonialism, xenophobia, and all forms of racist 
oppression. We represented Fannie Lou Hamer in a historic suit that led to the 
overturning of structurally racist elections in Mississippi ( Hamer v. Campbell , 
1966) and kept up the fight for voting rights, challenging discriminatory elections 
(Jackson v. Allain , 1984), and discriminatory county redistricting . We’ve fought 
systemic anti-Black employment discrimination (U.S. and Vulcan Society, Inc. 
v. City of New York,  2002), and challenged the constitutionality of replacing 
democratically elected officials in predominantly Black and Brown Michigan 
communities with unelected “Emergency Managers” (Bellant v. Snyder, 2013). 
We have a long history of fighting racist policing, from Daniels v. City of New York  
in 1999 to our landmark Floyd  case against the NYPD’s unconstitutional and 
racist stop-and-frisk policy. For 55 years, we have used the law and advocacy to 
dismantle institutionalized white supremacy. Thank you for partnering with us to 
make our crucial work possible!
STRUCTURAL RACISM: DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY
Introduction     Demand information 
about ICE’s “enforcement and 
removals operation citizen 
academy.” When ICE failed to 
respond to our request, we filed 
a lawsuit to compel release of 
information about the trainings, 
which rights advocates fear 
could fuel vigilante targeting  
of immigrant communities. 
     Demand access to 
information about “Operation 
Palladium,” under which ICE 
undertook a wave of immigrant 
raids in 2020. After ICE and  
DHS refused to provide 
information, we filed suit  
seeking a court order to force 
them to produce records.
     Seek information on  
U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection’s (CBP) policies and 
practices relating to emergency 
services along the U.S.-Mexico 
border, where many hundreds of 
people die annually attempting 
to cross into the United States. 
After CBP had not delivered 
a single document in over 20 
months, we filed a lawsuit  
with our movement partner,  
No More Deaths.
     Learn more about 
Cameroonian asylum seekers 
and the rationale for their mass 
deportations in 2020 back to 
dangerous conditions during an 
intense civil war in Cameroon.
Litigation for DecarcerationFOIA for the Movement
The Center for Constitutional 
Rights’ Open Records 
Project uses the Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) and 
state open records laws to 
support movement partners in 
their efforts to challenge—and 
understand the workings of—
oppressive systems of power. 
Our success with using FOIA 
information to stop fines of 
sanctuary movement leaders  
is just one recent example.  
We have also recently used 
FOIA requests to:11
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | STRUCTURAL RACISM: DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY (CONT’D)
Litigation for Decarceration  
Amid the COVID-19 Pandemic
Belton v. Gautreaux sought immediate 
release of medically vulnerable people 
and an overhaul of health procedures 
at a notoriously decrepit Louisiana 
prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
When the district court dismissed the 
lawsuit, we shifted to working with 
grassroots partners to convince the jail 
to permit us to educate incarcerated 
people about vaccinations. We also 
filed cases against ICE officials on 
behalf of medically vulnerable people 
detained in Mississippi ( Gonzalez 
Morales v. Gillis ) and Louisiana  
(Ache v. Witte). Reporters from 
Buzzfeed News, Business Insider , and 
The Lens New Orleans  covered this 
regional story with a national angle.
Freeing Those Convicted  
by Jim Crow Juries
We partnered with the Promise of 
Justice Initiative to bring justice to the 
1,000+ people incarcerated in Louisiana 
who were convicted by non-unanimous 
juries, also known as Jim Crow juries. 
For well over a century, Louisiana was 
one of only two states permitting 
criminal convictions by non-unanimous 
juries, meaning that people could be 
convicted and serve long sentences 
over the dissent of members of the jury. 
The laws were intentionally designed 
to disenfranchise Black jurors and 
contributed to disproportionately high 
rates of incarceration of Black people in 
the state. In April, following a Supreme 
Court decision holding non-unanimous 
juries unconstitutional, we filed post-
conviction relief petitions on behalf of 
Rufus Henry and Matthew Allen, two 
Black men who were convicted by non-
unanimous juries—where white jurors 
voted to convict and dissenting jurors 
were Black.Big Wins with Movements  
for Racial Justice
The Center for Constitutional Rights 
serves as movement lawyers for 
the visionary movements that are 
transforming our world. This year 
we saw important wins in our work 
alongside the abolition movement and 
the immigrant sanctuary movement. 
Holding Police Accountable
As a founding member of Communities 
United for Police Reform (CPR), we 
were part of the movement that got 
the Safer New York Act passed last 
summer to hold New York police 
accountable for brutality and anti-
Black policing. Immediately after the 
landmark legislation passed, five police 
unions brought a lawsuit to override 
the Act’s repeal of New York Civil 
Rights Law 50-a, which had allowed 
police to shield their misconduct from 
the public and which impacted family 
members and activists saw as a central 
obstacle to police accountability.  
OUR MOTION TO INTERVENE IN 
THE POLICE UNIONS’ LAWSUIT 
UPLIFTED THE VOICES OF 
VICTIMS OF POLICE VIOLENCE, 
INCLUDING RAMARLEY 
GRAHAM’S MOTHER, CONSTANCE 
MALCOLM, WHO RECOUNTED 
HER HARROWING EFFORTS TO 
UNCOVER THE DISCIPLINARY 
RECORDS OF THE OFFICERS WHO 
SHOT HER SON—AND THE CITY’S 
FAILURE TO SUPPORT HER.  
After an initial victory in the district 
court in February, the Second Circuit 
Court of Appeals denied the police 
unions’ attempt to overturn the repeal of 50-a, and in April the unions 
decided to give up. Our success will 
pave the way to fight similar efforts 
from police unions nationwide. 
Reporters from many outlets, including 
The Amsterdam News, The New York 
Times, New York Magazine, Democrat & 
Chronicle , and Gothamist, covered this 
win for the community.
A Victory for the Refugee 
Sanctuary Movement 
A Trump-era policy that authorized 
ICE to exorbitantly fine immigrant-
movement leaders is over. In 2020, 
along with New York University Law 
School’s Immigrant Rights Clinic 
and Just Futures Law, we filed a 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
request  which produced documents 
that showed how high-level Trump 
administration officials, including 
Stephen Miller, targeted sanctuary 
movement leaders, most of them 
women, with fines to punish them 
for their outspoken activism in 
support of immigrants. Armed with 
this information, in January 2021, 
we filed a federal action on behalf 
of individual and organizational 
movement leaders, Austin Sanctuary 
Network v. Mayorkas, attacking the 
government’s discriminatory and 
retaliatory issuance of exorbitant 
civil fines as a violation of the rights 
to speech, advocacy, and freedom 
of religion. In April, Department of 
Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro 
Mayorkas announced the end of the 
fines policy. We continue to seek 
damages and other immigration relief 
for our clients. Our clients’ stories and 
win were publicized in TruthOut, Prism , 
ColorLines, The Columbus Dispatch, and 
The Patch.
STRUCTURAL RACISM: DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 12
Black August
Black August is a celebration of the 
Black rebellions and Freedom Fighters 
who have come before us. In 2020, 
amidst ongoing defense of Black 
Lives, we called on the strength, 
wisdom, and power of revolutions and 
revolutionaries, and commemorated 
the sacrifices made for our collective 
advancement. Throughout the month, 
we recognized this history through 
digital programming, including sharing 
an online exhibition  of artwork 
documenting 
Black freedom 
struggles and 
freedom fighters, 
a podcast , 
weekly historical 
narrative posts, 
an op-ed , 
and a playlist  
celebrating the 
music of Black 
liberation. 
Agendas for Black Liberation
We celebrated Black History Month 
in 2021 with programming around the 
theme " Agendas for Black Liberation ," 
honoring the generations of Black 
freedom fighters who have put forward 
liberatory political, social, and economic 
platforms, and Black artists who have 
charted a future where Black people 
live abundant, healthy, safe, and joy-
filled lives. Our month of programming 
included an institutional statement 
celebrating liberatory visions of Black 
futures, a podcast episode on the 
BREATHE Act, political education, 
a virtual panel , a Freedom Flicks 
screening, and a live art celebration.Fighting to End  
Death by Incarceration
Despite growing recognition that 
extremely long sentences serve no 
legitimate public purpose and are cruel 
and dehumanizing, the United States 
continues to incarcerate thousands 
of people for life. We partnered with 
the Abolitionist Law Center and 
Amistad Law Project to file a first-of-
its-kind legal challenge to life without 
parole, or what our partners rightly 
call “Death by Incarceration.” In Scott 
v. Pennsylvania Board of Probation and 
Parole, we represent a group of people 
convicted under Pennsylvania’s “felony 
murder” rule, which carries a mandatory 
sentence of life without parole even 
if the individual did not take a life, 
or intend to, during the crime. The 
lawsuit highlights how such sentences 
are grossly disproportionate and 
unconstitutionally cruel. The sentences 
also reflect the unconscionable racism 
of the carceral system: 
70% of people serving  
death-by-incarceration 
sentences in 
Pennsylvania are Black. 
Rooted in principles of redemption 
and liberation, the legal filing 
centers voices and experiences of 
incarcerated individuals and highlights 
the irrationality and inhumanity of 
Pennsylvania’s carceral system—a 
mirror of the system of mass 
incarceration across the country.  
The case and our clients received  
news coverage via in-depth pieces on 
NPR and the Pittsburgh Post Gazette.Supporting Community 
Resistance 
In March 2021, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights nominated Buena 
Vista Plantation Cemetery, Acadia 
Plantation Cemetery, and affiliated 
archaeological sites to the Louisiana 
Trust for Historic Preservation’s List of 
Most Endangered Places. The effort is 
in support of tremendous community 
organizing to stop the development 
of a toxic plastics plant on the burial 
grounds of of formerly enslaved African 
people.  With our Southern partners, 
RISE St. James, the Louisiana Bucket 
Brigade, Inclusive Louisiana, Healthy 
Gulf, and the Center for Biological 
Diversity, we celebrated the addition of 
the burial grounds to the Endangered 
List in May 2021.
We also engaged in difficult 
negotiations to ensure that RISE   
St. James could hold their first 
Juneteenth ceremony at the burial 
grounds site in 2020. In 2021, they 
livestreamed their second annual 
Juneteenth commemoration. 
Indigenous Rights:  
Ramapough Mountain Indians, 
Inc. v. Township of Mahwah, 
Ramapo Hunt & Polo Club
We are proud to represent the 
Ramapough Lenape Nation in their 
struggles to retain and freely enjoy 
their ancestral land. Over the last year, 
since coming to a favorable settlement 
with the Township of Mahwah, the 
Ramapough have finally been able to 
hold religious and cultural ceremonies 
on their land without threat of illegal 
fines. In the meantime, along with 
our partners at Weil Gotshal, we 
are representing the Ramapough 
in long-running mediation with the 
neighboring Ramapo Hunt & Polo Club 
Homeowners Association to ensure 
their rights will be respected by the 
entire community.  
Portrait of Assata Shakur by  
Tom Manning; Courtesy of  
Certain Days as part of our Black 
August online art exhibition
STRUCTURAL RACISM: DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY13
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 
“[W]ith all the threats 
and injustices facing 
trans people, and 
especially trans people 
of color, right now, we 
have no choice but to 
fight. I will continue to 
stand up for myself  
and for my community 
until we can all be  
safe and free.”
—Ashley Diamond  
A Black trans woman and prisoners’ 
rights activist being held in a Georgia 
men’s prison who is our client in 
Diamond v. WardPATRIARCHY:  
FIGHTING GENDER-BASED OPPRESSION
PATRIARCHY: FIGHTING GENDER-BASED OPPRESSION|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 14
Fifty-five years of fighting patriarchal violence means following the 
leadership of those demanding liberation from all forms of gender-based 
oppression. We have always known dismantling patriarchy is a multi-issue 
struggle, and we work to center those with multiple-marginalized identities to 
ensure that our interventions expose and address the roots of injustice. 
In the 1970s, the Center for Constitutional Rights worked with women’s groups 
on what became a national model for informed consent in the face of systematic 
involuntary sterilization of Black and Puerto Rican women (Douglas v. Holloman, 
1975), defended women of color who were being prosecuted before white juries 
for their actions to protect themselves and their families  from violence, and 
fought for equal treatment of women in the workplace (Monell v. Department of 
Social Services, 1971). Over the decades, we have fought sexual harassment—
including in Burns v. City of Detroit, which resulted in a 2002 opinion rejecting 
the concept that sexual harassment is free speech; worked with LGBTQIA+ 
activists like members of ACT UP to challenge surveillance and suppression of 
organizing to promote safer sex and protest government inaction in response to 
HIV/AIDS; and supported abuse survivors in seeking high-level investigations 
and prosecutions  for systematic sexual violence committed against children 
by Catholic clergy, all the way up to the International Criminal Court at the 
Hague. With your crucial support, we continue the struggle to dismantle 
cisheteropatriarchy and uproot gender-based violence and oppression, from 
employment to healthcare, homeless shelters to prisons. We thank you for  
being right there with us as we fight alongside bold movements for gender  
self-determination, equity, and justice.How We Approach Dismantling 
Cisheteropatriarchy
This year, we reaffirmed our 
commitment to a broad-
based vision of gender self-
determination by explicitly 
naming our values in a statement 
released in March during 
Women’s History Month,  
on Trans Day of Visibility. 
At the Center for  
Constitutional Rights 
     We vocalize our solidarity 
with people in the sex trades 
and people punished for their 
survival from violence
     We partner with Black and 
Brown cis/trans women and 
LGBTQIA+ communities to 
disrupt the discrimination-  
to-incarceration pipeline
     We historicize the harm  
of patriarchal violence and 
commit to ending it
     We protect the rights and 
ability of trans youth to lead  
full and healthy lives
     We honor the women, cis  
and trans, and transmasculine 
and non-binary people who  
have fought to build a world 
where gender-oppressed  
people can thrive
      We understand that an 
expansive, cross-cutting gender 
justice lens acknowledges 
and supports the leadership 
of marginalized communities 
toward liberation for us all
PATRIARCHY: FIGHTING GENDER-BASED OPPRESSION
Introduction15
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | provide her with medically necessary 
treatment, and protect her and 
witnesses from further retaliation. 
Twelve days later, the U.S. Department 
of Justice filed a Statement of Interest 
affirming that prison officials violate 
the Constitution and the Eighth 
Amendment’s prohibition on cruel 
and unusual punishment when they 
refuse transgender people placements 
at facilities that correspond to their 
gender where needed for safety, and 
when they deny transgender people 
medically necessary care. Senior Staff 
Attorney Chinyere Ezie and co-counsel 
argued the motion in federal court in 
May. We now await a ruling.
“THE WAY GEORGIA TREATS ME 
AND OTHER TRANS PRISONERS 
IS A SYSTEMIC ABUSE OF 
POWER, AUTHORITY, AND MORAL 
DECENCY,” MS. DIAMOND  
WROTE IN AN OP-ED.
Alongside litigation, we are advocating 
for Ms. Diamond and for all LGBTQIA+ 
incarcerated people through 
solidarity actions and campaigns. 
We commissioned artwork featuring 
Ms. Diamond by Micah Bazant and 
gathered letters of support for Ms. Ashley Diamond Is Fighting for 
Trans People to Be Safe and 
Free—and We Fight By Her Side 
Ashley Diamond is fighting for her 
freedom, safety, and basic human 
rights. Ms. Diamond, a Black trans 
woman and prisoners’ rights activist, 
is also fighting for systemic change 
for all incarcerated people, especially 
LGBTQIA+ people, who are often 
targeted for violence. The Center 
for Constitutional Rights, along with 
the Southern Poverty Law Center, is 
representing Ms. Diamond  to hold the 
Georgia Department of Corrections 
(GDC) accountable for the brutal abuse 
and mistreatment she has suffered 
(Diamond v. Ward). Like Ms. Diamond, 
we do this work as part of a broad 
challenge to gender-based oppression 
and the devastating impacts of sexual 
and gender-based violence, anti-trans 
bias, anti-Black racism, and mass 
incarceration.   
Ms. Diamond made headlines in 2015 
when she successfully challenged 
GDC’s policy of denying gender-
related healthcare to transgender 
individuals and failing to protect them 
from sexual assault under the Eighth 
Amendment. That lawsuit prompted 
system-wide policy changes that 
greatly expanded transgender people’s 
access to healthcare behind bars. 
Ms. Diamond is currently incarcerated 
in a men’s prison for a technical parole 
violation. She has faced repeated 
sexual assaults and denial of the 
healthcare her previous lawsuit was 
supposed to guarantee. On November 
23, we filed a complaint on Ms. 
Diamond’s behalf citing violations 
under the Eighth and Fourteenth 
Amendments. On April 9, we filed an 
emergency motion asking a federal 
judge to order GDC to take immediate 
steps to protect her from violence, 
transfer her to a women’s facility, Diamond. In June, members of the Free 
Ashley Diamond support committee. 
were featured on our podcast,  
"The Activist Files." The same month, 
CNN covered Ms. Diamond’s case.  
Understanding that prisons are inherent 
sites of violence where gender-based 
and sexual violence are exacerbated, 
the Center for Constitutional Rights 
is expanding our efforts to challenge 
abusive detention policies and promote 
decarceration in the South and nation -
ally. We’re committed to the struggle 
to see Ms. Diamond and everyone 
she’s fighting for safe and free. 
Ms. Diamond has received an 
incredible amount of coverage in the 
media. In addition to CNN , her story 
was featured in USA Today , the New 
York Times, NPR , Pink News, Refinery 
29, Metro Weekly , and the Associated 
Press . Ashley wrote an op-ed in Them  
titled “I’m a Trans Woman Locked in a 
Men’s Prison. I’m Fighting to Be Free” 
that received more than 32,000 likes 
on the magazine’s Instagram account.
Ending Discrimination  
Against LGBTQIA+ People  
and People With Disabilities  
at the NYC Department of 
Homeless Services
We represent Mariah Lopez, a Black 
trans woman who is the executive 
director of STARR and a longstanding 
LGBTQIA+ rights activist, in her case 
seeking concrete policy changes 
in NYC’s shelter system. After 
experiencing anti-trans and disability-
related discrimination when entering 
shelter, Ms. Lopez filed a lawsuit that is 
currently in settlement talks. Through 
our negotiations, we hope to institute 
policy changes that will meaningfully 
improve access and prevent 
discrimination against LGBTQIA+ 
people and people with disabilities  
in NYC shelters.PATRIARCY: FIGHTING GENDER-BASED OPPRESSION (CONT’D)
Illustration of Ashley Diamond courtesy of Micah Bazant
PATRIARCHY: FIGHTING GENDER-BASED OPPRESSION|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 16
Trans Day of Remembrance  
and Resilience
On Trans Day of Remembrance 
and Resilience in November , we 
remembered the trans siblings we have 
lost at the hands of state-sanctioned 
violence, misogyny, and transphobia, 
and we marked the day as a call to 
action. From representing Ashley 
Diamond in her struggle against a 
violent prison system to our efforts 
to end discrimination against and 
criminalization of trans people, we will 
keep working for a world where trans 
people can not only survive, but thrive. 
From Stonewall to Minneapolis: 
Fighting for Black, Queer, and 
Trans Liberation (and Winning!)
On June 24, 2020, we celebrated the 
radical legacy of Black queer and trans 
liberation movements with the webinar 
“From Stonewall to Minneapolis.” 
Miss Major Griffin-Gracy, a veteran 
of the Stonewall uprising who has 
been fighting for a better world for 
trans and gender non-conforming 
people for more than 50 years, joined 
author and activist Hope Giselle, 8 to 
Abolition Co-founder K Agbebiyi, and 
Black Visions Collective Co-founder 
Oluchi Omeoga for a conversation with our communications assistant, 
Alex Webster, about what’s happening 
today to advance Black, queer, and 
trans liberation. 
Ending Gender-Based  
Violence Means Dismantling  
All Systems of Violence
As we mourned the loss of eight 
people, including six Asian women, 
in a racist and misogynist attack in 
Atlanta in March, we recommitted to 
dismantling the interlocking systems 
that threaten the safety and lives 
of Asian women, BIPOC, queer, 
trans and gender-nonconforming 
people, sex workers, immigrants, 
and those who are economically 
vulnerable. In a statement, the Center 
for Constitutional Rights added 
our voice to calls by the Asian and 
AAPI community for accountability 
that addresses violence at its root, 
believing that justice does not lie in 
strengthening police power, but rather 
in addressing the sources of violence: 
white supremacy, cisheteropatriarchy, 
and all systems of oppression. 
Opposing Discrimination  
in Federal Policy
In the waning days of the Trump 
administration, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights submitted public comments opposing proposed 
changes to federal rules that would 
permit discrimination against trans 
people in homeless shelters and 
would remove claims for asylum 
that are predominately cited by 
LGBTQIA+ people and survivors of 
violence and torture. The proposed 
rule for homeless shelters has since 
been rescinded, and the change to 
asylum policy was corrected by the 
new administration in January 2021 
to affirm that all asylum claims will be 
reviewed in accordance with the UN 
Convention Against Torture.
Fighting the Colonial Legacy  
of Gender Oppression 
During Pride Month, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights hosted partners 
across the African continent in an 
Instagram Live series entitled “Pride is 
Protest: Celebrating a Legacy of Black 
Queer and Trans Resistance, Resilience, 
and Rebellion.” Our comrades Pepe 
Julian Onziema of Sexual Minorities 
Uganda and Matthew Blaise, a Nigerian 
queer rights activist, highlighted the 
urgency of challenging the legacy 
of colonialism and imperialism that 
oppresses those who dare to live 
in their authentic identity, gender 
expression, and sexuality.
Artists' image description: Brightly colored Illustration of  
a crowd of trans and non-binary people of color of different 
races, abilities, sizes and genders. They are dancing, resting, 
talking and being together and wearing bright pink and  
purple outfits. 
During this virtual event, Stonewall legend Miss Major Griffin Gracy, author and activist Hope Giselle, co-founder of 8 to Abolition 
K Agbebiyi, and Oluchi Omeoga, co-founder and core team member of the Black Visions Collective celebrated and reflected on the 
work that is currently being done to engineer Black, Queer, and Trans Liberation.
PATRIARCHY: FIGHTING GENDER-BASED OPPRESSION17
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES:  
COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWER
“This law is nothing 
less than an effort 
to strong-arm water 
protectors, landowners, 
and concerned citizens 
into submission and 
silence us.”
—Anne White Hat 
Lead plaintiff in our suit challenging  
an anti-protest law pushed by the  
oil and gas industry in Louisiana
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES: COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWER
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 18
We use the legal system to fight oppressive economic structures  
and corporate abuses. Our argument in the 1980 case Local 1330,  
United States Steelworkers of America v. U.S. Steel (amicus) framed  
the societal issues at stake when more than 10,000 steelworkers in one town 
lost their jobs as a result of private companies’ decisions: we argued that 
corporations with enormous economic power that receive substantial benefits 
from government sources must act in a manner consistent with the best  
interests of the community. We have fought for years against environmental 
racism in Louisiana’s Cancer Alley, including a current battle against  
construction of a plastics factory on a burial ground of formerly enslaved people  
(RISE St. James). We push to hold U.S. corporations accountable for torture and 
human rights abuses committed abroad  (Al Shimari v. CACI; Doe v. Unocal and  
Roe v. Unocal; Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 Services; Abtan v. Prince/Blackwater; 
Corrie v. Caterpillar ), as in the 13-year fight to hold Shell accountable for its role 
in the brutal repression of the Ogoni people ( Wiwa v. Shell ). We also determinedly 
challenge corporate capture of government policy and law making. Thank you for 
your commitment and dedication as we expose and combat oppressive economic 
structures in the United States and around the world. “Landowners can 
prevail against a 
pipeline company 
in Louisiana 
because the 
Constitution is on 
our side . . .  I hope 
our victory today 
will encourage 
more landowners 
to engage in the 
legal process 
to protect their 
property and the 
natural resources 
of the state of 
Louisiana.”
—Landowner Peter Aaslestad
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES: COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWER
Introduction
19
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES: COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWER (CONT’D)
Important Wins in the Battle Between 
Pipelines and the Public Interest 
Victory: Defending the Right to Protest Pipelines
A   Louisiana district attorney has rejected all 
charges against pipeline protestors and a 
journalist who we represent who were arrested 
and charged under controversial amendments to 
a critical infrastructure law. 
Since the 2017 protests at Standing 
Rock opposing the Dakota Access 
Pipeline, more than 60 bills that 
heighten the risk and criminal 
penalties of dissent have been 
introduced across 30 states. Many 
of them seek to frame protests as 
“riots” and activists as “terrorists” in 
attempts to criminalize free speech 
activity and defense of Indigenous land. The Center for Constitutional 
Rights made a constitutional challenge to this kind of repressive 
legislation in White Hat v. Landry , representing protestors charged 
with felonies under a new Louisiana law—drafted and pushed by the 
Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association and inspired by an 
Oklahoma law pushed by ALEC—that added pipelines to the definition 
of critical infrastructure and dramatically increased the penalties faced 
by protestors engaging in civil disobedience in and around pipelines 
and pipeline construction sites. The law could become a dangerous 
model, threatening protestors, landowners, and environmental justice 
organizations across the country. In defense of the people’s right to 
protest and resist environmental devastation, we pushed back, and, 
in July, more than two years after we challenged the anti-protest law, 
a local DA vowed not to prosecute our clients under the measure. 
Reporters from the Associated Press, ABC News, and Reuters have 
followed this case as it developed, and journalists from the Louisiana 
Illuminator, WDSU TV, and KLFY TV publicized our clients’ victory.The Pipeline Company Must Pay   
In a related case, the Louisiana 
Supreme Court ruled in May 2021 that 
the Bayou Bridge Pipeline Company 
violated landowners’ due process 
rights, and the company must pay 
additional compensation, attorneys’ 
fees, and costs for the constitutional 
violations they committed. 
Built by the company behind the 
infamous Dakota Access Pipeline,  
the Bayou Bridge Pipeline ends in the 
historic Black community of St. James, 
Louisiana. The company attempted 
to take property via eminent domain, 
arguing the pipeline is in the public 
interest. But a few holdout landowners 
fought back, declaring the pipeline is 
actually contrary to the public interest 
in light of the extensive spill and leak 
record of the companies involved, 
the role pipelines have played in 
Louisiana’s coastal erosion crisis, and 
the relationship between fossil fuels 
and climate change.
The Center for Constitutional Rights 
has been representing the holdout 
landowners since 2018. Last year, 
they won a resounding victory when 
an appeals court ruled the company 
violated their due-process rights, and, 
in spring 2021, the state Supreme 
Court affirmed, in a precedent-
setting ruling, that the company must 
pay legal fees and costs relating to 
the violations. Reporters from the 
Associated Press , The New Orleans 
Advocate, the Louisiana Illuminator ,  
Eyes on the Ties, and Resilience.org 
covered our clients’ story and victory.
We hope our success in this case will 
encourage other small landowners 
to stand up to corporate abuse—and 
inspire more lawyers to help them.
 More than 60 bills 
that heighten the 
risk and criminal 
penalties of 
dissent have been 
introduced across 
30 states.
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES: COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWER|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 20
Fighting Corporate Capture
The American Legislative Exchange 
Council (ALEC) epitomizes corporate 
capture of government policy and  
lawmaking. 
The influential  
trade association  
has a 45-year legacy  
of designing and  
lobbying for state 
laws—including Stand 
Y our Ground and voter 
ID laws—that have 
had a negative impact 
on human rights and 
disproportionately 
harmed communities  
of color. 
In Puente, et al. v. Arizona State 
Legislature, we are fighting on behalf 
of the Arizona Palestine Solidarity 
Alliance, Mijente Support Committee, 
Puente, and Black Lives Matter 
Phoenix Metro in a lawsuit arguing 
that attendance by a majority of 
members of several Arizona state 
congressional committees behind 
closed doors at ALEC meetings 
violates Arizona’s Open Meeting Law. 
We appealed a lower court’s decision 
to grant the state legislature’s motion 
to dismiss the case in May 2021. Journalists from ThinkProgress ,  
Teen Vogue, Rising Up With Sonali , 
Eastern Arizona Courier , and TruthOut 
have amplified this story.
When Corporations Are Complicit
In June 2021, the U.S. Supreme Court 
limited—but has not foreclosed—the 
ability to sue U.S. corporations in U.S. 
courts for complicity in transnational 
human rights violations. We had joined 
more than a dozen human rights 
organizations in filing an amicus brief 
in Doe, et al. v. Nestlé USA, Inc./Cargill , which concerns the corporations’ 
alleged role in aiding child slavery and 
forced labor in the Ivory Coast. We 
argued the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), 
the 1789 law which the Center for 
Constitutional Rights' landmark case 
Filártiga v. Peña-Irala turned into a 
vehicle for modern human rights cases, 
must apply to U.S. corporations. While 
the Supreme Court did not provide the 
categorical exemption from liability 
under the ATS that corporations want, 
with five justices recognizing domestic 
corporate liability, the court ruled the 
narrow domestic conduct alleged by 
Nestlé and Cargill was insufficient for 
liability. A week after issuing its ruling 
in Nestlé , the Supreme Court denied 
the petition by private contractor CACI 
to take up our long-running case on 
behalf of Abu Ghraib torture survivors, 
Al Shimari v. CACI. Having been weeks 
from trial in 2019 when CACI filed its 
improvident appeal, we are eager for 
the plaintiffs to finally have their day 
in court. Reuters and Bloomberg Law 
covered this latest development. 
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES: COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWERFreedom of Information Act Request (FOIA): ICE and DHS Contracts with RELX Group and Thomson Reuters21
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | ABUSIVE STATE POWER:  
CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES
“It is a soaring feeling. 
I made my life in this 
country, so this is 
important not just for 
me, but for everybody. 
I don’t want the same 
thing that the FBI  
did to me to happen  
to others.”
—Muhammad Tanvir 
On the Supreme Court’s unanimous 
decision that American Muslims the 
FBI tried to coerce into spying on  
their communities can sue FBI  
agents for damages (Tanvir v. Tanzin) 
ABUSIVE STATE POWER: CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 22
ABUSIVE STATE POWER:  
CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIESThe Center for Constitutional Rights has a long legacy of defending 
individuals and movements against abuses of power by the state. We 
represented American Indian Movement leaders after a standoff with the 
FBI ( United States v. Banks and Means (Wounded Knee), 1974), exposed the extent 
and danger of FBI surveillance of activists ( Clavir v. Levi, 1976), and challenged 
illegal government electronic surveillance (Kinoy v. Mitchell , 1986). For two 
decades, we have been confronting the human rights violations and abuses of 
state power enabled by the so-called “war on terror,” including defending the 
rights of Muslim men and boys detained at Guantánamo. We fight for the  
human rights of all incarcerated people and seek justice and accountability on 
behalf of people who have been brutalized by war crimes and human rights 
violations across the world and in the United States. Your generous support  
and steadfast partnership allows us to continue challenging the surveillance  
state and confronting government abuses. Thank you.  “We held on to 
hope for so many 
years despite so 
many obstacles 
for justice. 
Finally, those 
who committed 
these egregious 
crimes will be held 
accountable.”
–Hernan Apaza, after a jury 
verdict awarded Apaza and his 
co-plaintiffs damages for the 
killing of their relatives by the 
Bolivian military in Mamani v. 
Sánchez de Lozada / Mamani v. 
Sánchez Berzaín (the judgment 
is currently on appeal)
(Left) Mohammad Tanvir  
(client in Tanvir v. Tanzin) and his child
ABUSIVE STATE POWER: CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES
Introduction23
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | Obtaining Accountability 
for Individuals Targeted by 
Government Abuse 
When we represent people seeking 
justice and accountability for 
government abuse, we are in it with 
them for the long haul. And this 
year we saw progress in our efforts 
to obtain redress in domestic and 
international cases we have been 
working on for years. 
Working with our legal partners at 
CUNY CLEAR, we scored a landmark 
victory in the Supreme Court—and 
a critical advocacy opportunity—in 
Tanvir v. Tanzin, a long-running case 
challenging the FBI’s targeting of 
Muslims. Beginning in 2013, the FBI 
pressured our clients—as part of a 
coercive pattern of targeting Muslims 
and Arabs—to become informants 
on their religious community. When 
they refused, they were put on the No 
Fly List, which is a secretive system 
rife with abuse. After we filed suit, 
the government took our clients off 
the list. Still, we argued our clients were entitled to damages under 
the Religious Freedom Restoration 
Act (RFRA) for the emotional and 
economic harms they suffered,  
and, in December, the Supreme  
Court unanimously agreed that  
RFRA does authorize damages  
against federal officials, allowing  
our case for accountability against  
the FBI to proceed. 
We have a storied 
history of fighting 
for accountability for 
human rights abuses 
committed against 
communities across  
the world, and this  
year we obtained 
another landmark 
victory in that fight.
In Mamani v. Sánchez de Lozada / 
Mamani v. Sánchez Berzaín, litigated for 
nearly 15 years by cooperating counsel 
Beth Stephens and Judith Chomsky, we represent Indigenous Bolivian 
families whose loved ones were killed 
in 2003 when security forces used 
deadly military force to suppress 
peaceful, popular protests. After a 
historic trial—the first time a former 
head of state sat before his accusers in 
a U.S. human rights civil jury trial—we 
obtained a $10 million jury verdict 
against the ex-president and ex-
minister of defense of Bolivia. In April 
of this year, following an earlier victory 
in the Court of Appeals in Miami, 
a federal judge upheld the verdict 
against the powerful defendants, 
despite their relentless attempts to 
evade accountability. Defendants have 
appealed that judgment.
As a result of our federal lawsuit, 
Migrant Justice v. Wolf , Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) 
will pay damages to our clients who 
were targeted by the Department 
of Homeland Security and ICE in a 
campaign to intimidate and repress 
activists who protest against abusive 
immigration and labor practices. One 
of the defendants, the Vermont DMV, 
which had fed ICE information about 
activists, agreed in a settlement last 
year to restrict its communication 
and information-sharing with federal 
immigration agencies. In a separate 
settlement reached in October, ICE 
agreed to pay substantial damages and 
afford “deferred deportation” status 
(a form of immigration relief) to the 
activists ICE arrested in retaliation, and 
agreed as a policy to instruct officers 
not to target people “for exercising 
First Amendment rights.”
Based on our victory, The Progressive 
magazine published an important 
policy piece making immigration  
recommendations to the Biden 
administration. Reporters from  
The Washington Post , and Latino  
Rebels  also covered this win. 
ABUSIVE STATE POWER: CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES (CONT’D)
ABUSIVE STATE POWER: CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIESMamani v. Sánchez de Lozada / Mamani v. Sánchez Berzaín clients, who were awarded $10 million in damages against Bolivia's 
former president and former defense minister for the killing of their family members during a massacre of unarmed Indigenous 
Aymara people in 2003, with co-counsel Thomas Becker. The judgment is currently on appeal.|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 24
Supporting More Immigrants and 
Immigrant Rights Movements 
Since 2018, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights has successfully 
obtained multiple injunctions to stop 
horrific Trump-administration bans 
on asylum for refugees desperately 
arriving at the Southern border. In 
February 2021, a federal court again 
blocked a ban that denied asylum 
to anyone at the Southern border 
who had transited through a third 
country en route to the United 
States, with very limited exceptions. 
Our lawsuit seeking the injunction, 
East Bay Sanctuary Covenant v. Barr  
(after East Bay Sanctuary Covenant v. 
Trump) was part of our broad work 
fighting abusive immigration policies, 
supporting immigrants and immigrant 
rights organizations, and upholding 
international human rights principles  
at the heart of asylum laws.
In Make the Road New York v. Renauld 
(formerly v. Cuccinelli ), we partnered 
with the Legal Aid Society to challenge 
Trump-administration rules that targeted 
immigrants with medical conditions 
and low-income immigrants of color 
by radically transforming the test for 
determining whether someone might 
become a “public charge” and imposing an 
unprecedented wealth test on noncitizens. We had obtained 
the first-of-its kind 
nationwide injunction  
in federal court.
In Make the Road New York v. Blinken 
(formerly v. Pompeo), the government 
has also withdrawn its appeal of 
the nationwide injunction we won 
against additional “public charge” rules 
affecting those seeking visas to enter 
the U.S. As a result of our injunction, 
the Department of State is operating 
under the rules that were in place from 
1999 to 2017. President Biden also 
rescinded the Trump administration’s 
proclamation barring immigrants who 
did not have private health insurance, 
a proclamation that never went into 
effect thanks to our lawsuit. Journalists 
from outlets including Courthouse News,  
Black Star News , and El Diario  reported 
on this victory.
We are continuing our fight against 
restrictions on asylum seekers at 
the Southern border in Al Otro Lado 
v. Mayorkas (formerly v. Nielsen ), by 
challenging a DHS policy and practice of 
“turnbacks”—denying refugees access 
to the asylum process, including by 
forcing thousands to put their names on a list and wait for months in dangerous 
conditions in Mexico until their name 
is called. We received a temporary 
restraining order in January blocking the 
Trump administration’s latest attempt to 
prevent asylum seekers from accessing 
the U.S. asylum process, and we 
hope to ensure that the U.S. honors its 
commitment to the fundamental human 
rights principle of asylum.
In D.J.C.V. v. U.S. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement, we are seeking 
damages for a Central American 
father and son separated at the 
border during the height of the Trump 
administration’s “zero tolerance” 
immigration policy. In a one-of-a kind 
suit, we are arguing that the separation 
of families seeking asylum amounts to 
torture and crimes against humanity. 
The government filed a motion to 
dismiss, claiming that the father’s past 
misdemeanor conviction gave the 
government the discretion to seize 
a toddler from his father and keep 
them apart for months without any 
determination of parental unfitness 
or the best interests of the child. 
Oral argument was March 5, and the 
decision is stayed pending settlement 
negotiations with the government.
ABUSIVE STATE POWER: CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES
25
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | Protecting the Right to  
Support Palestinian Freedom
Since 2017, we have been advocating 
on behalf of Fordham University 
students who were banned from 
starting a Students for Justice in 
Palestine (SJP) club by the university. 
Following our 2019 victory in which the 
court ordered Fordham to recognize 
SJP, the club successfully operated 
for more than a year. In December 
2020, an appellate court reversed 
the decision, permitting Fordham to 
reinstate its ban. In May, New York 
State’s highest court refused to hear our 
appeal, ending the case. We continue 
to support the students, who are still 
speaking out for justice in Palestine.
We succeeded in asking a federal court 
to dismiss the meritless complaint in 
Jewish National Fund v. US Campaign 
for Palestinian Rights, where we 
represent US Campaign for Palestinian 
Rights (USCPR) in fighting a lawsuit 
that seeks to chill USCPR’s First 
Amendment–protected activity and 
represents an escalation of the attack 
on advocacy for Palestinian freedom. 
Reporters from +972 Magazine covered this case as it developed, and 
Mondoweiss  wrote about the victory.
Seeking Accountability for 
International Crimes in Palestine
Alongside Palestinian partners, we 
continue to fight for accountability 
for war crimes and crimes against 
humanity committed in Palestine. 
On behalf of 20 Palestinian victims of the crime against humanity of 
persecution from across Palestine 
and the diaspora, we argued to the 
Pre-Trial Chamber of the International 
Criminal Court (ICC) that the court has 
jurisdiction over serious international 
crimes committed on the territory of 
Palestine by Israeli officials and their 
agents. In a historic ruling, the Pre-Trial 
Chamber ruled in February 2021 that 
the ICC can investigate and prosecute 
those responsible for war crimes, 
crimes against humanity, and genocide 
committed in Palestine. Soon thereafter, 
the ICC prosecutor announced the 
opening of an investigation. Senior Staff 
Attorney Katherine Gallagher penned 
an op-ed on this issue for OpinioJuris  
and participated in numerous webinars  
on the groundbreaking developments.
Upholding the Rights  
of Incarcerated People 
Years after our landmark class-action 
settlement in Ashker v. Governor of 
California  succeeded in releasing 
nearly everyone held in longterm 
indefinite solitary confinement in 
California, a federal judge affirmed 
our right to continue monitoring 
California’s treatment of the class. In 
April 2021, plaintiffs proved that the 
California Department of Corrections 
is systemically violating the due-
process rights of people in prison, 
so we continue to work with our 
clients to limit solitary and improve 
conditions in the California prisons. 
Our perseverance in this case has  
been covered by reporters from  
the San Francisco Bay View and  
The Progressive Magazine.
In Aref v. Garland , we persist in 
challenging “Communications 
Management Units” (CMUs) that 
isolate politically unpopular people in 
federal prisons, with Muslims placed 
in CMUs at vastly disproportionate “GUANTÁNAMO EMBODIES THE 
FACT THAT , FOR TWO DECADES 
FOLLOWING THE SEPTEMBER 
11, 2001 ATTACKS, THE UNITED 
STATES GOVERNMENT HAS 
VIEWED COMMUNITIES 
OF COLOR—CITIZENS AND 
NON-CITIZENS ALIKE—
THROUGH A SECURITY THREAT 
LENS, TO DEVASTATING 
CONSEQUENCES.”
—EXCERPT FROM A LETTER WE 
SENT TO PRESIDENT BIDEN IN 
FEBRUARY CALLING FOR THE 
CLOSURE OF THE PRISON AT 
GUANTÁNAMO BAY.ABUSIVE STATE POWER: CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES (CONT’D)
ABUSIVE STATE POWER: CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES
Awad, et al. v. Fordham University client Veer Shetty with former 2018-2020 Bertha Justice Fellow Astha Sharma Pokharel.|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 26
rates. A federal judge agreed that our 
client could continue to seek justice 
for his placement in a CMU despite his 
release from prison, but ruled against 
us on the merits of his procedural due 
process claim. We have appealed to 
the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals and 
are arguing the case this fall.  
Continuing the Movement  
to Close Guantánamo
The letter, which we drafted with long-
time partner Center for Victims of Tor -
ture, was signed by more than 100 civil 
rights and racial justice organizations. 
Secretary of State Blinken responded 
to the letter, assuring us the adminis -
tration plans to review issues related 
to the facility and the remaining 39 
men held in indefinite detention.
While we work with our partners 
to close Guantánamo, we have 
continued to lead the fight to apply 
the Constitution’s guarantees of 
fundamental fairness, embodied in 
the Due Process Clause, to the men 
detained there. 
We coordinated and led the filing 
of motions in 11 cases arguing that 
these basic fairness guarantees meant 
that the procedures and evidentiary 
rules used in these cases to date, 
which have called the outcomes 
in the government’s favor, were 
unconstitutional.
In April 2021, our client Sharqawi Al 
Hajj was finally cleared for transfer out 
of Guantánamo after a Periodic Review 
Board hearing determined his ongoing 
detention was unnecessary. We expect 
and will fight for the release of all 
those imprisoned at Guantánamo, 
including Al Hajj and Mohammed al 
Qahtani, who are suffering greatly as 
they continue to languish in prison 
and have been denied needed medical 
attention and evaluation.We also work at the 
international level 
to seek justice and 
accountability for the 
serious harms suffered 
by men subjected to the 
U.S. torture program
including Al Hajj and Guled Hassan 
Duran. Following our long-fought win 
at the ICC to open an investigation 
into the crimes committed in 
Afghanistan and through the 
CIA torture program, the Trump 
administration issued an Executive 
Order that led to the sanction of the 
ICC prosecutor and threatened civil 
and criminal punishment of those who 
furthered the investigation, including 
us. We worked with an international 
coalition to have the Executive Order 
rescinded  by the Biden administration. 
Through legal filings  and advocacy , 
we have urged the ICC prosecutor 
to reject a request to defer its own 
investigation in favor of one conducted 
by Afghanistan, and proceed to 
conclude its own investigation and 
victim-inclusive trials.
Domestically, we secured a historic 
ruling at the Guantánamo military 
commissions in June 2020 to 
substantially reduce the sentence of 
our client Majid Khan as a remedy 
for the war crimes of torture and 
other cruel treatment that he 
suffered while in CIA detention. The 
judge also ordered an evidentiary 
hearing on Khan’s treatment for 
May 2021. In December 2020, the 
government sought reconsideration 
of the ruling, arguing that universal 
torture prohibitions do not bind the 
U.S. government and there is no 
right to a remedy for torture under 
international law. The judge rejected 
those arguments and also granted our 
Illustration of Sharqawi Al Hajj by Christopher Noxon  
@noxonpics 
ABUSIVE STATE POWER: CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIESrequest to compel certain witnesses 
to testify about Khan’s torture. In 
April 2021, the government modified 
Khan’s plea agreement to reduce his 
sentence in exchange for withdrawing 
his motions to compel witnesses and 
for pretrial punishment credit. These 
developments were covered in The 
New York Times and in Just Security .OUR MONTHLY 
PODCAST ,  
“THE ACTIVIST 
FILES” 
which features the stories 
of people on the front lines 
fighting for justice, including 
activists, lawyers, and artists, 
averages close to 1,000 
downloads a month from 
all over the world, including 
Sweden, Mexico, the United 
Kingdom, and Australia. We 
continue to partner with 
organizations that have 
podcasts to cross-produce 
and promote. We worked 
with Donkeysaddle in July, 
when Advocacy Director 
Nadia Ben-Youssef and artist 
BK King with Donkeysaddle 
talked about radical freedom 
through art and activism.IN THE NEWS
27 |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | IN THE NEWSThe Center for Constitutional Rights Communications 
Department has had a generative year, sharing our 
radical perspective with billions of readers and viewers 
on traditional and social media. Our clients have been 
featured in stories across the globe, from France to South 
Africa, Germany to Israel, and India to Spain. With the 
goals of shifting the narrative and bringing awareness of 
our clients and our work, we have expanded our use of 
social media with Instagram Live takeovers and events 
that reach new audiences and produced compelling client-
centered videos, press/community events, and webinars. PRESS RELEASES 
AND STATEMENTS 
ON BREAKING NEWS
that get to reporters’ 
inboxes first. The more 
than 100 press releases and 
statements we wrote helped 
the department secure 
nearly 4,000 media hits in 
the last fiscal year, which 
translates to 21.9 billion 
potential readers, and is 
equivalent to spending  
$7 million on advertising.
YOUR CONTINUED SUPPORT ENABLES THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS TO KEEP AMPLIFYING OUR  
RADICAL PERSPECTIVE THROUGH DIVERSE MEDIA CHANNELS, SHIFT PUBLIC OPINION ON OUR CRITICAL 
ISSUES, AND EXPAND OUR AUDIENCES.
STAYING 
CONNECTED 
with reporters, producers, 
and bookers to keep them 
informed on our range of 
issues through relationship 
building and media 
briefingsOP-EDS FROM OUR CLIENTS AND  
THE LEGAL AND ADVOCACY TEAMS  
offering radical thought leadership on the pages of major  
newspapers and magazines from The New York Times to the  
Washington Post,  The Atlantic and Teen Vogue
VINCE WARREN  
IS IN THE MEDIA
on MSNBC, Al Jazeera, Vice 
News, Black News Channel, 
CNN and Democracy Now! 
and more, bringing our 
distinctive analysis to  
TV audiencesGROWING 
ENGAGEMENT  
on Twitter, Facebook,  
LinkedIn, and our  
Instagram accounts
FACEBOOK LIVE STREAMS 
to bring our thousands of supporters into the conversation during 
and after hearings, press conferences, and advocacy actions
INSTAGRAM LIVE TAKEOVERS
featuring staff talking about our legal cases and advocacy work 
and special partners, such as radical poets and DJs, for celebratory 
events, such as Black History Month and Black AugustFRONTLINES OF JUSTICE
our weekly email newsletter 
that brings you the Center for 
Constitutional Rights’ latest  
news every Monday
THE DAILY OUTRAGE
the Center for Constitutional  
Rights’ blogEMAILS
on breaking news, upcoming 
events, and more
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 28 |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 28Luna Martínez is working to defend 
the rights of Palestine solidarity 
advocates in cases including  
Jewish National Fund v. US Campaign 
for Palestinian Rights and Awad v. 
Fordham University ; challenge unlawful 
detentions at Guantánamo ( al Qahtani 
v. Obama); and support Indigenous 
and environmental justice movements 
(Ramapough Mountain Indians v. 
Ramapo Polo Club ). The Bertha Justice 
Fellowship is a two-
year program for 
emerging lawyers 
to gain practical experience 
working on Center for 
Constitutional Rights cases 
across the full range of the 
organization’s issue areas and 
a theoretical understanding 
of how legal advocacy can 
create social change. Now 
in their second year of the 
Fellowship, the current 
Fellows are getting  
firsthand experience in  
movement lawyering. 
The Bertha Justice Fellowship 
Program is sponsored by the 
Bertha Foundation, which 
hosts emerging lawyers at 
legal organizations across  
the world.Elsa Maria Mota specializes in advo-
cating for immigrant rights and racial 
justice. During the Fellowship, she is 
challenging government misconduct 
and abusive immigration practices in 
cases such as Al Otro Lado v. Nielsen  
and Make the Road New York v. Pompeo. 
Elsa is inspired by her experience in 
diverse, low-income communities that 
creatively fight against systems of 
oppression to seize opportunities. 
BERTHA JUSTICE FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM“ONE THING I HAVE 
LEARNED IS THAT LOSING IS 
NOT ALWAYS A LOSS. THERE 
IS ALWAYS SOMETHING 
MORE TO ADVOCATE FOR. 
RELIEF GOES BEYOND 
LITIGATION AND RESISTING 
IS WINNING.”
—ELSA MARIA MOTA,  
BERTHA JUSTICE FELLOWBERTHA JUSTICE FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
BUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS
Samah Mcgona Sisay specializes in 
international human rights and chal-
lenging inhumane immigration policies 
and abusive police practices. During her 
Fellowship, Samah has provided legal 
representation on immigration matters 
to undocumented Black immigrant 
women impacted by gender violence 
and has worked on our efforts to gain 
accountability for international crimes 
committed in Afghanistan and Pales-
tine, as well as on cases including Floyd 
v. City of New York and Scott v. Pennsyl-
vania Board of Probation and Parole.Rafaela Uribe works on issues 
of racial and gender justice, 
discriminatory policing, governmental 
abuses of power, and government 
surveillance. During their Fellowship, 
Rafaela has worked on cases 
including our FOIA litigation on 
behalf of the sanctuary movement, 
Austin Sanctuary Network v. Mayorkas, 
Lopez v. NYC Department of Homeless 
Services, Black Love Resists v. City of 
Buffalo , and Diamond v. Ward. Rafaela 
was previously an Ella Baker Intern at 
the Center for Constitutional Rights.29
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | ELLA BAKER INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
ELLA BAKER INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
BUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS
The Ella Baker Summer 
Internship Program 
honors civil rights 
movement hero 
Ella Baker by training the 
next generation of social 
justice lawyers. Interns 
gain practical litigation 
experience and sharpen their 
theoretical understanding 
of the relationship between 
social change, organizing, 
and lawyering. They are 
also connected to a global 
community of social justice 
law students and lawyers 
through our Ella Baker Alumni 
Network. As a result of the 
pandemic, the summer 2020 
internship was remote. 
We are proud to introduce you 
to two of the 2020 Ella Baker 
interns who have dedicated 
themselves to using the law  
as a tool for social justice. “It was … amazing  
to get an inside peek  
of a movement-
focused institution.” 
Fatoumata Diabate, Seton Hall 
University School of Law ’21, was 
drawn to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights by our work on racial justice 
and discriminatory policing. 
“[In high school], I spent four years 
in … a highly politicized, damaged 
school district. As Black children,  
we were treated like criminals  
before even entering the building. 
This unwarranted criminalization only 
contributes to the school-to-prison 
pipeline,” Fatoumata wrote. 
At the Center for Constitutional 
Rights, Fatoumata gained experience 
in cases related to discriminatory 
policing, the human rights of 
incarcerated people, and more, 
working on al Qahtani v. Obama, our 
FOIA litigation with No More Deaths,  
and Turkmen v. Ashcroft. Fatoumata 
also learned from the historic war-
crimes case Doe v. Karadzic. 
Fatoumata then spent the spring 
2021 semester in an immigration and 
human rights clinic. “I thought I would have 
to wait 20 or 30 years 
to work on these issues, 
but at CCR, I didn’t have 
to wait.”
Maira Perez Velazquez , University of 
Illinois College of Law ’21, is a DACA 
recipient and first-generation law 
graduate. Maira applied for the Ella 
Baker Internship “to surround myself 
with progressive and passionate 
people’s lawyers—the kind who  
don't see legal work as just a job  
but as a movement for change.”
As an intern, Maira worked on “an 
incredible array of issues that got 
at the heart of the social injustices 
occurring today,” from ALEC and 
corporate capture to Indigenous land 
rights (Ramapough Mountain Indians 
v. Township of Mahwah, Ramapo 
Hunt & Polo Club ), immigration and 
human rights (DJVC v. U.S. Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement), and 
environmental justice for the 
communities in Louisiana’s Cancer Alley. 
Maira’s next role will be as a Law 
Advisor for the Trial Advocacy 
Program at the University of Illinois 
Law School. Insiders
Before COVID, we enjoyed hosting 
small, family-style dinners in NYC where 
leading supporters could hear from our 
movement lawyers and advocates in an 
intimate setting. We had to re-envision 
“Insider Dinners” during the pandemic, 
and we held our first-ever virtual Insider 
on December 1, 2020.
Vince Warren, Advocacy Director 
Nadia Ben-Youssef, and Senior Staff 
Attorney and Associate Director of 
Strategic Initiatives Omar Farah shared 
inside perspectives on our preparations 
for a new Southern regional office 
and our bold post-election strategy. 
Board Member Colette Pichon-Battle, 
Executive Director of the Gulf Coast 
Center for Law and Policy, shared 
profound insights about the role of 
the South, bridging community-level 
conversations and the global impact of 
Southern movements. The extraordinary 
graphic recorder Abby VanMuijen 
translated the discussion into visuals, 
and guests shared reflections with 
one another and with the Center for 
Constitutional Rights team.On July 29, 2020 as 
the pandemic and 
the long-overdue reckoning with 
structural racism gripped the nation, 
supporters joined Executive Director 
Vince Warren and Legal Director Baher 
Azmy to learn how the Center for 
Constitutional Rights was seizing the 
moment to fight even harder  
for justice.
On November 17, 2020, donors 
heard from Vince Warren, Senior Staff 
Attorney Chinyere Ezie, and Baher 
Azmy about how our work will continue 
in the face of a new presidency.
On March 30, 2021, Vince Warren, 
Senior Staff Attorney Pamela Spees, 
and Bertha Justice Fellow Rafaela 
Uribe spoke with donors about women 
on the frontlines of the fight for justice 
historically and today, in honor of 
Women’s History Month.
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 30EVENTS
EVENTS
As the COVID-19 pandemic continued, we created 
opportunities to gather, raise awareness on important 
issues, and stay connected to our supporters and larger 
community through dynamic online events, and by 
continuing our podcast series.
What Michael Taught Us
Michael Ratner devoted four 
decades of his life to the Center 
for Constitutional Rights before his 
untimely death in 2016. He handled 
some of the most significant human 
rights cases of his time and lived and 
breathed radical lawyering. On June 
16, 2021, Vince Warren, Baher Azmy, 
former Staff Attorney and Board 
Member Ellen Yaroshefsky, and Senior 
Staff Attorney and Associate Director 
of Legal Training and Education Rachel 
Meeropol participated in a panel that 
discussed Michael’s autobiography 
Moving the Bar (published earlier 
this year) and to reflect on his 
indispensable lessons for the next 
generation. Abby VanMuijen joined  
us again to translate the discussion 
into visuals.
“WHERE YOU FOUND INJUSTICE, 
MICHAEL FELT YOU MUST STAND 
AND SPEAK OUT .”
—ELLEN YAROSHEFSKY AT  
WHAT MICHAEL TAUGHT USBrick by Brick: A Community Forum 
on Ending Death by Incarceration in 
Pennsylvania
On January 26, 2021, we co-presented 
a community forum with Abolitionist 
Law Center and Amistad Law Project 
to raise awareness about the fight 
to end Death-By-Incarceration 
(commonly known as life without 
parole) sentences in Pennsylvania. 
The event allowed attendees to hear 
from formerly incarcerated people and 
family members of people currently 
serving these cruel sentences.  
(Read about our work on this issue in  
Scott v. Pennsylvania Board of Probation 
and Parole on page 12.)
We also organized a month of 
programming in celebration of Black 
History Month honoring the radical 
agendas for Black liberation put 
forth by our ancestors and raising up 
the voices of our comrades who are 
shaping our Black futures (see page 12). 
31 |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | Highlights from Community Events
From the Streets to the Supreme 
Court: Protecting Our Communities 
from Federal Repression
On September 16, 2020, a few weeks 
ahead of oral arguments before the 
Supreme Court in Tanvir v. Tanzin 
(see page 23), we held a panel with 
Tanvir plaintiff Naveed Shinwari, Staff 
Attorney Diala Shamas, Law Professor 
and CLEAR Founding Director Ramzi 
Kassem, Thenjiwe McHarris of Blackbird 
and the Movement for Black Lives, and 
journalist Rozina Ali (moderator).Rights 
or Rightlessness: The Lives  
of Men Imprisoned at Guantánamo
On January 11, 2021, we marked the 
19th anniversary of the opening of 
the prison at Guantánamo Bay with 
a discussion between Guantánamo 
prison survivor Mohamedou Ould 
Slahi, Baher Azmy, and scholar Dr. A. 
Naomi Paik, moderated by Dr. Maha 
Hilal (Justice for Muslims Collective) 
and Advocacy Program Manager Aliya 
Hussain. Mohamedou joined from 
Mauritania to share his experience of 
being detained without charge for over 
a decade and of his life after release. 
(Read about our ongoing legal fight for 
the rights of people incarcerated at 
Guantánamo on page 26).EVENTS (CONT’D)
EVENTSWhat Is the Role of Lawyers During 
Crisis?
On March 23, 2021, we held a panel 
discussion to celebrate the launch of 
the book Crisis Lawyering: Effective 
Legal Advocacy in Emergency Situations , 
which is dedicated to former Center 
for Constitutional Rights lawyer and 
President Michael Ratner. Speakers 
included Baher Azmy and other Crisis 
Lawyering contributors, with moderator 
Dahlia Lithwick, a legal commentator 
and senior editor at Slate.
Podcast: “The Activist Files”
Like our events, which are recorded 
and live on online to be viewed 
any time, all 40 episodes of our 
podcast remain available. Our 
monthly podcast  features movement 
partners, our clients, and people using 
storytelling to create change. We 
produced 12 episodes in FY 2020 
on topics including abolition, Black 
trans liberation, Bolivian indigenous 
resistance, lessons from recent 
SCOTUS decisions, the BREATHE 
ACT, decriminalizing sex work, and 
dismantling Jim Crow juries. 
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 32DONOR SPOTLIGHT
Julie F. Kay  is a well-known litigator 
and a voice for using law to promote 
abortion rights and gender equity in 
the U.S. and Ireland. She was the lead 
attorney on the landmark abortion 
rights case ABC v. Ireland before the 
European Court of Human Rights.  
She is also the co-author, with  
Kathryn Kolbert, of the new book 
Controlling Women: What We Must Do 
Now to Save Reproductive Freedom.  
“Organizing to advance reproductive 
freedom as an issue of gender and 
racial equity is at the heart of our book 
and has been strongly influenced by 
the work I’ve seen and supported at 
the Center for Constitutional Rights 
over many years,” she said.  
Julie is a longtime supporter of ours 
—and even served on our board. She is 
currently a Justice Sustainer, having set 
up a reoccurring monthly gift with us, 
and a member of our Thelma Newman 
Planned Giving Society, having 
included the Center for Constitutional 
Rights in her estate plan. 
Thank you, Julie, for staying with us for 
the duration, too.
DONOR SPOTLIGHTThank you!“THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 
NEVER GETS STALE,” 
JULIE SAID, “BECAUSE 
ITS HISTORY OF SMART 
RADICALISM INFORMS ITS 
WORK AND ENHANCES THE 
ORGANIZATION’S VISION OF A 
MORE JUST WORLD. THEY USE 
THEIR RESOURCES WELL AND 
LOOK TO ADVANCE THE RIGHTS 
OF THREATENED COMMUNITIES 
IN MANY VARIED WAYS…
IT’S EASY TO SUPPORT THE 
POPULAR CAUSES OR TO 
COLOR WITHIN THE LEGAL 
LINES, BUT THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 
IS ABLE TO BRING LEGAL 
FIREPOWER AND HUMAN 
RIGHTS ARGUMENTS TO THOSE 
WHO ARE DISENFRANCHISED 
AND TO STAY WITH THEM FOR 
THE DURATION.”
Miriam Pollet was born in 1923, 
in Brooklyn, the youngest child of 
immigrants from Eastern Europe. 
Though her sisters never went to 
college, Miriam followed her brothers, 
studying economics and history at 
Brooklyn College, and biology and 
chemistry at the City College of New 
York. After working various jobs in 
labs and a stint in administration at 
the Metropolitan Opera, she earned a degree in library science, leading 
to her career as a science librarian at 
Brooklyn College, Downstate Medical 
Center, and the NY Public Library.
After retirement, Miriam volunteered 
at several organizations. At some 
point, she heard that the Center for 
Constitutional Rights needed help with 
a mass mailing. She signed up, and was 
struck by the commitment of the staff 
she worked with. She had long been 
engaged politically and involved with 
social justice organizations, starting in 
high school when she raised money 
for anti-fascist groups in Europe. The 
Center for Constitutional Rights was a 
perfect fit.Miriam next volunteered with 
us to respond to requests from 
incarcerated people. She learned 
about the problems of the carceral 
system and was proud to be part of 
an organization that addressed the 
needs of a severely isolated and under-
represented population.  
Today, at 98, Miriam is as concerned 
for the world as ever. She can no 
longer volunteer, but is happy to 
support social justice through 
donations. Our heartfelt thanks go 
to Miriam for her substantial and 
multifaceted support of our work. 
33
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | DONOR SPOTLIGHT
Carolyn Purcell worked for many 
years as a family nurse practitioner 
in community clinics in California, 
with a focus on immigrant groups. 
These days, she delights in being a 
grandmother. In all her roles, she cares 
deeply about equitable healthcare, 
quality education for all, and the 
expansion of human rights for the 
most vulnerable in this country  
and abroad.She learned about the Center for 
Constitutional Rights when a friend 
brought her to a dinner with Michael 
Ratner in 2005: “We talked about the 
struggles in Central America in the 
1980s and raising children. From that 
moment on, the connection with the 
Center for Constitutional Rights began 
and has held firm ever since.”
Carolyn supports our work because 
we continue to “expand the vision 
of justice for all” and ask strategic 
questions like “Where do we go next? 
How will our choices raise all voices?” 
She appreciates being involved in our 
“beloved, welcoming, and dynamic 
community” and being invited to join 
the conversation. 
DONOR SPOTLIGHT
“THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 
HEALS WOUNDS OF 
INJUSTICE SO THAT ALL 
PEOPLE MAY TAKE THEIR 
RIGHTFUL PLACE IN 
SOCIETY AND  
FULLY PARTICIPATE,”  
REFLECTS SUPPORTER 
CAROLYN PURCELL. 
“In conversation, we are 
moved to find our true 
and authentic response 
and learn to be in 
solidarity.” 
“It is with deep satisfaction that  
we can send money to the Center for 
Constitutional Rights. Not only does  
the Center play an unwavering, 
essential litigation role for human 
rights and justice, it also supports 
direct action for communities in peril.” Irwin and Martha Spiegelman  are 
committed to anti-war, justice, human 
rights, labor rights, environment, 
anti-nuclear, and other causes. In the 
1950s, Irwin was a founding member 
of Students for a SANE Nuclear Policy. 
In the ’60s, they were inspired by civil 
rights activists and the Poor People’s 
Campaign. They were in march after 
march against the Vietnam War.  
Among the stalwarts the Spiegelmans 
met in those days was Martin Brod, 
who generously gave to groups 
for peace, justice, labor organizing, 
environmental justice, and human 
rights—especially Palestinian rights.  
“For over 50 years, we were often with Marty in the deep activist and political 
left-liberal trenches.” It is from him 
that the Spiegelmans learned of the 
Center for Constitutional Rights and its 
defense of those who are protesting 
Israeli oppression and U.S. complicity.  
After Marty’s death, they became his 
successor fundholders, following in  
his footsteps with their pledge to 
donate his money as he wished.  
“Marty Brod belongs in this donor 
spotlight,” they wrote.   
“In old-age now, we cannot canvas 
door-to-door, we cannot march. But 
we are fortunate to be able to use 
funds to take another pathway to help 
out worthy causes.”  |  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 34
 DONOR SPOTLIGHTThank you!DONOR SPOTLIGHT
CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy  
Among the many events that 
transpired in 1981, some of the 
most notable include the swearing 
in of Ronald Reagan as president 
of the United States, the global 
spectacle of Lady Diana Spencer’s 
marriage to Prince Charles, and the 
identification of the first cases of the 
syndrome that later became known 
as AIDS. 1981 was also the year that 
philanthropists Maryanne Mott and 
Herman Warsh decided to do even 
more in their efforts to shift the needle 
toward justice, and they established 
the CS Fund to support non-profit 
organizations whose missions were 
devoted to defending civil liberties and 
human rights. At that point, the Center 
for Constitutional Rights—which, at 15, 
was itself still a young organization—
was already on the Fund’s radar. 
“From the CS Fund’s inception, the 
Center for Constitutional Rights has 
encapsulated everything that we stand 
for,” said CS Fund’s Executive Director, 
Bailey Malone. “CCR works on the 
leading edge of protecting civil liberties, 
and its unfailing work on the hard cases 
that create change have led us to put 
many of CCR’s issue areas — repression 
of dissent, government surveillance, 
torture and war crimes, and, more 
recently, abusive immigration practices 
— at the forefront of our grantmaking.”
The CS Fund, and its sister foundation, 
the Warsh-Mott Legacy (established 
in 1985), have proudly stood with the 
Center for Constitutional Rights from 
their first grant to us in 1981 until 
today—a rare and extraordinary tenure 
for a partnership between a foundation 
and a grantee. In 2021, as the Fund 
marked its 40th anniversary, its board 
awarded the Center for Constitutional 
Rights an unprecedented five-year 
grant, further cementing this longtime 
collaboration. 
“The range of issues challenging society 
today are far-reaching and almost 
overwhelming in their scope,” said 
Bailey. “CCR’s mission to dismantle 
oppressive power and build the power 
of social movements allows them 
to bring their expertise in litigation, 
advocacy, and narrative shifting where 
it is needed most — and often where 
other organizations fear to go. It is that 
courage, paired with their devotion 
to principle and to uplift the most 
marginalized, that continues to inspire us 
to stand with them.”“FROM THE CS FUND’S 
INCEPTION, THE CENTER 
FOR CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS HAS ENCAPSULATED 
EVERYTHING THAT WE  
STAND FOR.” 
– CS FUND’S EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR, BAILEY MALONE35
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | IN MEMORIAM
David Kaiser & Don Lichty
The Center for Constitutional 
Rights family is deeply 
saddened by the untimely 
loss of David Kaiser  
in July 2020; we are so grateful  
to have known him and his  
relentless compassion.
David was a fierce fighter for what 
he cared about, especially combating 
climate change and transforming the 
criminal justice system. 
A great-great-grandson 
of John D. Rockefeller, 
he was willing to upend 
“the generally polite 
world of philanthropy,” 
While we mourn the loss 
of Don Lichty in May 
2020; we are inspired 
by his life.
Don was introduced to our work by 
his friend, former board member 
Michael Smith, and past Center 
for Constitutional Rights President 
Michael Ratner. He stayed involved 
because of our principled progressive 
approach, our international scope, and 
our refusal to compromise in the fight 
for justice.  
Born in Wisconsin, Don spent many 
years in New Mexico and then Hawaii. 
He was passionate about art and 
politics, and committed to social and The New York Times reported in his 
obituary, by challenging the very 
industry from which his family had 
drawn its wealth. As president of the 
Rockefeller Family Fund, David led the 
foundation’s divestment from fossil 
fuels and confronted Exxon Mobil’s 
destructive track record on climate 
change head-on.  
He was the kind of radical 
philanthropist who supported bold 
organizations like the Center for 
Constitutional Rights. His partner, 
Rosemary Corbett, has played a 
longtime leadership role on our  
Board of Trustees. 
David fought hard for justice and 
we will remember his vision and 
commitment as we keep fighting. 
environmental justice—commitments 
that will have enduring impacts at the 
Nature Conservancy’s Lichty Ecological 
Research Center and at the Center 
for Constitutional Rights, which has 
been fueled by the Lichtys’ generous 
support for decades. 
Don and his wife of 50 
years, Pamela Goodman 
Lichty, have supported 
our work since 1982.  
We are grateful and privileged to 
continue Don’s heartfelt devotion to 
the fight for a more just world. 
IN MEMORIAMDavid Kaiser and his partner Rosemary Corbett who serves as 
the Secretary of our BoardAnonymous (1)
Paul J. Allen
Florence Bloom
Martin M. Brod
Helga Busemann
Michael A. Cooper
Jeffrey M. 
DickemannHerbert Epstein
Louise Frankel
Marvin Gettelman
Ellen Harris
Richard T. Jeroloman
Robert K. Johnson
David KaiserAmy Kaplan
Sue Levering
Donald Lichty
Maria L. and Stanley 
Lofchie
Muriel E. Neufeld
Chorale P. Page
Leon Pomerance Amy B. and  
Sameer Bashiti
Lawrence Rivkin
Manuel Schonhorn
Nadine Taub
George Wallerstein
Richard M. Wiebe
John H. WilsonIT IS ALWAYS SAD TO LOSE A MEMBER OF OUR COMMUNITY, 
BUT THEIR IDEALS WILL LIVE ON IN OUR WORK.36
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 
FINANCIAL REPORTProgram Services  
(Litigation and Advocacy) ..................................................................... $7,851,966
Suppporting Services  
(Administration and General) ............................................................... $2,087,231
Grants and Contributions  ............................................................... $15,592,145
Court Awards and Attorney Fees  ........................................................ $854,479
Investment Income and Realized Gains  .............................................. $636,407
In-Kind Income  ............................................................................................. $4,521
Other Income  ........................................................................................ $1,309,877TOTAL REVENUE, 
GAINS, OTHER 
SUPPORT$18,397,429TOTAL 
EXPENSES$9,939,197The Center for Constitutional Rights is a nonprofit 
charitable organization that relies on individual  
and foundation support.
YOUR DEDICATION 
AND GENEROSITY ARE 
INDISPENSABLE IN THE 
FIGHT FOR JUSTICE. 
FINANCIAL REPORT|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 37 STAFFBOARD, STAFF, INTERNS
Board
Katherine Acey  |  Treasurer 
Amna Akbar
Lumumba Akinwole-Bandele
Laila Al Arian
Leonardo M. Aldridge (through June 2021)
Amanda Alexander
Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan (through January 2021)
Colette Pichon Battle
Rosemary R. Corbett  |  Secretary
Lisa Crooms-Robinson
Michelle DePass (through June 2021)
Marjorie Fine  |  Development Committee Chair
Katherine Franke  |  Chair (through June 2021)
Justin Hansford 
Leila Hessini  |  Vice Chair (through June 2021)
Nsombi Lambright (through October 2020)
Gay McDougall
Jumana Musa
Vincent Southerland
Management Team
Vincent Warren  |  Executive Director
Baher Azmy  |  Legal Director 
Nadia Ben-Youssef  |  Advocacy Director 
Chandra Hayslett  |  Communications Director 
Theda Jackson-Mau  |  Director of Development 
Donita Judge  |  Associate Executive Director
Maria LaHood  |  Deputy Legal Director
Grace Lile  |  Director of Operations 
Jeffrey Weinrich  |  Finance Director
Operations
Gregory Butterfield  |   Finance Manager
Orlando Gudino  |  IT Manager
Meriam Haider  |  Receptionist/Administrative 
Assistant 
Lisa Levy  |  Senior Human Resources Manager
Ken Montenegro  |  Technology Director
Wan Yin Lui  |  Operations Manager
Edwin Santana  |  Administrative Associate, 
Operations 
Lynette Seymour  |  Executive Associate
Anderson Taveras  |   IT AssociateAdvocacy
maya finoh  |  Advocacy Associate
Aliya Hussain  |  Advocacy Program Manager 
Tabitha Mustafa  |  Advocacy Program Manager (as of 
February 22, 2021)
Obiajulu Nwabuzor  |  Strategic Events Manager
Dominic Renfrey  |  Advocacy Program Manager
Communications
Emily Ballas  |  Graphic Design Associate
Lauren Gazzola  |  Communications Associate  
for Publications (through May 20, 2021)
Charles Greene  |  Web Communications and 
Multimedia Manager 
Jen Nessel  |  Communications Coordinator
Alessandra Perotti  |  Digital Engagement Manager
Alex Webster  |  Communications Assistant 
Development
Michelle Anthony  |  Donor Relations Associate
Mimi Clara  |  Senior Major Gifts Officer
Doug Edelson  |  Foundation Relations Officer 
Fernando Garcia  |  Capital Campaign Associate
Amy Greenstein  |  Associate Director of 
Development 
Olivia McIntosh  |  Database and Online Giving 
Manager (as of November 23, 2020)
Rob Santiago  |  Senior Major Gifts Officer 
Charisse Waugh   |  Grant Writer
Legal
Darius Charney  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Claire Dailey  |  Senior Legal Worker
J. Wells Dixon  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Sadé Evans  |  Legal Worker (as of June 1, 2021)
Chinyere Ezie  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Omar Farah  |  Senior Staff Attorney; Associate 
Director of Strategic Initiatives
Katherine Gallagher  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Angelo Guisado  |  Staff Attorney 
Ian Head  |  Senior Legal Worker
Shayana Kadidal  |  Senior Managing Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Luna Martinez  |  Bertha Justice Fellow 
Rachel Meeropol  |  Senior Staff Attorney; Associate 
Director of Legal Training and Education
Elsa Mota  |  Bertha Justice FellowAfrika Owes  |  Administrative Associate, Legal
Ibraham Qatabi  |  Senior Legal Worker
Ghita Schwarz  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Diala Shamas  |  Staff Attorney
Samah Sisay  |  Bertha Justice Fellow 
Pamela Spees  |  Senior Staff Attorney
Leah T odd  |  Senior Legal Worker 
Rafaela Uribe  |  Bertha Justice Fellow 
2021 Ella Baker Interns
Dana Jabri
Darius Johnson
Fatoumata Diabate
Joanne Choi
James Johnson
Mahroh Jahangiri
Maira Velazquez
Pooja Shivaprasad
Ramis Wadood
Shaiba Rather
Farishtay Yamin
Zoe Ridolfi-Starr
Interns
Hudson Clulow
Ivey Dyson
Aryn Frazier
Lisa Garcia
Laura Herrera-Sarabia
Philip Issa
Hannah Kohn
Phoebe Lytle
Alex Matak
Taliah Mirmalek 
Udodilim Nnamdi
Niteka Raina
Anna Ruiz
Leena Sabagh
Laura Silva
Serena Taj
Lauren Wilfong
Ayyan Zubair38
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | WAYS TO SUPPORT THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTSOTHER WAYS TO SUPPORT THE  
CENTER FOR CONSITUTIONAL RIGHTS
STAY UP-TO-DATE AND 
SHARE OUR NEWS! 
Follow @theCCR on Twitter, 
CCRJustice on Instagram , and 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
on Facebook  and LinkedIn,  
and bookmark our website:  
www.CCRjustice.org. Sign up  
for our weekly newsletter,  
the Frontlines of Justice, at 
ccrjustice.org/up-to-date. Share 
our newsletters, action alerts, and 
appeals with your friends.WE ARE 
CALLING 
ON YOU
JOIN FORCES WITH ACTIVISTS, LAWYERS, AND STORYTELLERS TO FIGHT OPPRESSION AND BUILD POWER. 
YOU HAVE A ROLE TO PLAY: DONATE. ACT . SHARE.
FOR MORE INFORMATION ON WAYS TO SUPPORT US, PLEASE 
CONTACT: THEDA JACKSON-MAU, DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT 
AT 212-614-6448 OR TJACKSON-MAU@CCRJUSTICE.ORGMAKE AN ONLINE GIFT AT 
WWW.CCRJUSTICE.ORG/
DONATE
It’s fast, easy, and secure, and your gift 
will go to work right away. Online gifts 
are a quicker and greener way to give.JOIN THE JUSTICE 
SUSTAINERS
These gifts provide us with a 
reliable, steady source of income, 
making it possible for us to plan, 
leverage and allocate resources 
in a way that means more hope 
for our clients, more support for 
movements, and more justice 
and accountability. Sign up 
online for a monthly recurring 
gift at www.CCRjustice.org/
Donate. 
INCLUDE THE CENTER  
FOR CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS IN YOUR WILL
Including us as a beneficiary in 
your will is an excellent way to 
make a statement about the 
values you held during your 
lifetime while ensuring that we 
will be here for the long haul. You 
may choose to make a bequest 
to us of a specific dollar amount 
or a percentage of your estate. MAKE THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  
YOUR BIRTHDAY GIFT! 
Ask friends and family to make gifts 
to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights in your honor as your 
holiday/birthday/anniversary/no-
reason-at-all gift OR make gifts to 
us in honor of the people on your 
shopping list. These gifts will pay 
tribute to our shared social justice 
values and build our audience, while 
fueling our efforts to fight for the 
most vulnerable while building the 
power of social movements. DONATE STOCK
If you sell depreciated stock and 
give the proceeds to the Center 
for Constitutional Rights, you may 
be able to claim the loss on your 
taxes, as well as the charitable 
deduction. If you donate 
appreciated securities to us, you 
may avoid capital gains taxes and 
receive a charitable deduction.  
For stock transfer information, 
go to www.CCRjustice.org/gifts-
stocksfunds .ATTEND A VIRTUAL EVENT —
AND BRING A FRIEND! 
If you are on our email list, you will 
receive invitations. Public events are 
listed on our calendar at  
www.CCRjustice.org/calendar .
Thank you!The Center for Constitutional 
Rights is grateful for your 
dedication and partnership. 
You make it possible for us  
to think big and stake out 
daring positions.  Because of you, our litigation and advocacy are 
holistic, fearless, and relentless.  
Together, we are transforming the power 
structures that oppress vulnerable communities, 
building the strength of social justice movements, 
and training the next generation of movement 
lawyers and activists.
CCRJUSTICE.ORGTHANK YOU!
|  CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS @  55 YEARS  | 39 THANK YOU AND ATTRIBUTIONSATTRIBUTIONS
Art by Art Twink + Forward T ogether + Trans 
Student Wellness Initiative  |  page 16 
Micah Bazant  |  Artist  |  page 15 
Christine Brown  |   Cfreedom Photography    
page 45, top left
Jaffa Graves  |   page 21Vic Hinterlang from Shutterstock   |   page 24
Louisiana Bucket Brigade   |   cover, top right
T om Manning  |  Courtesy of Certain Days  |  
page 12 
Maddy Miller  |  cover, bottom  leftChristopher Noxon  |  Artist  |  pages 26
Abby VanMuijen  |  Artist  |  pages 8, 30
Witness Against T orture   |   cover, top center
Jessica Hoffmann  |  Research and Writing  |   
jess@jessicahoffmann.com© 2021 CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS   
666 BROADWAY FL 7  |  NEW YORK, NY 10012  |  212.614.6448  
CCRJUSTICE.ORG