The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization. On request, a copy of CCR’s latest financial report may be obtained from us or from the Office of the Attorney General of 
the State of New York, Charities Bureau, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the 
rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represented civil rights move-
ments in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization commit-ted to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.
Design: Nicholas Coster, nicholas@modino.com. Photo credits: p 2: Yanick Salazar • p 4: Pam Bradshaw • p 6: Pam Bradshaw • p 7: Juan Manuel, Herrera/OAS • p 11: Qa’id Jacobs • p 
12: Qa’id Jacobs • p 14: Alexis Agathocleous • p.15: Snowden: Laura Poitras/Praxis Films. Assange: Cancillería del Ecuador. Manning: courtesy of www.bradleymanning.org • p16: © RON-ALD KABUUBI/epa/Corbis • p.19: Courtesy of Iraq Veterans Against the War/Civil Soldier Alliance • p.20-21: Picture 2: Laura Raymond. Picture 5: Organization of Women’s Freedom in Iraq. Pictures 6, 11, 15: Pam Bradshaw. Picture 10: Courtesy of Iraq Veterans Against the War/Civil Soldier Alliance. Picture 12: Aliya Hana Hussain • p 22-23: Pictures 2, 6: Pam Brad-shaw. Pictures 4, 5: Sameer A. Khan • p 23: Pictures 4, 5 by Sameer Khan • p 27: Pam Bradshaw • p 29: David Hicks: Adam Thomas (devdsp@flickr) • p 30: Top left: Shayana Kadidal •  
p.32: Chelsea Manning by Alicia Neal, in cooperation with Chelsea herself, commissioned by the Chelsea Manning Support Network • p 33: Top: Pam Bradshaw. Bottom: Kevin Gay • p 34: Bot-tom left: Alexis Agathocleous • p 36: Bram Cymet (bcymet@flickr) • p 41: Bottom: Courtesy of Iraq Veterans Against the War/Civil Soldier Alliance • p 46: Douglas Gorenstein • p 62: Ruby Dee: Courtesy of MDCarchives01Table of Contents
Message from the Executive Director .................................................................. 2
Guantánamo ................................................................................................... 4
Government Misconduct and Racial Justice ......................................................... 10
International Human Rights .............................................................................. 16
Movement Support ......................................................................................... 20
Bertha Justice Institute ..................................................................................... 22
Communications  ............................................................................................ 24
Message from the Legal Director ....................................................................... 26
Case Index .................................................................................................... 27
CCR Joint Projects .......................................................................................... 39
Partners in Litigation ........................................................................................ 42
CCR Donors ................................................................................................... 46
Financials ...................................................................................................... 59
CCR Board and Staff ....................................................................................... 60
In Memoriam ................................................................................................. 6202Message from the Executive Director
“Without struggle, there can be no progress,” Frederick Douglass famously observed. At CCR, 
years and sometimes decades of hard work yielded significant—at times groundbreaking—
progress over the past 12 months. We have been in the trenches fighting police discrimination, 
government surveillance, persecution of vulnerable communities, and torture, and you have 
been there with us; your support has given us the resources we need to remain in these fights 
and see them through to victories. 
Our landmark victory in the Floyd v. City of New York stop-and-frisk case was a stunning rebuke 
to the NYPD and set in motion what will be an historic process of community involvement in 
designing sweeping reforms; a process in which CCR will be deeply engaged. It came after 14 
years of litigation. The phones had not stopped ringing in response to our Floyd  win when two 
days later a federal judge issued a first-of-its-kind ruling in our case against Scott Lively for his role in persecution of LGBTI people in Uganda. Allowing the case to proceed, the judge affirmed that LGBTI people are covered under international law, making their persecution a crime against 
humanity. 
Meanwhile, CCR’s dogged pursuit of Vatican accountability continues this year resulting in not 
one, but two UN Committees summoning the Vatican to Geneva to answer questions about its 
role in exposing children to sexual violence and protecting abusers. When we first filed our case 
against the Vatican in the International Criminal Court in 2011, many people scratched their heads, wondering why we thought we could possibly hold the Vatican responsible for its actions. 
However, we and our clients at SNAP knew that the evidence would speak for itself, and this 
year, both the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child and the UN Committee Against Torture 
issued scathing reports on the Vatican’s failure under its international treaty obligations. 
Some CCR cases came to a close this past year, after many years of determined work. Most 
notably, we reached a final settlement in our Vulcans case, ending decades of racially discrimina -
tory hiring policies at the FDNY and creating the most diverse class of incoming firefighters in 
history. After the dismissal of our case challenging the government’s drone program, our client 
Nasser al-Aulaqi decided he could not bear the pain of reliving the loss of his son and grandson 
again and declined to appeal the decision. Yet even though we faced setbacks our four-year 
effort to demand answers in the Obama administration’s targeted killings program produced notable results, including a Justice Department white paper, leaked in 2013, attempting to justify 
the killing of American citizens without due process, a broader public record and more robust 
public discourse on the program.
03
One of the hallmarks of CCR’s work is that we remain undaunted. Our case challenging the 
NYPD’s surveillance of Muslim communities in New Jersey was dismissed in early 2014, but we 
are appealing that decision and have lined up an impressive array of legal groups in support of 
our case, as well as the children of Fred Korematsu, Gordon Hirabayashi and Minoru Yasui, who 
were held in Japanese internment camps based upon their national origin. Meanwhile, that same 
perseverance has paid off in our case against CACI, which had also been dismissed. But the 
Fourth Circuit Appeals Court ruled that victims of torture at Abu Ghraib can pursue legal claims 
against private military contractors. 
As I look back on the year, I see tremendous progress towards justice; whether it’s our victories 
in Floyd  and Vulcans, or against-the-odds movement towards accountability like our Vatican 
work and our work on behalf of torture victims at Abu Ghraib, these victories are as much yours as they are ours and our clients; we couldn’t do them without you. It’s the generous and unflag -
ging support of our donors that makes it possible for CCR to demand justice day after day, week 
after week, month after month, and year after year. 
Looking forward, the same is true as well. Recently, the New York Times called our Pelican Bay 
case one “that could shape national policy on the use of long-term solitary confinement.” Our 
work on behalf of the detainees at Guantánamo and our fierce determination to see this shame -
ful prison finally closed will likewise continue for as long as it takes. Our latest cases, challenging 
the use of the No Fly List to coerce Muslims to spy on their communities and demanding answers 
about the government’s immigration detention policies, will move ahead with the same unrelent -
ing commitment to demand and create progress.
Through it all, it will once again be you, CCR’s supporters, who are the foundation of everything 
we do; it is your dedication to justice and support of CCR that allow us to work to make justice a 
reality. Without you, none of this would be possible. With you, progress and justice are possible. Thank you!Message from the Executive Director
Vincent Warren04Guantánamo
Twelve years after bringing the original challenges to unlawful detentions in Guantánamo, CCR continues to fight for justice there on several 
fronts: through litigation in U.S. courts and international tribunals; through diplomatic and advocacy efforts to resettle our clients in third coun -
tries; through public education and outreach on the issues; and through aggressive communications and media work aimed at keeping the issues in the public eye. We are continually telling our clients’ stories to ensure that the men at Guantánamo are not forgotten.
As one of his first official acts in office, President Obama promised to 
return America to “the moral high ground” in the so-called “War on 
Terror,” by signing an executive order to close the prison at Guantá -
namo Bay within a year. Despite repeatedly reaffirming that promise, 
the president has failed the 149 men who continue to languish in 
Guantánamo, more than 12 years later.
Following the longest period without a single detainee transfer and 
a period of particularly deep despair at the prison, President Obama bowed to the pressure created by the mass detainee hunger strike 
and released 17 men; 79 men are currently cleared for release. This 
proved that, despite efforts to blame Congress for inertia at Guantá -
namo, the president has ample authority to release men—when he 
has the will. While this was a positive development, the pace of releas -
es remains far too slow, especially because the majority of men have never been and will never be charged with a crime. And despite lifting 
the blanket ban on transfers to Yemen, the president has nothing to show for it: not a single Yemeni man has left Guantánamo alive since 
2010. Yemenis now constitute nearly two-thirds of the population at 
Guantánamo, although most were cleared for release years ago. Some who have been transferred are sent against their will to countries 
where they face grave threats. This includes CCR client Djamel Ame -
ziane who was involuntarily sent to Algeria even though we identified 
for the administration a number of safe countries willing to accept him.As one of the few human rights organizations that represent detained men, our deep, longstanding relationships with our clients remain vital to our work. By regularly travelling to meet with our clients in 
Guantánamo, we hear directly from them about the conditions at the 
prison and their physical and emotional health, which informs our legal and advocacy strategies and enables us to amplify their voices. 
Guantánamo Global Justice i nitiative
“i have imagined myself in my mother’s embrace, she is crying. i am crying. c an i ever  
finish greeting her? Who would i go to first? m y mother has the most right, but wouldn’t  
my daughter feel the same? m aybe when i hug my mother, Hafsa will slip in between us.”  
– Fahd GhazyCCR staff in NYC’s Times Square on the Global Day of Action to Close 
Guantánamo and End Indefinite Detention.05litiGation
The Center’s clients’ stories vary, but 
most tell of the torment that comes with being indefinitely detained for more than a dozen years without charge or trial. At home, children have grown up, parents have died, and the futures they once dreamed about have slipped away. Yet many of these men remain hopeful, with dreams of a new future once they are released. Fahd Ghazy (see p.9) was only 17 years old when he was rendered to Guantánamo; he is one of the last remaining prisoners to have been detained as a juvenile. Tariq Ba Odah has been in Guantánamo since 2002, and has been on a seven-year hunger strike to protest his indefinite detention. Twice a day he is strapped to a restraint chair and painfully force-fed. Mohammed al-Hamiri suffered severe brain injuries as a young man and traveled to Pakistan in search of affordable medical care where he was apprehended and sold to the U.S. for a bounty. CCR continues to advocate for the release of Ghaleb Al-Bihani, who was the fourth detainee to be reviewed by the Obama administration’s new Periodic Review Board, established in 2011. The Board approved Al-Bihani for transfer in May. Thus, while all four men have been cleared for release from Guantánamo, they remain imprisoned there.CCR continues to chal -
lenge the legitimacy of the military commissions that the Obama administration has sought to continue in lieu of fair criminal trials. To this end, CCR is demanding that the U.S. government admit wrongdoing and accept responsibility for the torture of our client Majid Khan. Khan took a plea bargain in his military commission to hasten the day he could meet his daughter, who was born after his capture. In addition, the Center has recently filed a direct challenge to the validity of the military commissions system itself, which aims to vacate the guilty plea of our client David Hicks, because the charge to which he pled guilty to obtain his freedom is not actually a crime under international law. If successful, these cases will demonstrate what CCR has been arguing from the begin -
ning—that military commissions are not legitimate courts and their verdicts will never carry real weight or validity.
The Center continues to advocate for fair trials for those whom the government has targeted for prosecution and will continue to co -
ordinate and support the efforts of non-CCR habeas counsel. CCR is currently litigating a case seeking public disclosure of videotapes of Mohammed al Qahtani, a Saudi citizen who has been detained in Guantánamo for 12 years and who was the victim of the Penta -
gon’s “First Special Interrogation Plan”—a regime of “aggressive interrogation techniques” amounting to torture. The government has destroyed hundreds of hours of videotapes depicting harsh interrogations for the express purpose of avoiding public scrutiny. Making the remaining tapes public will expose how the U.S. has treated the detained men, increase the likelihood of holding of -
ficials accountable, and help ensure such forms of detainee torture never happen again. Courts
“all i think about is the day my freedom will 
be given back to me, for it will be the day of 
my re-birth. i want to become a father and 
hold my baby in my arms, and provide for 
my family and to my child.” 
– Ghaleb a l-bihaniMilitary Commissions
 Our Clients
Top: CCR client Fahd Ghazy. 
Bottom: CCR client Ghaleb Al-Bihani.CCR’s legal team travels to Guantánamo 
regularly to provide our clients with up-
dates on any developments in their legal cases and advocacy efforts made on their behalf. 06aDvocac Y
On January 11, 2013, as we marked the 11th anniversary of Guan -
tánamo, it appeared as though transfers might never resume and 
Guantánamo had become a distant memory for many outside the 
prison’s walls. This all changed in February 2013, when most of the 166 men then held at the prison engaged in a collective, nonviolent 
hunger strike to protest more than a decade of indefinite detention 
without charge, deteriorating prison conditions, and intentional 
offenses against their religion. The physical and psychological toll 
on our clients and other hunger strikers was immeasurable, but their self-sacrifice succeeded in garnering increased world attention and a 
refocusing on the injustice—and human cost—of Guantánamo. CCR 
and allies worked tirelessly to keep the spotlight on the men’s efforts and to use the government’s fear of another prison death to apply 
political pressure on officials to resume transfers. All major news 
outlets extensively covered the prisoners’ harrowing accounts of 
the human rights abuses, and federal judges decried the prisoners’ 
treatment and harshly rebuked the government for interfering with counsel access to the prisoners. Major international human rights 
bodies condemned the White House’s failure to close the prison, its 
inadequate response to the hunger strike, and the inhumane prac -
tice of force-feeding. 
CCR built on the momentum created by the hunger strikers by 
developing dynamic advocacy strategies with our clients at the fore -
front. In May 2014, one year after President Obama again pledged to close Guantánamo and lifted his ban on transfers to Yemen, CCR 
joined activists and human rights organizations in dozens of cities 
worldwide for the Global Day of Action to Close Guantánamo and End Indefinite Detention. The Center also created a short video in response to the president’s lack of action, which highlighted our Ye -
meni clients who, despite being cleared for release, remain detained 
because of where they are from. 
Our advocacy efforts have demonstrated the power of our clients’ 
stories to move audiences to act. And in turn, we are able to share 
with our clients that their voices were heard and that people around 
the globe are standing in solidarity with them. As our client Fahd 
Ghazy has said, “You are the voice of the voiceless.”Guantánamo
“article ii , section 2 of the c onstitution provides that ‘[t]he President shall be the  
commander in chief of the a rmy and n avy of the u nited s tates ... ‘ i t would seem to  
follow, therefore, that the President of the united s tates, as c ommander-in- chief, has  
the authority—and power—to directly address the issue of force-feeding of the detainees  
at Guantánamo bay.” – Judge Gladys KesslerActivism
A CCR supporter reads a brochure featuring our Yemeni clients who, despite  
being cleared for release, have spent a third of their lives detained at Guantá-
namo without charge. 07CCR continues its work before the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), an interna -
tional platform for our advocacy on behalf of the men at Guantánamo that provides an opportunity to highlight the U.S. government’s failure to adhere to international human rights norms. CCR and co-petitioners, the Center for Justice and International Law, Physicians for Human Rights, and Reprieve, filed a request for a thematic hear -
ing, which took place in March 2013. We submitted over 600 pages of documentation to inform the Commission of the grave psychological impact of indefinite detention, the deaths of men at Guantánamo, the lack of access to fair trials, and illegitimate U.S. policies that restrict the closure of the prison. The hearing took place during the mass hunger strike in 2013. This hearing marked the first time since President Obama’s re-election that U.S. of -
ficials were confronted with questions about Guantánamo in a formal public setting. As a result, in July 2013, the IACHR extended the scope of its existing Precautionary Measures due to “allegations of widespread abuse and mistreatment, including unnecessary and humiliating searches, the force feeding of detainees who have chosen to participate in a hunger strike, and the increasing segre -
gation and isolation of detainees.”
In August 2013, President Obama transferred two men out of Guantánamo, the first trans -
fers in nearly a year. While CCR welcomed the resumption of voluntary transfers, the repatriation four months later of CCR client, Djamel Ameziane, to Algeria against his will and despite his fear of persecution in his home country, was deeply disturbing. CCR had worked for years on Ameziane’s behalf to secure alternative locations for resettlement. His forced transfer to Algeria violates inter -
national law, including the United Nations Convention Against Torture. CCR demanded that the Algerian government immediately release Ameziane from secret detention, treat him humanely, and respect his human rights. We continue to monitor his condition, demand transparency and accountability from the Algerian government, and ensure that Ameziane does not suffer persecution. 
CCR also continues to advocate on behalf of several of our other released 
clients as well, including Muhammed and Abdul Nasser Khan Tumani, a father and son from Syria who were resettled in Portugal and Cape Verde in 2009 and 2010 and have yet to be reunited.
International Advocacy Resettlement Efforts
CCR Senior Staff Attorney Wells Dixon advocates on behalf of 
Guantánamo detainees before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. CCR client Djamel Ameziane.
“We keep walking through the tunnel in search of 
a shred of light hoping it would appear at the end 
of that tunnel... a nd for every couple of steps we 
make, this strong air pushes us one step backward, as if it is stealing one step from us. Yet we keep 
walking forward.” – m ohammed a l-Hamiri08Guantánamo
Guantánamo b Y tH e numbers
779 37
86%* 22
630  9
149 8
8 88  
0 79
58men and boys, all of them Muslim, 
have been imprisoned over time at Guantánamo since January 2002.men have been designated for indefi -
nite detention without charge or trial by President Obama’s Task Force.
or more were children when taken 
to the detention camp.
More men have died (9) at Guantánamo...
...than have been convicted (8) by 
the military commissions.
years is the longest hunger strike 
by a man at Guantánamo. It’s still going.
senior government officials have 
been held accountable for the wrongful detention and torture at Guantánamo.were sold to the United States dur -
ing a time when the U.S. military was offering large bounties for capture; commonly, $5,000 offered per man.
men have been transferred.
 men remain detained.
of them are from Yemen.
have been cleared for release but 
remain imprisoned.
of those who are cleared for release 
are Yemenis, but they continue to be detained because of their citizenship.
*Seton Hall University School of Law,  
Report on Guantánamo Detainees, 2006.
09Ten years ago, CCR and the few brave others 
who dared to challenge the Bush administration’s lawless Guantánamo prison achieved a landmark victory in the Supreme Court. The Court’s deci -
sion in Rasul v. Bush , which was hailed at the time 
by some legal scholars as “the most important civil liberties case in half a century,” represented a major blow to the Bush administration’s assertion of unchecked executive power and promised the possibility of legal relief for hundreds of detainees. Yet, CCR’s commemoration of the Rasul  anniver -
sary was bittersweet. After more than a decade, 149 men—including CCR clients—remain impris -
oned, the courts have failed to live up to Rasul’s  
promise of meaningful judicial review, and Obama has faltered on carrying out his promise to shutter the prison.
Despite its diminishing promise of enforceable 
legal rights, Rasul  was a transformative accom -
plishment because it opened the prison up to the world—first through hundreds of lawyers, followed by press. These lawyers, mobilized by CCR from all practice areas and all regions of the country, flooded the prison, pressured home gov -
ernments to repatriate their citizens, exposed the blackness of torture and arbitrary detention, gave names and stories to the men being held and, as a result, secured the release of more than 600 men. Their tireless efforts also led to the improve -
ment of conditions and treatment at the base. CCR’s victory in Rasul  and our role in coordinating 
hundreds of legal challenges to military practices in Guantánamo represented, in the words of one CCR supporter, “the greatest mass defense effort in American history.” As we look back on the past 10 years challenging indefinite detention and tor -
ture in Guantánamo, we recognize that our hard work is not over, but that the legacy of Rasul  is well 
worth celebrating. Last year, the mass hunger strike by detainees accomplished the near impossible: the men returned the public spotlight back onto Guantánamo, forc -
ing President Obama to publicly re-commit to closing the prison and lift his self-imposed ban on detainee transfers to Yemen. 
The heightened sense of urgency 
and the outpouring of harrow -
ing stories throughout the strike led CCR to be bolder, and client focused, in our advocacy efforts. Storytelling became a useful way to humanize the men detained and educate the administration and public. A story, a man’s story, can, if done well, have a life of its own—it can be shared, amplified, and it resonates with our own humanity. Using client photographs and artwork, quotes from letters and meetings, and film, we narrated the injustice of Guantá -
namo, and shared them on popular social media platforms.
In an adventurous new project, in collaboration with fellow Bertha Founda -
tion grantee the New Media Advocacy Project (N-Map), CCR created a short 
film about our client Fahd Ghazy and the effect that Guantánamo has had on his family and community. Only 17 when he arrived at Guantánamo, Fahd, like more than half of the men there, has been cleared for release for years, but he is trapped almost entirely because of his Yemeni citizenship. Key to moving the administration to resume transfers—especially to Yemen where no one has been transferred since 2010—is showing that Fahd and others like him can be successfully repatriated or resettled because they have networks ready to sup -
port them, and the resourcefulness and skills to allow them to begin rebuilding their lives peacefully upon release. 
CCR travelled to Yemen in December to meet with and film the Ghazy family 
over the course of two weeks. While the film shows the life of just one family, the story it tells of separation, love, and hope is universal. The final product is a beautiful portrait of the life that awaits Fahd’s return. The documentary is being used as a tool to advocate for Fahd’s release with administration officials, invigo -
rate our supporters to take action, and attract new and diverse constituencies and showcase CCR’s work as we use it across innovative platforms and forums.Telling Stories of Hope for Life beyond Guantánamo
beYonD Guantánamo 10 Years l ater
CCR’s Omar Farah with Abduraheem Ghazy, the 
youngest brother of our client Fahd Ghazy, out-side his home in Yemen.Rasul Anniversary 10Government Misconduct and Racial Justice
racial Discrimination
In August 2013, Judge Scheindlin ruled in favor of CCR’s plaintiffs in 
our groundbreaking class action racial profiling case, Floyd v. City of 
New York . The judge held that the New York City Police Department 
(NYPD) had engaged in a policy and widespread practice of unconsti -
tutional and racially discriminatory stops and frisks. Accepting CCR’s demand that comprehensive and systemic reform was required, she 
also laid out a series of reforms necessary to bring NYPD stop-and-frisk 
practices into sustained compliance with the U.S. Constitution, includ -
ing the appointment of an independent monitor to oversee the changes 
to training, supervision and police practices. She also accepted CCR’s 
proposal and ordered a groundbreaking “joint remedial process,” which 
will bring together affected communities, elected officials, the police, and CCR clients and attorneys in the case, and will ensure that commu -
nities most affected by these policies will have a seat at the table to help shape the future of policing in New York—and potentially the nation. 
Predictably, then-Mayor Bloomberg and the City of New York attempt -
ed to block the court order. In October, CCR and co-counsel argued 
before an appeals court and only two days later, the court issued an 
unprecedented decision that stayed the ruling, but went far beyond 
what either party asked for by shockingly removing Judge Scheindlin 
from the case, accusing her of misconduct in accepting Floyd as a “re -
lated case” to CCR’s predecessor stop-and-frisk lawsuit Daniels v. City 
of New York and violating judicial ethics by making public comments 
in the press. Erwin Chemerinsky, dean of the School of Law at the 
University of California, Irvine, rightfully called the ruling both “unprec -
edented” and “dangerous.”
From October to January, the case was caught up in a spate of virtu -ally unprecedented appeals motions, orders and responses, which 
consumed the entirety of the CCR legal team, our co-counsel, and our Communications and Education and Outreach departments in order to 
respond. After negotiating in private with the new administration, CCR 
was thrilled to announce, on January 30, alongside Mayor de Blasio, 
that the parties had reached an agreement for the City to drop the ap -
peal and move forward with the reforms. 
However, the appeal has not yet been officially dropped by the City, 
and police unions are filing various motions to obstruct the process. In 
the meantime, the Center continues to prepare for the reform process 
and to work with our partner Communities United for Police Reform on other strategies.
CCR’s roots stem from the 1960s civil rights movement in the American South. Our mission as well as our approach to representing movements 
and clients is shaped by this history. Nowhere is this legacy more evident than in our Government Misconduct and Racial Justice docket. The Cen -
ter’s largest and most diverse docket, our work covers issues as wide-ranging as racial discrimination, solitary confinement, immigration detention, free speech and religious profiling. Where possible, CCR employs the creative use of domestic and international law and uses litigation, advocacy, education, and media to shift the dialogue, influence decision makers, support activists and challenge modern-day manifestations of racial, social and economic injustice.
“no one should live in fear of being stopped whenever he leaves his home to go about the  
activities of daily life.” – Judge s hira a . scheindlinInstitutional Racism
CCR, Floyd plaintiffs, and co-counsel from Beldock, Levine & Hoffman at a press 
conference announcing a victory in our lawsuit challenging the NYPD’s racially 
discriminatory stop-and-frisk practices.In August 2013, in CCR’s landmark case 
Floyd v. City of New York , a federal district 
judge found that the New York Police Department (NYPD) had engaged in a widespread practice of unconstitutional 
and racially discriminatory stops and frisks. 
The court ordered the appointment of an 
independent monitor to oversee a collab -
orative reform process. 
The watershed victory in Floyd was won 
with CCR’s sound and aggressive legal 
strategy, but would not have been possible 
without the enormous public pressure  
exerted by our partner: Communities United for Police Reform (CPR). 
CPR, of which CCR is a founding member, 
is a campaign of more than 60 NGOs. It is 
led by a steering committee of nine orga -
nizations, including CCR. Over the nearly 
10-week Floyd trial, CPR and its member -
ship packed the court and held daily press 
conferences, rallies and events to draw 
public attention to how the communities 
they represent were being affected by 
discriminatory policing and stop and frisk. 
This organizing and advocacy behind the scenes, and in packing the court, was es -
sential in securing the ultimate victory. So much so that CPR was recognized by the judge who, in ordering the watershed col -
laborative reform process, named CPR as a stakeholder. 
As a stakeholder, CPR and affected com -
munities, led by CCR, will engage in the 
process along with the police, elected 
officials, and plaintiffs’ attorneys. Having CPR and affected communities at the table 
will play a vital role in ensuring the future policies surrounding the practice of stop 
and frisk in New York are fair and just.
CPR is also behind the multiple police 
reform legislative victories of the past year, 
including the passage of the Community 
Safety Act by the New York City Council 
in August 2013 (over the veto of former 
Mayor Bloomberg) and the election of a New York City mayor who campaigned 
on the promise of reforming stop and 
frisk. Further, CPR played a pivotal role in the selection of the new NYPD Inspector 
General. Overall, CPR has exerted politi -
cal pressure in numerous areas to ensure meaningful reform of discriminatory polic -
ing practices in New York City, including 
increased and coordinated documentation 
of police abuse on the street and the en -
hanced ability of affected communities to 
direct the reforms that dismantle discrimi -
natory policing practices.
Collaborating with Communities United for Police Reform
CPR press conference on the first day of the Floyd 
trial highlighting the voices of affected individuals, community leaders, elected officials and others.In March, an historic settlement was reached in CCR’s 
class action lawsuit Vulcan Society v. City of New York , 
which charged the New York City Fire Department (FDNY) with racially discriminatory hiring practices spanning a period of nearly 40 years. The settlement 
followed from a CCR victory at trial on some discrimi -
nation claims, which was affirmed on appeal but left some questions open. Under the settlement, the City 
will end decades of discrimination that the judge in our case said rendered the FDNY “the last bastion of white 
privilege.” By implementing court-monitored reforms, 
the agreement will result in increased opportunities for New Yorkers of color to become firefighters and 
to change the culture of the FDNY to make it more 
welcoming to people from all backgrounds. There is 
also a significant monetary victory: the thousands of 
Black and Latino victims of the City’s discriminatory firefighter hiring exams will be eligible to receive back 
pay totaling $98 million. And as a result of the case 
and advocacy by CCR and our remarkable clients, the Vulcan Society, the December 2013 class of firefight -
ers was the most diverse in NYC’s history. 
Because the FDNY remains a difficult place to work 
for firefighters of color, CCR continues to advocate for victims of discrimination, and will continue to monitor the implementation of the settlement and remedial court orders.
Vulcan Society leaders Capt. Paul Washington and Duery Smith 
flanking newly-minted firefighter Bruno Joseph after his gradu-ation from the Firefighter Academy.Hiring Discrimination
1112tarGetin G oF muslim an D arab c ommunities
CCR and Muslim Advocates 
appealed a court’s dismissal of Hassan v. City of New York , the 
first-ever case brought on behalf of Muslim Americans who were unlawfully targeted and surveilled in New Jersey under the NYPD’s post-9/11 human mapping and suspicionless surveillance program. Our clients include a decorated Iraq war veteran, current and former Rutgers University students, the parent organization of the Muslim Student Association of Rutgers University, a coalition of New Jersey mosques, and the owners and proprietors of a grade school for Muslim girls. 
CCR’s advocacy efforts work to draw connections between our longstanding law enforce -
ment abuse work, the targeting of immigrant communities and communities of color, and 
the expansion of widespread surveillance in the name of national security. The NYPD’s religious discrimination through the targeting of Muslims is a sister case to CCR’s landmark police misconduct case, Floyd v. City of New York ; both cases demonstrate egregious 
unconstitutional police misconduct by the NYPD, based on nothing more than skin color or religion, in direct violation of the U.S. Constitution.In Tanvir v. Holder , 
CCR and the CLEAR Project at CUNY Law School are  challenging the federal govern -
ment’s notoriously overbroad and  
inaccurate No Fly List in a new case filed on behalf of four Muslim Americans who were placed on the List, not because they posed a threat to aviation security, but because they refused to serve as FBI informants to spy on their religious communities. The government has claimed that the No Fly List is limited to individuals determined to be such significant threats that they cannot step on a commercial flight. There is no such evidence against our clients or the thousands of others who are placed on the List in secrecy and cannot find a way to get off. The List is now being regularly deployed by the FBI as a tool of coercion. In our case, the FBI told our clients that they would be removed from the List only if they became government informants—a premium resource for “counter-terrorism” efforts in the FBI. Because of their placement on the No Fly List, our clients have not been able to see family overseas for years.
Government Misconduct and Racial Justice
“i have seen firsthand the damage the n YPD spying pro -
gram has done to my community and to individual m uslims 
and their families, profoundly disrupting our lives at work 
and at home, and our ability to worship. t his surveillance  
is extensive and deeply invasive, touching every part of  our community, from our religious institutions to our  
businesses to our schools.”  
– imam a bdul Kareem m uhammad, Plaintiff in 
HassanNYPD Spying No Fly List
According to the govern-
ment’s Watchlisting Guid-ance document, which sets forth vague criteria for placing individuals on the 
No Fly List,“watchlisting is 
not an exact science. ”13unJust Detention
In January, CCR and the De -
tention Watch Network filed 
a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit seeking the im -
mediate release of documents that the U.S. government has refused to provide regarding the so-called “detention bed quota,” also known as the “detention bed mandate” or “lockup quota,” which Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has interpret -
ed to require detaining 34,000 non-citizens per day. Under this program, the money that Con -
gress gives to ICE is used to fill what are now cells frequently run by private prison corporations that manage civil immigration facilities; it is an ugly incentive structure—more detentions, more money. And, it is inextricably linked to the Obama administration’s record-breaking deportations, which are quickly approaching two million. CCR continues our efforts to secure justice on behalf of the Muslim and Arab men unlawfully detained, and later deported, in the immigration sweeps following 9/11. This lawsuit seeks justice for a wider group of plaintiffs after our historic $1.26 mil -
lion settlement in 2009, which was on behalf of five individuals. CCR again seeks accountability for the actions of the high-level Bush administration architects of the 9/11 sweeps. A federal district court judge ruled that our claims against low-level prison officials—for imposing harsh and discriminatory condi -
tions on our clients—could proceed, but it dismissed our claims against the high-level “architects” of this broad policy, former Attorney General John Ashcroft and FBI Director John Meuller. We appealed the part of the decision dismissing Ashcroft and Mueller because this is where responsibility undoubtedly ultimately lies. 
With this case, the Center is challenging, among other things, 
the unlawful conditions of confinement, including physical, ver -
bal and religious abuse, of immigrant detainees. The case also seeks to preserve the ability of non-citizens to sue government officials for misconduct, which is a principle that is increasingly contested by the federal government.
DeFenDinG Dissent
In July 2013, CCR appealed the court’s 
dismissal of our case, Blum v. Holder , which 
challenged the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA) as an unconstitutional infringe -
ment on free speech. We argued the district 
court erred in ruling that our plaintiffs—all 
animal rights activists who are chilled by the 
AETA from engaging in traditional forms of 
protest—did not have standing to challenge the legality of the AETA. The appeal also challenged the AETA as dangerously vague 
and overbroad, because it could punish tradi -
tionally protected forms of advocacy. 
Unfortunately, in March, the case was 
dismissed by the court of appeals in Boston. Based on a recent Supreme Court decision, 
the court adopted a new, higher standard for 
permitting individuals to challenge statutes 
that may infringe on free speech. The court 
further held that our clients need not be concerned about any risk to their activism because the Department of Justice has dis -
avowed any intent to use the law to pros -
ecute First Amendment-protected protest. CCR and our clients have appealed this deci -
sion to the United States Supreme Court.
In the meantime, the Center continues to 
advise activists and provide legal support to 
other animal rights and environmental activ -
ists targeted as terrorists under the AETA and other federal and state laws. Post-9/11 Sweeps Information Seeking and Immigrants’ Rights
Targeting of ActivistsICE agents detain record numbers of 
non-citizens to ensure 34,000 remain in detention each day.14Prisoners’ riGHtsGovernment Misconduct and Racial Justice
In June, a landmark development occurred in CCR’s federal lawsuit 
on behalf of prisoners at Pelican Bay State Prison who have spent 
between 13 and 30 years in solitary confinement: the judge agreed 
to permit CCR to represent the entire class of inmates at Pelican Bay subject to long-term solitary confinement, ensuring the case will 
have a much larger reach. 
Prisoners in solitary confinement or other restrictive conditions 
throughout California suspended their third hunger strike in Sep -
tember 2013 after nine weeks. Despite the California Department 
of Corrections and Rehabilitation’s stubborn refusal to engage with 
the prisoners, its retaliation against them, and its efforts to break the strike, the peaceful protest successfully secured legislative hearings 
that examined the inhumane conditions that thousands of prison -
ers in solitary confinement have endured for many years. Following these public hearings, two bills were introduced in the California 
Assembly that were designed to improve conditions in the SHU and limit the offenses that can result in SHU placement.With this case, CCR hopes to expand the law relating to the Consti -
tution’s prohibition on “cruel and unusual punishment” as applied to solitary confinement. Long-term Solitary Confinement as Torture 
“unless you have lived it, you cannot imagine what it feels like to be by yourself, between  
four cold walls, with little concept of time, no one to confide in, and only a pillow for  
comfort – for years on end. i t is a living tomb.” – Gabriel r eyes
CCR continues to challenge violations of 
fundamental constitutional rights at two ex -
perimental prison units, called Communica -
tion Management Units (CMUs), which the federal government has designed to isolate 
certain prisoners from the rest of the prison 
population and the outside world. Despite 
the fact that many CMU prisoners have nei -
ther significant disciplinary records nor any 
communications-related violations, CMU 
prisoners have extremely limited calls and 
visitation and are forbidden from hugging, touching or embracing their family members during visits. Our clients have spent years under these conditions without knowing 
why they were designated to the CMUs nor 
afforded a proper review process that allows for transfer back to the general population.
Since filing, we have had important victories 
and learned valuable information. Prior to 
our lawsuit, the federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) had not transferred a single CMU 
prisoner to a general population unit. Since 
our case was filed, dozens of prisoners have since been transferred out of the units. Documents that CCR obtained during litiga -
tion reveal that our clients were explicitly 
targeted for the CMU in retaliation for their 
political and religious speech—speech that is protected by the First Amendment. The 
documents also show that 60 percent of 
CMU prisoners are Muslim, though Muslims 
comprise only six percent of the federal 
prisoner population. Based on these docu -
ments, we know that CMU prisoners have 
clearly been denied due process every step 
of the way. Due Process Violations and Retaliation at Experimental Prison Units
CCR, allies and activists outside the federal court building prior to a hearing 
in our lawsuit challenging prolonged solitary confinement as cruel and unusual punishment.15WHistleblo Wer suPPort
It appears that it is open-season on truth 
tellers. In the past year alone, Chelsea 
Manning was sentenced to 35 years for her 
alleged disclosure of documents concern -
ing U.S. crimes in Afghanistan and Iraq 
and diplomatic cables exposing the inner 
workings of a seriously flawed global 
system. Jeremy Hammond is serving a 10-
year sentence for disclosing emails from a private “intelligence” firm Stratfor. Edward 
Snowden, who leaked NSA documents 
on surveillance, remains in Russia as the U.S. refuses to consider amnesty. James 
Risen, the New York Times reporter who 
refused to name his source, lost his appeal 
and WikiLeaks founder and publisher Julian 
Assange passed his two-year mark since taking refuge in the Ecuadorian embassy 
in London, where he has been granted 
asylum. In April, the U.S. filed legal papers stating that Assange and WikiLeaks remain 
under criminal investigation by the Depart -
ment of Justice. 
Information is the life-blood of democracy; 
yet our government increasingly seeks to 
silence and punish those who expose their 
criminality, corruption, and hypocrisy to the public. Increasingly, cases brought by 
CCR and others to expose abuses and hold 
officials accountable are being dismissed based on so-called “state secrets” and other 
nearly unchallengeable grounds; and thus whistleblowers become even more essen -
tial to providing the facts we need to make democracy work.
The Center’s President Emeritus, Michael 
Ratner, with support from CCR attor -
neys, continues to serve as U.S. counsel 
to WikiLeaks and Julian Assange. That 
representation has gotten more complex 
since WikiLeaks was credited with helping Snowden safely leave Hong Kong. Ratner 
and CCR are involved in advocating on be -
half of other whistleblowers, journalists and publishers who publish materials neces -
sary for making informed political choices. 
Ratner travels frequently to London to meet 
with Assange where he remains in the Ecua -
dorian embassy, and to Berlin for related 
work and consults with the network of 
other attorneys, including Baltasar Garzon, who represent Assange in this extremely 
complicated case. CCR advises Assange on 
U.S. law, the complicated legal issues re -
garding extradition to the U.S. and asylum 
claims. Ratner writes and speaks frequently 
on behalf of CCR on these issues and has 
drawn the connection between our clients’ cases and those of Manning, Hammond 
and Snowden as part of a larger attack on 
dissent, transparency and accountability.
Despite the jailing, forced exiles and intimi -
dation of whistleblowers and publishers, 
the government is not winning this battle—
more information is being revealed and cou -
rageous people are publishing it. Ultimately, 
we expect that these brave individuals who 
have risked everything to force government accountability will be seen as the heroes 
they are.
“the people who ought to be prosecuted are the people who carried out the illegal acts, 
the illegal surveillance, the illegal wiretapping on everything from our telephones to our 
computers to every communication.” – m ichael r atner, ccr President e meritusLeft to right: Edward Snowden, Julian Assange and Chelsea Manning. 16International Human Rights
anti-Ga Y extremism
CCR has made great strides in the case against anti-gay extrem -
ist Scott Lively, filed on behalf of our client, Sexual Minorities 
Uganda (SMUG). This is the first case using the ATS to seek 
accountability for persecution on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. SMUG alleges that Lively’s involvement 
in Uganda, including his active participation in the formulation 
of anti-gay legislation to revoke fundamental rights of LGBTIQ 
persons, constitutes the crime of persecution. This case seeks 
to curtail similar efforts by other anti-gay extremists by show -
ing that they, too, can be held accountable. The suit has raised 
awareness of the human impact of Lively’s actions on LGBTIQ 
Ugandans—whose very lives are threatened by this law—and 
the role of U.S. religious extremists in promoting these policies.
In an enormous victory in August 2013, the federal court denied 
Lively’s motion to dismiss (and has since denied two other similar 
attempts to end the case), which is historic for three reasons: it recognized for the first time that persecution on the basis of 
sexual orientation and gender identity is a violation of interna -
tional law and a crime against humanity under the ATS—a major win for LGBTIQ rights worldwide; it was the first positive ATS 
ruling since the 2013 Supreme Court decision in Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum/Shell  (in which the Supreme Court narrowed 
the scope of the ATS), building new precedent for the continued 
vibrancy of ATS litigation; and it means the case will proceed, 
providing a much-needed boost for our client, attracting world -
wide attention to the issue, and keeping public pressure on the Ugandan government.In February, the Ugandan President signed the repressive Anti-
Homosexuality Bill (AHB) into law, resulting in more arrests of 
LGBTIQ Ugandans—some of whom have been tortured while in detention. Others have gone into hiding or are seeking asylum. The climate of persecution in Uganda, means that our clients’ 
existence, speech and advocacy, including this very case with 
CCR, are all illegal and put them in danger—making challenging 
Lively and other anti-gay extremists in equal parts delicate and 
critical.
CCR’s mission is to advance and protect the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is why CCR seeks to integrate an International Human Rights (IHR) frame into virtually all of our work. Whether conducting an IHR analysis 
of the death penalty, pushing the limits of the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) to challenge human rights violations by corporations abroad, or using the 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) to seek accountability for torture committed by the U.S. government, expanding and defending human rights is at the core of so much of what CCR does. 
CCR also uses international fora and advocacy to advance our clients’ interests. Whether appearing before the United Nations in Geneva to 
expose the extent of sexual violence by priests against children and the failure of Vatican officials to adequately respond, or by working with 
grassroots organizations in Iraq and veterans in the U.S. to show the ongoing harm caused by the U.S. invasion of Iraq—CCR goes where it must to ensure that the U.S. respects international law both at home and abroad.
Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni signs the anti-gay legislation in  
Kampala, Uganda, February 2014. 17litiGation
April marked the solemn 10-year anniversary of the 
publication of the deeply disturbing Abu Ghraib photos. To date only the lowest level of military per -
sonnel have been held accountable for their actions. This lawsuit seeks to expose the participation of high-level U.S. officials and to hold corporations to the same standard as individuals when they commit human rights violations abroad. 
In a watershed victory, on June 30, 2014, a federal 
court of appeals ruled that CCR’s case on behalf of victims of torture in the notorious Abu Ghraib prison could pursue their legal claims against a private military contractor responsible for atrocities there. In 2004, U.S. military investigators determined that the U.S.-based CACI Premier Technology, Inc. had contributed to torture and other “sadistic, blatant, and wanton criminal abuses” at Abu Ghraib. The June decision overruled an earlier dismissal based on Kiobel  and recognized that CACI could be held liable in U.S. 
courts under the Alien Tort Statue (ATS). This is the second CCR case that has overcome the Kiobel  limits on the ATS—and the first appellate court ruling to 
preserve the ATS post- Kiobel —thus keeping this vital tool for holding account -
able those responsible for human rights abuses in U.S. courts. 
Corporate Accountability
Early this year, CCR and our clients were handed a bitter loss when our lawsuit challenging the constitution -
ality of the targeted killing of three American citizens by U.S. drones in Ye -
men in 2011 was dismissed. CCR and the ACLU filed the case on behalf of the families of Anwar Al-Aulaqi, Samir Khan, and Al-Aulaqi’s 16-year-old son, Abdulrahman.
At the request of our client, CCR will 
not appeal this ruling. As Nasser Al-Aulaqi (father to Anwar, grandfather to Abdulrahman) stated in explaining his decision: “I have now spent years asking American courts to decide whether the U.S. government can deprive even its own citizens of life… This isn’t justice. …I have no faith left in a judiciary that refuses even to hear whether Abdulrahman, an American child, was wrongfully killed by his own government.”
CCR continues to speak out against un -
lawful drone killings and will continue 
to identify ways to raise awareness and seek accountability for unlawful U.S. drone attacks. 
Government Misconductu.s. aDvocac Y
As U.S. activism in support of Palestinian  human rights increases, suppression of speech and activities has also increased, including sup -
pression of campus solidarity activism, abuse of Department of Education anti-discrimination policies, use of material support laws to criminal -
ize solidarity work, and harassment of pro-Palestinian activists. This suppression is aimed at squelching the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement and the activities of other groups and individuals that are sympathetic to the Palestinian cause for self-determination and human rights. In response to this growing need, CCR aims to ensure that there is not a “Palestine exception” to the First Amendment, and that freedom of speech and assembly do not stop at the mention of Palestine or criticism of Israel. Palestinian Legal Support Network
CCR is working with the Committee of Families of the Detained and Disap -
peared (COFADEH) in Honduras to demand account -
ability for the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency’s role in a massacre that took place in Ahuas, Honduras in May 2012. Four innocent ci -
vilians were killed and four others were seriously injured in a “botched” drug interdiction mission launched from a nearby U.S. base when security forces opened fire on a passenger boat. U.S. Accountability for  Post-Coup Honduran Massacre
18international aDvocac Y
In the past year, CCR pursued investigations 
and prosecutions of high-level Vatican officials 
for knowingly enabling and facilitating sexual 
violence against children and vulnerable adults before two UN committees. In January, the UN 
Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) 
questioned the Vatican before a room overflow -
ing with press and observers, including survi -
vors from around the world. This historic event was the first time the Vatican has been called 
to account for its actions on this issue before an 
international body.
CCR and our client and partner, the Survivors 
Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP), 
were not disappointed with the historic and 
damning report issued in February by the  Committee. Among its many recommendations, 
the CRC called on the Vatican to remove all  
child sexual abusers and report the abuse to the appropriate authorities. 
This year, CCR and SNAP submitted two reports 
to a second UN body, the Committee Against 
Torture. The Committee, which has long ad -
dressed rape and sexual violence as forms of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, questioned the Vatican sharply on its compliance with the Convention Against Tor -
ture. The Committee raised serious questions 
about the Vatican’s compliance with the treaty’s 
obligations to prevent, punish and redress acts 
of sexual violence, committed and furthered by 
officials around the globe under its control. CCR continues to use Universal Juris -
diction (UJ) to seek accountability for 
the role of Bush administration officials 
in the IHR violations committed as part 
of the “War on Terror.” Working with the European Center for Constitutional 
and Human Rights, the International 
Federation for Human Rights and the Canadian Center for International Jus -
tice, CCR has filed cases in Germany, France, Switzerland, Spain and Cana -
da—making travel a risky business for 
many high-level U.S. officials. Our most 
successful and ongoing efforts to date 
have been in Spain.
In February, Spain sought to amend its 
UJ law to limit cases to those with a di -
rect tie to Spain. CCR joined with other 
NGOs to speak out against the pro -
posed amendment, but it was unfortu -
nately adopted. However, rather than 
close the case immediately, the judge 
instead asked the parties to submit briefs on the relationship between the 
new law and Spain’s international treaty 
obligations. CCR argued that closing this investigation breaches Spain’s obli -
gations under the Geneva Conventions and Torture Convention, which require International Human Rights
“the committee is particularly concerned that in dealing with  
allegations of child sexual abuse, the Holy s ee has consistently 
placed the preservation of the reputation of the church and the 
protection of the perpetrators above children’s best interests…” 
– un c ommittee on the r ights of the child, February 2014Representatives from SNAP and CCR at the UN Com-
mittee Against Torture hearing in Geneva.Vatican Impunity
Universal Jurisdiction19signatory states to prosecute 
war crimes and torture. 
In response, Spain will 
continue its investiga -
tion into the alleged 
torture of men formerly 
detained at Guantánamo 
by U.S. officials. The 
judge ruled that Spain’s obli -
gations under international law to investi -
gate any credible allegation of torture took precedence over the new restrictions, and renewed his request for information from 
the Obama administration regarding any 
U.S.-based investigations into torture alle -
gations. CCR and co-counsel stand ready to respond to the U.S. submission.
In October, Canada belatedly filed its 
response to the UN Committee Against Torture for failing to investigate and 
prosecute George W. Bush during his 2011 
visit, and justified its lack of action because the authorities would not get the neces -
sary assistance from the United States. Canada argued that any evidence “of 
torture by the U.S. government resides, for 
the most part, within the very centre of the U.S. administration and with present and 
former U.S. officials residing in the United 
States.”crossinG  borDers
The Right to Heal Initiative
Eleven years ago, many 
of us rallied in the biggest global protests ever seen to stop the invasion of Iraq. But we were unable to stop the war and watched in hor -
ror as an illegal invasion and occupation killed hundreds of thousands of people, and injured and poisoned countless more. The harms of the war will be felt for generations.
CCR has joined Iraq Vet -
erans Against the War, the 
Organization of Women’s Freedom in Iraq, and the Federation of Workers Councils and Unions in Iraq to form a new joint project: the Right to Heal Initiative, in order to demand that the full costs of the war be assessed and to call for concrete action, such as the clean-up of toxic areas in Iraq and the provision of adequate health care for veterans and Iraqis. Since the project launched in 2013, the coalition has garnered enormous support through outreach in U.S. Congress, signature gathering on the streets of Iraq and on -
line, media work, and public events. In a pivotal moment, in March 2014, we organized meetings and a briefing in the U.S. Congress regarding continued crises resulting from the war as well as a People’s Hearing on the Iraq War moderated by Phil Donahue, that brought together Iraqi civil society leaders, U.S. veterans, and experts in public health and human rights. As the sectar -
ian conflict reached a breaking point in June 2014, CCR helped build an echo chamber to amplify the messages of our partners in Iraq and Iraq War veterans critical of further U.S. military intervention.
CCR will continue to work with war impacted communities on this long-term 
advocacy project to build relationships between U.S. and Iraqi civil societies and demand the ‘Right to Heal’. Learn more at www.righttoheal.org.
CCR and Right to Heal partners with Phil Donahue  
at the People’s Hearing on the Iraq War in  Washington, DC.
20
Movement Support and Advocacy
Central to CCR’s advocacy work is our commitment to promoting human dignity. 
At the heart of our diverse efforts are people—the courageous movements,  
impacted communities, and clients that face injustice with action and hope for 
a better, more just future. It is at their lead and by their side that CCR continues our work to dismantle unjust policies and practices at home and abroad. CCR has 
successfully harnessed the power of a range of non-litigation tools and strate -
gies—organizing, public education, legislative advocacy, storytelling, and solidarity 
actions—to help make critical connections between the struggles of many. 
CCR’s advocacy team has had a phenomenal year. These snapshots and highlights 
show the range, depth, and global reach of our advocacy work, and our brave  
partners who inspire us and with whom we move in solidarity.
1 Press conference announcing victory in our stop-and-frisk case, Floyd v. City of New York. 2 Passage of Community Safety Act in New York, which  
CCR helped secure as a member of Communities United for Police Reform. 3 CCR team filmed in New York and Yemen for our Guantánamo documentary. 
4 Honduran soldier searches man as he enters a voting center during 2013 Honduran elections. 5 CCR partner Organization of Women’s Freedom in Iraq 
collects signatures in Iraq to demand reparations from the U.S. government for the disastrous effects of war. 6 Screening of “God Loves Uganda” documen-
tary with CCR client and Executive Director of Sexual Minorities Uganda, Frank Mugisha. 7 Launch of the No Separate Justice Campaign to end human rights 
abuses in federal terrorism cases. 8 Publication of CCR comic “The Case Against Scott Lively” and SMUG v. Lively advocacy booklet. 9 Members of Survivors 
Network of those Abused by Priests at the Vatican review at the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child. 10 CCR, as a member of the Right to Heal Initiative, 3
4
52
 121
15
hosts “People’s Hearing on the Lasting Impact of the Iraq War” panel and livestream. 
11 CCR hosts panel discussion and livestream on U.S. Drug War and its devastating 
domestic and international impact. 12 Guantánamo beach “art”; CCR travelled to the 
base eight times to meet with clients. 13 & 14 Panel discussion and launch of Death 
Penalty Mission Report on the World Day Against the Death Penalty.  15 Global Day 
of Action to Close Guantánamo and End Indefinite Detention. 16 CCR participates 
in Rutgers University event on NYPD surveillance of Muslim communities.12 13
96 7
8
10 11
14
1622 
be Just Fellows
In 2012, CCR launched 
three in-house fellowships for emerging lawyers as part of the Bertha Founda -
tion’s global Be Just Fellows Program. The program of -
fers three new lawyers the opportunity to start their le -
gal career at the Center through a two-year fellowship. Be Just Fellows are immersed in CCR’s cases and learn the fundamentals of the Center’s lawyering approach through the support and mentorship of CCR attor -
neys and the BJI Director. In addition, CCR’s Fellows are part of the global Bertha Be Just Initiative, an international network of legal organizations across the world. 
movement l awyering 101 t raining  
This year, the BJI launched a new “Move -
ment Lawyering 101” training—a four-hour foundational training on how lawyers can support social movements. Over the past year, we have trained over 800 lawyers/law students across the country on this method. We are now turning the facilitation guide into a formal curriculum that will be available online with reading resources and interviews with current movement lawyers. Once this is completed, we plan to distribute the curriculum to students, law schools, professors, legal organizations and the Be Just Network. 
training for Practicing l awyers
CCR hosted a CLE program this past November with the Columbia Law School Human Rights Institute entitled The ATS & Transnational Accountability in the Age of Kiobel . The course focused on the Alien 
Tort Statute (ATS) as a tool for seeking accountability for serious human rights vio -
lations, particularly in light of the Supreme Court’s decision in Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum . Over 200 participants attended 
this program which brought together the leading scholars and practitioners in this specialized area of human rights litigation. The ATS is a critical tool for accountabil -
ity by victims of corporate, individual or governmental abuse that are unable to seek justice in their home country. The Kiobel  de-
cision may have further eroded the statute’s protections, which made the subject matter urgent and timely, and the need for attor -
neys to develop complementary strategies and discuss how to move legal precedent forward all the more important. 
Global b ertha Fellows c onvening 
This year, CCR participated in the first ever global convening of Bertha Fellows from around the world. At the weeklong event in Cape Town, South Africa, the Center’s Bertha Fellows Chauniqua Young, Susan Hu, and Jessica Lee met Bertha Fellows from 13 legal organizations across the world— including from Palestine, Haiti, South Africa, Mexico, India and the Philippines. bertha Justice i nstitute: Since 1966, CCR has been on the frontlines of using the law to ad -
vance the power of social movements. Twenty-six years ago, in recognition that students needed 
a radical antidote to traditional legal programs, CCR formalized its training with the creation of 
the Ella Baker Summer Internship Program. In 2010, with the generous support, vision and part -
nership of Bertha Philanthropies, CCR began building a much more ambitious and far-reaching program: the Bertha 
Justice Institute (BJI), which launched in 2012. The goal of the BJI is to be an innovative training institute that will build 
the next generation of “people’s lawyers.” Through the BJI, CCR is building a cadre of lawyers to support social move -
ments in the U.S. and across the world. Bertha Justice Institute
1 2 323social Justice c onference 
On June 6, 2014, the Center hosted our 
third Social Justice Conference entitled 50 Years of Radical Lawyering Since Freedom Summer . The conference marked the 50
th 
anniversary of Freedom Summer and CCR’s radi -
cal roots by profiling global and domestic examples of where lawyers and organizers worked together within grass -
roots social justice move -
ments to build power. The conference brought together some of the most important activists of our time and the 
lawyers supporting them including: stop and frisk in NYC, anti-LGBTIQ legislation in Uganda, stand your ground laws in Florida, indefinite detention at Guantánamo, torture in Colombia, exploitation of laborers in New Orleans, and the Marikana mineworker massacre in South Africa. The conference featured keynote speakers Phillip Agnew of the Dream Defenders and long-time activist and artist Harry Belafonte. The event drew 250 attendees representing 50 organiza -
tions from New York and across the world. 
ella baker Program
The Ella Baker program is an intensive, 10-week summer program that uses a combination of seminar-style classes and field experience to train law students on the theory and practice of being a people’s lawyer. This past year, the BJI hosted 20 law students at three sites including: CCR; the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti in Boston; and the Community Justice Project of Florida Legal Services in Miami. Ella Baker interns develop practical litigation skills by working hand-in-hand with lawyers on active cases and sharpen their theo -
retical understanding of social change by interacting with community organizations and affected individuals. 
ella baker a lumni n etwork
This past year, the BJI hosted over 30 social events, film screenings, cultural events, talks and seminars for current and past Ella Bakers. We invited Ella Baker alumni to par -
ticipate in Ella Baker program trainings, BJI conferences and trainings. Through these efforts, the BJI is helping the Center’s 200+ alumni stay in touch, continue to exchange strategies and tactics, and most important of all, build community. As we continue to graduate classes of Ella Bakers, and grow the number of Be Just Fellows, create more training opportunities and materials to share, the BJI is pleased to see our alumni network grow. 
1: Week-long agenda/orientation booklet from Global Bertha Fellows Convening in Cape Town. 2: Ella Baker 
program closing retreat. 3: Bertha Justice Institute Director Purvi Shah with South African freedom fighter Ahmed Kathrada who was jailed in Robben Island for over 20 years with Mandela. 4: Neijla Calvo, Jesus  Torres, and Claunick Duronville, 2014 Ella Baker Summer Interns. 5: Harry Belafonte gives closing address  at the Bertha Social Justice Conference. 6: Ella Baker Summer Orientation. 7: Bertha Social Justice Confer-
ence program. 8: Ella Baker program closing retreat.4 5 6
7
8Bertha Justice Institute24Communications
CCR’s Communications Department 
continues to build and expand its reach and impact, thereby increas -
ing CCR’s role in public debates surrounding issues we are litigating. Most prominently, CCR received major press coverage this year of our lawsuit with Muslim Advocates against the NYPD for spying on the New Jersey Muslim community, the granting of class action status in our case challenging long-term solitary confinement at California’s Pelican Bay State Prison, the launch of our case with CUNY Law School challenging the No Fly List’s use to coerce Muslims into spying on their communities, and our victory suing the NYPD for its unconstitutional and racially discriminatory stop-and-frisk prac -
tices. The stop-and-frisk case Floyd v. City of New York was on the front page of the New York Times twice this year, and was the subject of thousands of news articles, blogs and broadcasts. Our work helped make stop and frisk the leading issue in the mayoral campaign last year and contributed to over -
whelming public pressure for reform.
CCR is increasingly invited to present its 
perspective in the mainstream progressive press, appearing multiple times over the past year on MSNBC and PBS and, of course, we remain a mainstay on Democracy Now! Dur -
ing the period covered in this annual report CCR was cited in over 15,000 news stories across the country and around the world. 
In the past year, CCR has placed a remark -
able 58 opinion pieces, in outlets ranging 
from The Hill  to Ms. Magazine and the 
L.A. Times , the Star Ledger , and Al Jazeera, 
not only bringing CCR’s unique voice and political analysis to audiences everywhere, but increasing worldwide awareness of the issues at stake in our cases. Our com -
mitment to highlighting the voices of our clients was best demonstrated by a series of first-person pieces on Truthout  by each of 
the 10 plaintiffs in our Pelican Bay case. The heart-wrenching piece by our client Nasser Al-Aulaqi, “The Drone that Killed my Grand -
son,” was the most viewed article on the New York Times website the day that it ran. 
Perhaps the ultimate accomplishment in 
CCR’s communications work is to shape the narrative around an important issue, something CCR is proud to have done in our efforts to hold high-level Vatican officials accountable for sexual violence by Catholic clergy. When CCR filed a petition with the International Criminal Court in 2011, con -versations about the crisis still debated the viability of holding perpetrators accountable in various courts and the scope and scale of the problem. Now, after the revelations in our briefs and the targeted communica -
tions campaign augmenting our litigation and UN advocacy work, this issue is increas -
ingly covered with the glare of the spotlight on officials. The focus is squarely on the seriousness of these acts, including refer -
ence to them as “violence” and “torture,” and the Vatican’s responsibility—and failure —to meet its international human rights obligations. This year the Vatican was twice summoned to appear before UN bodies and account for it actions and inaction, and the CCR Communications team coordinated a multi-channel effort to amplify these historic developments, including op eds, interna -
tional press teleconferences as well as local press conferences in Geneva, livestreams, and social media.
CCR’s Katherine Gallagher debates Rev. Thomas 
Rosica, a Vatican spokesman, on a United Nations report demanding that the Vatican turn over all known and suspected clergy child sexual abusers over to law enforcement to face investigation and possible 
prosecution.
CCR’s Wells Dixon talks with Rachel Maddow about 
the Bergdahl prisoner exchange and the Obama administration’s authority to continue releasing men from Guantánamo.25Our social media presence continued to 
grow, deepen, and diversify. In addition to our more than 45,000 Twitter and Facebook followers and likes, social media puts CCR in direct, real-time, public conversation with journalists, opinion-makers, and other advocates. As a prominent voice on the social media stage, the public and journalists alike turn to CCR for timely, thoughtful, and unique insight into dozens of human rights and civil rights issues.
This year, we are producing more videos 
than ever, ranging from short pieces for so -
cial media to longer mini-documentaries. Of particular note is the year-long project, just completed, to tell the story of Fahd Ghazy, one of the first detainees at Guantánamo and a CCR client. With the help of the New Media Advocacy Project and funding from the Bertha Foundation, we traveled to Ye -
men to interview Fahd’s family and produce a compelling story that we are now planning an extensive campaign around for the  coming year. You can learn more at  ccrjustice.org/fahd. 
We are also in the middle of full redesign of 
the CCR website, a 16-month project that will result in a brand new web presence in early 2015, fully integrating our social media properties and microsites with our main site, ccrjustice.org. This project is a significant investment in our ongoing effort to expand  our capacity, reach and impact. 
All of this work is accomplished with a  
talented staff working to maximize our  resources and our reach, along with help from our longtime media consultants at  Riptide Communications. We could not do this work without our CCR supporters; whether giving a gift, sharing a story or  following us on Twitter, you are a part of  our success and our increased impact.
FDNY Discrimination  
Lawsuit is Finally Settled
New Jersey Muslims Appeal  
Federal Ruling on NYPD Surveillance
Lawsuit: FBI Used No Fly List  
Threat Against Muslims
Scott Lively Will Be Tried for Fueling  
Antigay Persecution in Uganda
UN Denounces Vatican Over Child Abuse 
and Demands Immediate Action
Lawsuit Challenges Animal Rights 
Activism Terror Law
Left: CCR’s Darius Charney gives an overview of the significance of the historic stop-and-frisk ruling. Right: CCR’s Omar  
Farah discusses debate on the fears we should ignore to preserve freedom and those that should be confronted to  strengthen security.Communications26Last August, in 
a usually sleepy 
month, we received 
two unprecedented decisions in our 
cases. First, in Floyd 
v. City of New York , 
the federal district 
court in New York 
ruled, following our nine-week trial, that the 
New York Police Department’s divisive stop-
and-frisk program has been systematically 
violating the Fourth Amendment rights of all 
New Yorkers and that the largest police force 
in the country was unlawfully targeting Blacks 
and Latinos in violation of the Constitutional 
guarantee of Equal Protection. Just a few days later, in Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Lively , a 
federal judge in Massachusetts held that our case against anti-gay extremist minister Scott Lively for his conspiratorial role in persecuting 
LGBTI persons in Uganda could proceed and 
ruled for the first time that sexual orientation and gender identity—just like race, religion, 
gender—are protected under international 
human rights law. The sheer audacity of these cases and the rulings they produced continues 
CCR’s radical litigation approach and framed 
our work for the rest of the year.
In Floyd , after a politically hostile court of 
appeals panel tried to subvert the district 
judge’s ruling, CCR’s litigation, organizing and 
activism kicked into high gear, pressuring the 
new mayor, Bill de Blasio, to drop the appeal 
and proceed with court ordered reforms of the 
NYPD. In a dramatic joint press conference in the Brownsville Recreation Center in Brooklyn, 
the new mayor, standing next to Vince Warren 
and CCR client Nicholas Peart, promised to do just that. Our negotiations with the less-
hostile de Blasio administration continued in 
other places, creating a final settlement of our 
remaining claims in Vulcans v. City of New 
York, which requires serious reforms to the recruitment, hiring and promotion of Black 
firefighters, and millions of dollars in back pay. 
The settlement capped a 40-year struggle of 
the Vulcan Society and this year, produced the most diverse firefighter class in New York City 
history.
Our prisoners’ rights cases are proceeding on 
pace. In our challenge to the federal govern -
ment’s Kafkaesque “Communications Man -
agement Units,” we’ve assembled a wealth of evidence for the district court showing that this 
disciplinary system is arbitrary and unconsti -
tutional. And in our challenge to long-term solitary confinement at the notorious Pelican 
Bay prison in California, the court granted our 
request to represent the entire class of indi -
viduals subject to the soul-and-body-destroy -
ing effects of prolonged isolation. CCR is using Freedom of Information Act litigation to force transparency around the increasingly punitive 
detention practices in our immigration policy. 
Our International Human Rights docket contin -
ued our work for international solidarity, justice 
and accountability. We continued our alliance with the amazing Survivors Network of those 
Abused by Priests (SNAP). Our filings with the 
United Nations accountability mechanisms forced Vatican officials, for the first time, to 
face survivors of its policies and to answer 
aggressive questioning by UN officials—which produced strong international pressure 
demanding that the Vatican take responsibility 
for its documented role to cover up and abet 
priest sexual violence against children. The 
last of our three cases against private military contractors for their role in torture and abuse 
of Iraqi prisoners in Abu Ghraib, Al Shimari v. 
CACI , was initially dismissed following the  
Supreme Court’s Kiobel  decision, but the 
appeals court overturned the decision and upheld the use of the Alien Tort Statute. Our 
work defending Palestinian human rights 
activists took on particular urgency in light of an uptick in campus crackdowns on lawful pro -
tests and state legislative attempts to punish 
academic organizations encouraging boycotts 
of Israeli universities.
Our Guantánamo and related national security 
work continues as resilient as ever despite enormous challenges. Since last year’s hunger 
strike 17 men have been transferred from 
Guantánamo, including CCR client Djamel Ameziene, who is with his family in Algeria and 
on a slow path to recovery. Still, on this, the 
10
th anniversary of our Supreme Court victory 
in Rasul v. Bush , 149 men remain, stuck in a 
political-judicial vortex we are continuing to contain. Our case challenging the “targeted killing” of U.S. citizens in Yemen, Al-Aulaqi v. 
Obama , was dismissed by the district court 
and our clients, after years of agonizing frustra -
tion with the U.S. judicial system, chose not to 
appeal. Our challenge to the NYPD’s program of “human mapping” and suspicionless surveil -
lance of Muslims in New Jersey was dismissed 
by a district court ruling which fully embraced 
the program’s grossly discriminatory premises, but we are confident about our appeal. And, 
furthering our attempts to challenge domestic 
law enforcement manifestations of the “War 
on Terror,” we filed a challenge to the FBI’s 
standardless No Fly List and the FBI’s practice of placing Muslims on the list as a condition for 
becoming informants on their community—a 
practice that violates their rights to free asso -
ciation and freedom of religion. 
In the following pages, you will find more infor -
mation on the breadth of issues we’ve covered 
through our cases and joint projects with our partners.
Message from the Legal Director
Baher Azmy, Legal Director
27Al-Bihani v. Obama
Representation of Ghaleb Al-Bihani, a Yemeni citizen held at Guantánamo for over 12 years 
without charge or trial. His habeas petition was 
denied based on a finding that he was an assis-tant cook for a group allegedly associated with the Taliban. The ruling was twice upheld by the D.C. Circuit, once by a three-judge panel 
which concluded that international law was not 
applicable in its review of Al-Bihani’s detainabil-ity, and again by the full court, the majority of which concluded that the panel’s international 
law ruling was unnecessary, but that he was 
nonetheless detainable. The Supreme Court declined to review the case.Status: Al-Bihani was cleared for transfer by the Periodic Review Board in May 2014, yet he 
remains in Guantánamo.
Al-Hamiri v. Obama 
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Mohammed Al-Hamiri, a Yemeni citizen who was raised 
in Saudi Arabia. Al-Hamiri suffered severe 
cranial injuries as a young man and traveled to Pakistan in search of affordable medical care. He crossed the border into Afghanistan shortly before the 9/11 attacks and was arrested by po-
lice in Pakistan as he fled the ensuing conflict. 
He was then transferred to Guantánamo where he has been detained for more than 12 years. Al-Hamiri has never been charged with a crime 
and is approved for transfer. In January 2011, 
the D.C. district court heard oral argument on his habeas petition. The presiding judge in Al-Hamiri’s case retired without rendering a decision. The case was transferred to a new 
judge who has called for additional argument in 
the matter.Status: Decision pending; awaiting scheduling of further oral argument.Al Qahtani v. ObamaHabeas petition for Mohammed al Qahtani, vic-tim of the United States’ extraordinarily abusive “First Special Interrogation Plan,” “enhanced interrogation techniques” personally authorized 
by Donald Rumsfeld. He is the only detainee 
the U.S. admits to torturing. This torture pro-gram violated both domestic and international law, and leaves U.S. officials open to war crimes charges. 
Status: The case has been stayed since October 
2010.
Center for Constitutional Rights v. Depart-
ment of Defense (Al Qahtani FOIA)
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit seeking public disclosure of videotapes of Mo-hammed al Qahtani made when he was in soli-tary confinement immediately prior to a period, 
detailed in a log published by TIME Magazine 
in 2006, in which al Qahtani was systemati-cally tortured. Al Qahtani’s attorneys at CCR have viewed the tapes, but are prohibited from discussing their contents, including confirming or denying whether they contain footage of abuse. The suit also seeks certain photographs of al Qahtani.Status: CCR moved for summary judgment, but 
the district court dismissed the lawsuit, accept-
ing the government’s arguments for secrecy. CCR as plaintiff appealed to the Second Circuit and the appeal was argued in June 2014 by pro bono counsel Gibbons, P .C.
Al-Zahrani v. United States
CCR brought a civil suit on behalf of the families of Yasser Al-Zahrani of Saudi Arabia 
and Salah Al-Salami of Yemen, who died at 
Guantánamo in June 2006 along with a third man, Mani Al-Utaybi. While the military claims that the men committed suicide, four soldiers stationed at Guantánamo at the time later came 
forward with first-hand accounts, as reported 
by Scott Horton in Harper’s Magazine, suggest-ing that the military covered up the actual cause and circumstances of the deaths, and that the  Guantánamo BayCase Index
On May 23, a year after President Obama recommitted to closing Guantánamo and lifted the ban on transfers to Yemen, CCR 
joined activists around the globe to hold him accountable. 
Guantánamo28men may have been killed at a secret site at 
Guantánamo. The case was dismissed and appealed to the D.C. Circuit, which affirmed, 
holding that the courts lacked jurisdiction over 
the case under the Military Commissions Act. CCR then filed a petition at the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights requesting that the body review the case. Since then, addi-
tional evidence of a cover-up has been revealed 
by Scott Horton and the Seton Hall Law Center for Policy & Research.Status: The IACHR petition is pending an ad-
missibility decision.
Ameziane v. Obama
Ameziane v. United StatesHabeas petition on behalf of Djamel Ameziane, 
an Algerian man who was never charged with 
any crime and was held at Guantánamo from 2002 to December 2013. Ameziane suffered serious abuse in the prison, including profound isolation in solitary confinement, and required 
urgent resettlement protection to keep the U.S. 
government from returning him to Algeria, a country he fled nearly 20 years ago to escape violence, instability and oppression. In 2012, the D.C. Circuit unsealed documents reveal-
ing government admissions that Ameziane 
was long cleared for transfer, his detention was “no longer at issue,” and he should be released. In 2008, CCR filed a petition with the 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 
(IACHR). The IACHR accepted jurisdiction over Ameziane’s case, the first time it had done so in a case of a Guantánamo detainee, underscor-ing the fact that there has been no effective 
domestic remedy available to victims of unjust 
detentions and other abuses at the base. Status: Over CCR’s and Ameziane’s objections he was forcibly repatriated to Algeria in Decem-ber 2013. We continue to litigate his habeas 
case in order to clear his name and get back 
property that was seized from him at the time of his capture. We also continue to pursue his case before the IACHR, which will examine the 
human rights violations suffered by Ameziane, 
including his harsh conditions of confinement, the abuses inflicted on him, the illegality of his detention, and his forced transfer.
Ba Odah v. Obama 
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Tariq Ba Odah, who is a Yemeni citizen and lifelong resi-dent of Saudi Arabia. Ba Odah has never been 
charged with a crime, and recently disclosed 
documents show that the Guantánamo Task Force has approved Ba Odah for transfer. Ba Odah requires urgent release from Guantá-namo for humanitarian and medical reasons. He 
has been on a peaceful unbroken hunger strike 
at Guantánamo since February 2007 to protest his indefinite detention, now in its second de-cade. Guards at Guantánamo continue to strap him to a restraint chair every morning and night 
and force-feed him in an excruciating process 
by inserting a tube through his nasal passage. He is also held in near complete isolation as punishment for his refusal to end his strike. Status: Court granted voluntary motion to 
dismiss without prejudice in March 2014. CCR 
continues to advocate for the release of Ba Odah and our other cleared Yemeni clients, who remain detained almost entirely because of their citizenship.
Barhoumi v. Obama
Habeas petition on behalf of an Algerian national who has had three sets of military 
commission charges brought against him and 
all dropped. CCR also represents Barhoumi as civilian military commission defense counsel.Status: The district court rejected a motion to reconsider its denial of the habeas petition, 
based on new evidence belatedly turned over 
by the government. The government continues to refuse to charge Barhoumi with any offense.
Guantánamo BayCase Index
Djamel Ameziane is an Algerian refugee who has been 
detained at Guantánamo since 2002. In December 2013, the U.S. transferred him to Algeria against his will.
Tariq Ba Odah is a Yemeni-national who has been detained 
at Guantánamo since February 2002. He has spent one-third 
of his life in Guantánamo without charge.
29Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld 
Allaithi v. RumsfeldCivil suits against Donald Rumsfeld and oth-
ers responsible for the detention, torture and 
mistreatment of six men illegally detained in Guantánamo for years, including three men released years after being classified as non-enemy combatants.
Status: The district court dismissed the cases. 
CCR appealed to the D.C. Circuit, but in June 2014, the Court of Appeals affirmed the dismissal.
Fahd Ghazy
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Yemeni detainee Fahd Ghazy and later voluntarily with-drawn without prejudice. Ghazy was detained 
at Guantánamo roughly four months before 
his 18th birthday, making him one of the last remaining men at Guantánamo to be detained as a minor. He has never been charged and has been approved for transfer by both Presidents 
Bush and Obama. Ghazy is fluent in English and 
Arabic. He graduated first in his high school class and won a scholarship to Sana’a Univer-sity. Ghazy’s daughter, who was only months old when he was detained, his wife, brothers, 
and extended family are in Yemen waiting to be 
reunited with him. Status: Ghazy has been cleared for transfer since 2007 and advocacy efforts to secure his 
release are ongoing. 
Hamad v. Gates (amicus)
CCR submitted an amicus brief in support of a former Guantánamo detainee’s request that 
the Supreme Court review the lower court’s 
dismissal of his case seeking damages for abuse suffered in detention. CCR argued that the lower courts wrongly decided that Congress has the power to forbid federal courts from 
even considering such claims by former Guan-
tánamo detainees, a question with fundamental implications for the separation of powers be-tween Congress and the Judiciary. If Congress has the power to bar all consideration of federal 
legal questions (arising from statutes, treaties, 
or the Constitution itself) then vast classes of litigants may equally be at risk of having their claims thrown out of court wholesale by future Congressional actions.
Status: The Supreme Court denied certiorari in 
June 2014. 
Hicks v. United States
Appeal on behalf of former Guantánamo 
detainee David Hicks, an Australian citizen, challenging his military commission conviction for providing material support for terrorism on two grounds: (1) the military commission was 
without jurisdiction to convict him for material 
support; and (2) his guilty plea was involuntary because it was obtained under torture. Hicks seeks to invalidate his conviction and, finally, clear his name. His appeal is based on a D.C. Circuit ruling in Hamdan v. United States, which held that providing material support for terrorism is not a war crime that can be charged 
and tried by military commission.
Status: Appeal stayed pending further court review in Al Bahlul v. United States.
IACHR Precautionary Measures  
on Guantánamo
Petition filed with the Inter-American Commis-sion on Human Rights requesting a hearing and granting of precautionary measures regarding 
detention policy at Guantánamo and related 
issues.Status: The IACHR granted the request for pre-cautionary measures. In July 2013, the IACHR expanded the scope of the precautionary mea-
sures, ordering the U.S. to immediately close 
the facility, transfer detainees to their home or safe third countries, expedite release of those cleared, and provide due process rights and ap-propriate conditions of detention to detainees 
referred for trial. 
United States v. Khan 
In February 2012, Majid Khan, who was secretly held and tortured in CIA detention for 
several years prior to his transfer to Guantána-
mo, was charged before a military commission with various offenses. He pled guilty to those offenses pursuant to a pretrial agreement with 
the prosecution. He will be sentenced within 
four years of the date of his guilty plea. This case supersedes Khan’s habeas petition, Khan v. Obama, which was dismissed pursuant to his plea agreement.
Status: Khan faces between 0 to 19 years of 
imprisonment at sentencing, minus credit for time served from the date of his guilty plea.
CCR filed an appeal on behalf of former Guantánamo 
detainee David Hicks seeking to vacate his conviction in the military commissions. Guantánamo BayCase Index30Khan Tumani v. Obama
Habeas petition filed on behalf of a Syrian father and son, Abdul Nasser and Muhammed 
Khan Tumani, who were detained apart at 
Guantánamo for over seven years without charge. Muhammed was a juvenile when he came into U.S. custody and was separated from his father for the duration of his detention. Both 
men were ultimately cleared for release and 
resettled; Muhammed in Portugal in 2009, and his father in Cape Verde a year later.Status: Ongoing efforts for their rehabilitation 
and reunification. Father and son remain sepa-
rated and have not been allowed to see each other to date.
Kiyemba v. Obama (I and III)
Coordinated habeas petitions filed on behalf 
of 17 Chinese Uighurs held at Guantánamo, who won their cases in 2008. A federal judge ordered the Uighurs, members of a perse-cuted minority in China, to be released into 
the United States since they were unable to 
return to China for fear of torture and persecu-tion and did not have a third country to accept them. The D.C. Circuit reversed in Kiyemba I, and the Supreme Court granted review to consider whether a habeas court has power to order actual release from custody in these 
circumstances. The Uighurs were then offered 
resettlement in third countries, which all but five of them accepted, and the Supreme Court vacated Kiyemba I and remanded. In Kiyemba III, the D.C. Circuit reinstated Kiyemba I. 
Status: The last three Uighurs at Guantánamo 
were transferred to Slovakia in December 2013, more than five years after their exoneration and subsequent indefinite detention, which the 
court determined was unlawful.
Othman v. Obama 
Habeas petition for Khaled Abd Elgabar Mo-hammed Othman of Yemen. Yemenis comprise 
88 of the 149 still detained at Guantánamo. 
Status: The district court stayed Othman’s case in late 2008. The President officially lifted his moratorium on transfers to Yemen in mid-2013 but has still not transferred a single cleared 
Yemeni home since 2010.Al Shimari v. CACIFiled in 2008, this lawsuit on behalf of four Iraqi 
civilians alleges that employees of a private military contracting corporation (CACI Premier Tech., Inc.) conspired to commit torture at the 
notorious Abu Ghraib prison. The complaint 
alleges that CACI employees ordered military police to “soften up” detainees for interroga-tion, which caused our clients to suffer electric shocks, beatings, painful stress positions and 
sexual humiliation and alleges the corporation 
attempted to cover up reports of abuse from the U.S. Government and the International Committee of the Red Cross so it could con-tinue to reap millions in profits from the war.
Status: Following a number of appeals and 
discovery in the district court, in June 2013, the district court dismissed the case following the Supreme Court’s Kiobel decision limiting the extraterritorial application of the Alien Tort 
 CCR staff and allies in NYC’s Times Square on the Global Day of Action to Close Guantánamo and End Indefinite Detention.Guantánamo Bay/Corporate and Institutional AccountabilityCase Index
corporate and  
institutional  accountability
Since 2004, CCR has represented over 340 Iraqis suing 
private military contractors for their role in torture at Abu Ghraib and facilities throughout Iraq.
31Statute. Plaintiffs’ appeal of that decision to the 
Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals was success-ful, as the court held in a June 2014 decision 
that human rights abuses committed by a U.S. 
corporation at a U.S.-controlled prison in a conspiracy with U.S. soldiers is sufficiently connected to the United States so as not to be considered “extraterritorial” under Kiobel. The 
case has been remanded again to the district 
court for further proceedings.
Mamilla Cemetery Human Rights Campaign
International advocacy supporting descen-
dants of people buried in the historic Muslim Mamilla Cemetery in Jerusalem who seek to halt construction of a “Museum of Tolerance” atop the cemetery by the Los Angeles-based 
Simon Wiesenthal Center, to re-bury the 
removed remains, and to protect and preserve the remaining cemetery.Status: Plans to construct the “Museum of Tol-erance” persist; CCR continues its work to stop 
desecration of the cemetery.
Al-Aulaqi v. Panetta
Civil suit brought with the ACLU against senior 
CIA, Department of Defense and Joint Special 
Operations Command officials for the drone killings of U.S. citizens Anwar Al-Aulaqi, Samir Khan, and Anwar Al-Aulaqi’s 16-year-old son, Abdulrahman, in two strikes in Yemen in 2011.
Status: After oral argument in July 2013, the 
District Court in Washington, DC dismissed the case in April 2014, finding that “special factors” of war-making, national security, and foreign policy precluded a judicial remedy for violations 
of constitutional rights. Faced with the pros-
pect of having to relive these tragic events in another legal process, and their belief that the U.S. justice system has failed them, our clients chose not to appeal. CCR will continue this 
work through other forms of advocacy.
Al-Majalah Freedom of Information Act
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests submitted with the ACLU, for documents 
pertaining to U.S. airstrikes in December 2009 
on the village of al-Majalah in Yemen, in which dozens of civilian bystanders were killed, including 21 children.
Status: Administrative requests are pending.
Bush Torture Indictment 
A criminal indictment against George W. Bush for torture filed in British Columbia, Canada 
in October 2011 on behalf of four individuals 
who had been subjected to the U.S. torture program.Status: Following Canada’s failure to initiate a criminal investigation against Bush under the 
Convention Against Torture, the plaintiffs filed 
a complaint with the UN Committee Against Torture against Canada, which is pending.CCR v. Department of Defense et al. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit seeking the release of U.S. records pertaining 
to U.S. policy towards the blockade of Gaza 
and regarding the May 2010 attack by Israel, in international waters, on a flotilla seeking to break the siege and deliver humanitarian aid to Gaza.
Status: In response to the filing of the case in 
May 2011, more than 8,000 pages of docu-ments have been released. CCR continues to challenge the withholding and redactions of 
documents and has summarized and analyzed 
the documents, grouping them thematically, so advocates can locate and make use of them.
CCR v. Obama
Challenge to NSA warrantless domestic elec-
tronic surveillance, asserting that it violated the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and the First and Fourth Amendments. The lawsuit was brought on behalf of CCR attorneys seek-
ing to protect our clients’ right to confidential 
attorney-client communications. At this stage of the litigation, the only remaining claim centered on our request that the court order the govern-ment to destroy any records of surveillance that 
it still retains from the illegal NSA program.
Status: In January 2011, the district judge dismissed all plaintiffs’ claims. CCR appealed. The case was set for argument on June 1, 2012, 
but 11 days beforehand, the Supreme Court 
granted cert in a similar case, Clapper v. Am-nesty International, and the Ninth Circuit stayed our appeal pending the Supreme Court’s deci-sion. Following the Supreme Court decision, the 
Ninth Circuit dismissed CCR’s appeal in June 
2013. CCR then appealed to the full Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit; that appeal was denied in October 2013. CCR filed a petition seeking review by the Supreme Court in January 
2014, which the Court rejected in March 2014. Government AccountabilityCase Index
Government  
accountability
CCR legal team in front of courthouse for argument on 
drone killings of U.S. citizens.
32CCR v. United States
CCR v. LindA petition for extraordinary relief filed in the 
military appeals courts, seeking access to 
documents in the court-martial proceedings for Private First Class Chelsea (formerly Bradley) Manning, including the government’s motion papers, the court’s own orders, and transcripts 
of proceedings, none of which had been made 
public by the court-martial.Status: The Army Court of Criminal Appeals de-nied relief. CCR filed its appeal to the Court of 
Appeals for the Armed Forces which held by a 
3-2 vote that it lacked jurisdiction over claims of members of the public and media seeking ac-cess to a court-martial. The plaintiffs then filed a new lawsuit, CCR v. Lind, in federal court in 
Baltimore. The day before the government had 
to respond to that suit, it published versions of almost 500 of the documents we had sought for over a year. The case was voluntarily dismissed in January 2014, after the government posted 
redacted transcripts of classified sessions of 
the Manning trial, as well as several hundred defense and prosecution trial exhibits.
Haiti – IACHR Precautionary Measures on 
U.S. Deportations
In January 2011, CCR and partner organiza-tions filed an emergency petition with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 
(IACHR) to halt the roundup, detention and 
imminent deportation by the U.S. of hundreds of Haitian nationals being sent back to cholera-ridden detention facilities in post-earthquake Haiti. The petition argues that deporting people 
to Haiti while it is still reeling from the devastat-
ing 2010 earthquake, and is burdened with a massive cholera epidemic, political unrest, and rampant street violence, would result in serious human rights violations, including deprivations 
of the rights to life, family, and due process and 
of freedom from cruel or unusual punishment.Status: The IACHR expanded the precaution-ary measures to cover additional people facing deportation to Haiti. The U.S. is still actively removing people to Haiti, and CCR and its 
partners have continued to file updates and 
requests with the IACHR. 
Honduras Freedom of Information Act
CCR represents journalist Jeremy Bigwood 
and the True Commission, the alternative truth 
commission formed by Honduran civil society, around requests for records from the U.S. government regarding various U.S. interests, 
actors, or agencies and their knowledge of or 
role in the 2009 coup d’état in Honduras. CCR supported the efforts to understand the root causes of the coup, to ensure accountability for human rights violations stemming from it, and 
to achieve genuine truth and reconciliation in 
Honduras. CCR represents Bigwood in a FOIA lawsuit, Bigwood v. DOD, challenging the with-holding of documents responsive to Bigwood’s requests. This case takes place in the context of 
CCR’s broader solidarity work in Honduras.
Status: Since CCR filed Bigwood v. DOD in March 2011, the Department of Defense has turned over a number of documents. CCR con-tinues to fight for release of more information 
and transparency around U.S. foreign policy in 
Honduras. Summary judgment briefing is com-plete, and the Court’s decision is pending. 
Mamani v. Sánchez de Lozada and Sánchez 
Berzaín
Cases against former president and former minister of defense of Bolivia for their roles in the killing of civilians during popular protests 
against the Bolivian government in September 
and October 2003.Status: Amended complaint filed June 2013; defendants’ motion to dismiss denied in part in May 2014. Defendants have filed a motion to 
certify for interlocutory appeal that is currently 
being briefed.
Government Accountability
Private First Class Chelsea Manning was sentenced to 35 
years in prison for her alleged disclosure of documents concerning U.S. crimes in Afghanistan and Iraq, pictured as she sees herself.Case Index
Silvia Mencías holds a photo of her son Isis Obed Murillo who was killed by Honduran military forces during the 2009 coup d’état.
33Spanish Investigation into the  
U.S. Torture ProgramThe Center has made filings in two cases 
brought under Spain’s universal jurisdiction 
laws that seek to hold former high-ranking U.S. officials accountable for their individual roles in directing, implementing or planning the U.S. torture program. Spain investigated whether 
U.S. officials undertook “an authorized and 
systematic plan of torture and ill-treatment on persons” in U.S. detention facilities in violation of international law. A case filed against the 
“Bush Six”—David Addington, Jay S. Bybee, 
Douglas Feith, Alberto R. Gonzales, William J. Haynes, and John Yoo (lawyers from the Bush administration)—for torture and war crimes is on appeal before the Spanish Constitutional 
Court, with CCR having filed an amicus to the 
Supreme Court.Status: Appeal of the closure of the “Bush Six” case is pending before the Spanish Constitu-tional Court. Following amendment of Spain’s 
universal jurisdiction statute limiting its ap-
plicability, the investigating magistrate affirmed his continued jurisdiction over the ongoing investigation into the global torture program.
French Investigation into the U.S. Torture 
ProgramThe Center, with the European Center for Con-stitutional and Human Rights, submitted a dos-
sier to the High Court of Paris setting forth the 
criminal responsibility of former Guantánamo commander Geoffrey Miller, and called on the court to subpoena him in the ongoing investiga-tion into torture at Guantánamo.
Status: The French judge declined to subpoena 
Miller, but the investigation remains open.Aref v. HolderChallenging policies and practices at two ex-perimental prison units called Communications Management Units (CMUs), highly restrictive federal prison units that segregate certain 
prisoners from the general prison population 
and the outside world, closely monitoring and controlling these prisoners’ communications through a complete ban on any physical contact 
with visiting friends and family and severely 
restricted access to phone calls, work, and edu-cational opportunities. Individuals are desig-nated to CMUs with no meaningful explanation and without a clear way to seek return to the 
general population—a due process violation 
that allows for the abuse of power, retaliation and racial and religious profiling. 60% of these prisoners are Muslim, and many others have “unpopular” political views, including environ-
mental activists designated as “eco-terrorists.”
Status: Discovery has been completed and both parties have moved for summary judg-ment. We hope for a final decision in the case later this year.
Floyd v. City of New York
A class action lawsuit challenging the current “stop-and-frisk” policy and practice of the New 
York City Police Department (NYPD) as uncon-
stitutional and racially discriminatory. These NYPD practices have led to a dramatic increase in the number of suspicionless stop-and-frisks occurring per year, with the vast majority of 
stops taking place in communities of color and 
with the greatest impact on Blacks and Latinos. This case stems from CCR’s landmark racial profiling case, Daniels v. City of New York, which was settled in 2003. That settlement 
ended the notorious Street Crimes Unit after 
the outrage over the death of Amadou Diallo, and required the NYPD to maintain and report stop-and-frisk data—provisions that have al-lowed the Center to build our Floyd case and 
work towards systemic reform of NYPD stop-
and-frisk policies and practices.Status: In August 2013, the District Judge ruled that the NYPD’s stop-and-frisk practices were unconstitutional and appointed a court monitor 
to oversee policy reforms. The City appealed 
that ruling. In October 2013, the Court of Ap-peals stayed the District Court ruling pending the outcome of the appeal. The City’s appeal is 
still pending.
 Government Accountability/Policing and Prisons
Mayor Bill de Blasio announces that the City has agreed 
to drop the appeal in CCR’s stop-and-frisk case, alongside CCR client Nicholas Peart and CCR Executive Director Vince Warren.Case Index
Policing and Prisons
New Yorkers rally outside the courthouse when CCR 
put the NYPD on trial for its unconstitutional  and racially discriminatory stop-and-frisk policy  and practice. 34Fahad Hashmi
Representation of Fahad Hashmi, a U.S. citizen of Pakistani origin who grew up in Queens, 
NY, to challenge his solitary confinement at 
the Administrative Maximum (ADX) prison in Florence, Colorado—the country’s only federal “supermax” prison. Hashmi was held in 22- to 24-hour solitary confinement at ADX for three 
years, after being convicted of providing mate-
rial support to Al Qaeda. His “support” consti-tuted storing waterproof socks and ponchos in his apartment for two weeks that were later 
allegedly delivered to an Al Qaeda member 
in Pakistan. Hashmi pled guilty to one count of material support after being held for nearly three years in pre-trial solitary confinement and under Special Administrative Measures (SAMs) 
at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in New 
York.Status: Hashmi was transferred out of ADX in June 2014, ending seven years of solitary confinement.
Hassan v. City of New York
First and Fourteenth Amendment challenge to the New York Police Department’s (NYPD) human-mapping and surveillance program of Muslim Americans in New Jersey. Petitioners in-clude businesses, organizations, and individuals who were subjected to the NYPD’s surveillance program. Internal NYPD documents reveal that its sole basis for targeting plaintiffs was their 
religious affiliation in clear violation of the core 
constitutional principles of freedom of religion and equality under the law. Status: The federal District Court of New Jersey 
dismissed the case without oral argument on 
February 20, 2014; plaintiffs appealed to the Third Circuit. 
Patel v. Arpaio
While serving as a legal observer for the Na-
tional Lawyers Guild, CCR attorney Sunita Patel was arrested without cause at protests against SB1070 in front of Sheriff Arpaio’s jail in Phoe-nix. Charges were later dismissed. This case 
challenges her unlawful arrest and Arpaio’s 
practice of excessive force and repressive law enforcement in Arizona. Suspicions that Arpaio had been targeting those working on immigrant rights issues were confirmed when the Depart-
ment of Justice investigated and issued findings 
that Arpaio targets legal advocates, lawyers and judges in an effort to silence them.Status: The case was dismissed; CCR attorneys, 
along with the Center for Social Justice at Seton 
Hall Law School, have filed an appeal to the dismissal in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. We are awaiting an oral argument date.
Ashker v. Brown 
In May 2012, CCR filed a federal class action suit on behalf of prisoners at Pelican Bay State Prison who have spent between 10 and 28 
years in solitary confinement in the Security 
Housing Units (SHU). The case grew out of a 2011 hunger strike by thousands of California prisoners protesting the inhumane conditions. Originally filed by our client as a pro se suit, CCR and several advocate and legal organiza-tions in California joined the case, alleging that prolonged solitary confinement violates Eighth Amendment prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishment, and that the absence of 
meaningful review for SHU placement violates 
the prisoners’ right to due process.Status: The court denied defendants’ motion to dismiss our claims in April 2013 and certified 
the class in June 2014. Meanwhile, discovery is 
underway.
Tanvir v. Holder
Tanvir v. Holder is a federal lawsuit brought 
by four American Muslim men (Muhammad 
Tanvir, Jameel Algibhah, Naveed Shinwari, and Awais Sajjad). The four were placed on the federal government’s notoriously overbroad and inaccurate “No Fly List,” not because they 
pose a threat to aviation security, but because 
they refused to serve as government informants against innocent members of their religious community.Status: Amended complaint filed April 2014.
Policing and Prisons
As part of a series of vigils organized by the No Separate 
Justice Campaign, CCR and allies call for Fahad Hashmi to be transferred out of solitary confinement.
Marie Levin is interviewed about keeping in touch with her brother, CCR client Ronnie Dewberry, who has spent the last 23 years in solitary confinement.Case Index35U.S. v. Mehanna (amicus)
Amicus brief filed in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in support of the reversal 
of Tarek Mehanna’s conviction for material 
support to Al Qaeda. CCR’s brief argued that the government’s prosecution, on the basis of Mehanna’s translations and other speech, penalized activity that was protected by the 
First Amendment as independent advocacy and 
core political speech. The First Circuit upheld his conviction, and Mehanna’s petition for rehearing en banc was denied. He filed a cert 
petition with the Supreme Court in May 2014.
Status: Cert petition is pending.
Wright v. Corrections Corporation of Ameri-
ca (FCC Rule-making Petition)
Petitioning the Federal Communications Com-
mission (FCC) to regulate interstate prison telephone calls to ensure fair and reasonable rates for prisoners and their families.Status: The FCC published a rule in February 
2014 regulating interstate inmate calling service 
rates. Blackman Hinds v. DHS (amicus)CCR submitted an amicus brief in an appeal 
by an immigrant challenging his mandatory 
deportation under the 1996 immigration reform statutes. The amicus brief argues that Con-gress’s power to regulate immigration is not 
enumerated in the text of the U.S. Constitution; 
instead, the U.S. Supreme Court has consis-tently characterized it as a power “inherent in sovereignty,” created by—and limited by—in-ternational law. International law norms like 
the right to family integrity should inform and 
restrict draconian mandatory deportation pro-cedures. In this case, deportation should not be allowed without individualized consideration of hardship and whether the government’s inter-
est in removal outweighs the harm.
Status: The case was argued before a panel of the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in April 2014.
Immigrant Defense Project et al. v. ICE et al.
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request to Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Department of Homeland Security on 
behalf of Immigrant Defense Project and the 
Hispanic Interest Coalition of Alabama seeking documents related to the continuing practice by the Obama Administration of using home raids as an enforcement tactic to arrest and 
detain immigrants.
Status: Federal complaint to be filed in South-ern District of New York in August 2014.
Detention Watch Network v. ICE et al.
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request to 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Department of Homeland Security for documents related to ICE’s implementation of the “Detention Bed Quota,” a provision of the annual appropriations bill that requires funding and filling 34,000 immigration detention beds per day and that results in the detention of tens of thousands of immigrants, even when the law permits them to be released. Because the 
provision is up for renewal in the ongoing Con-
gressional budget debate, information about the effects of the quota is a crucial advocacy tool for advocates fighting to end it. 
Status: Federal complaint filed in January  
2014; motion for preliminary injunction fully briefed by March 2014. Judge dismissed  preliminary injunction motion without prejudice and instead established a system of required 
monthly submissions by DHS and ICE,  
beginning June 2014.
National Day Laborer Organizing Network v. 
Department of Homeland Security 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit led 
to a landmark ruling, the release of a trove of more than 500,000 pages of documents and revelations contained in them regarding the Im-migration and Customs Enforcement’s “Secure 
Communities” (S-Comm) data sharing program. 
Policing and Prisons/Immigrant Justice
The government’s 2013 Watchlisting Guidance, which 
describes the criteria for placing someone on the No Fly List and other terrorist watchlists. Case Index
CCR seeks information related to ICE’s “detention bed quota” operation, which has resulted in record numbers of immigrants behind bars.
immigrant Justice
36The program established immigration finger-
print checks for all arrestees, even for when charges are minor and there is no criminal con-
viction. CCR and broad coalitions of activists 
and officials across the country have mobilized against the program, organizing protests against S-Comm and initiating local legislation to fight the effects of the program.
Status: The case was settled for $1.2 million in 
July 2013. In the aftermath, numerous localities, from Philadelphia to Los Angeles, have refused to comply with the ICE “holds” that are the 
hallmark of the Secure Communities program. 
These reforms are the direct result of activism by organizing groups who used information gathered through the NDLON litigation to spearhead local change. 
Turkmen v. Ashcroft
Class action lawsuit seeking to hold former Attorney General John Ashcroft and other high-level officials accountable for unlawful 
racial profiling, mass detention, and abusive 
treatment of South Asian, Arab, and Muslim non-U.S. citizens after 9/11. Status: In December 2012 the district court dismissed plaintiffs’ claims against high-level 
defendants, but denied motions to dismiss 
by the wardens and other supervisors at the Metropolitan Detention Center. A cross-appeal to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals was argued in May 2014. We are now waiting for a 
decision.
Phillips v. Snyder 
Challenging the Michigan law that allows the governor to appoint so-called “emergency managers” to take control of democratically 
elected local governments and/or school 
districts. The lawsuit charges Michigan Governor Rick Snyder and the legislature with implementing an unconstitutional power grab that effectively silences and disenfranchises 
citizens and ends democratic government in 
some of Michigan’s poorest communities and communities of color.Status: Case filed in the Eastern District of Michigan in March 2013. The state moved to 
dismiss, and the action was stayed pending 
adjudication of the state’s claim that the federal district court lacked jurisdiction due to Detroit’s bankruptcy filing. Stay was lifted after amended 
complaint was filed excluding Detroit plain-
tiffs, and defendants again moved to dismiss. The motion to dismiss is fully briefed, but the defendants have appealed the lifting of the stay to the Sixth Circuit.
Gulino v. The Board of Education of the  
City of New YorkClass action lawsuit on behalf of New York City public school teachers of color who are chal-
lenging discriminatory tests and licensing rules 
which stripped them of their permanent teach-ing licenses, seniority, and in some cases their tenured teaching positions, resulting in drastic reductions in salary, benefits and pension. 
Many of these teachers were kept in the class-
room in the same positions and course loads, but on a per diem basis and without benefits or union protections. Status: In December 2012, the District Court 
held that the City Department of Education 
discriminated against minority teachers and im-posed injunctive relief on the City Department of Education. The Court of Appeals upheld that 
decision in February 2014. In August 2013, the 
District Court certified a plaintiff class for dam-ages. The remedial phase of the case is now proceeding in the District Court. 
Johnson v. Locke
Lawsuit charging that the government’s use of arrest records in hiring process for well-paid temporary positions within the U.S. Census Bureau was racially discriminatory. Applicants 
were required to produce documentation for 
any past arrest, including minor charges—such as participation in a demonstration—and regardless of whether or not the arrest resulted in conviction or of how long ago it 
occurred. Using arrest records as an employ-
ment screening criteria compounds the already existing injustice of extreme racial disparity in the criminal legal system in which people of 
color are arrested at disproportionately higher 
rates. The practice denies these populations the option to work in these difficult economic times and further deepens the poverty in their communities.
Status: Class certification is pending.
Immigrant Justice/Racial JusticeCase Index
racial Justice
S-Comm is an ICE program that requires state and local law 
enforcement to send fingerprints of anyone arrested through immigration databases.
37United States and Vulcan Society v.  
City of New YorkChallenging racially discriminatory hiring 
practices of the New York City Fire Department 
(FDNY) on behalf of the Vulcan Society, an association of Black firefighters, and individual class representatives. New York City has the least diverse fire department of any major city 
in America. Only 7.4% are Black and Latino in 
New York City, whereas 57% of Los Angeles’ firefighters, 51% of Philadelphia’s, and 40% of Boston’s are people of color. The case charged 
the FDNY with intentionally discriminating 
against minority applicants. In a strongly word-ed rebuke to the city, the district judge ruled in favor of CCR and the Vulcan Society in 2009 and 2010 on their claims of discrimination.
Status: After conducting a full trial on what 
measures would be required to remedy this persistent pattern of discrimination, the judge ordered broad injunctive relief, including 10 years of court-supervised monitoring of FDNY 
and enhanced recruitment and retention ef-
forts. The judge also separately issued an order awarding eligible class members back pay in an amount up to $128 million. The city appealed the judge’s injunctive relief order and January 
2010 finding of intentional discrimination to the 
U.S Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. In May 2013, the Second Circuit issued a ruling upholding almost all of the injunctive relief—in-cluding the court monitoring—but remanding 
the intentional discrimination issue to a differ-
ent district court judge for trial. In April 2014, a settlement was reached to resolve the claims process by paying almost 1500 claimants $98 
million dollars, and the Vulcan Society settled 
the intentional discrimination case with the City in return for winning enhanced recruitment of candidates of color, improved appointment pro-cesses, and the hiring of a new Chief Diversity 
and Inclusion Officer and Diversity Advocate to 
monitor fairness within the FDNY .
Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Otter (amicus)
CCR filed an amicus brief urging a federal court 
to strike down Idaho’s Ag-Gag law as a violation 
of the First Amendment. The law unjustly crimi-nalizes undercover investigations and whistle-blowing inside animal agricultural facilities. 
Status: Amicus brief filed May 2014. We expect 
a ruling soon.
Blum v. Holder
Federal lawsuit challenging the Animal 
Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA) as an un-
constitutional infringement on free speech. The plaintiffs are five long-time animal rights activists whose advocacy work has been chilled due to fear of being prosecuted as terrorists 
under the AETA. One of the plaintiffs has al-
ready been prosecuted for free speech activity around hosting a website that reported on and supported lawful and unlawful protests to shut down Huntingdon Life Sciences.
Status: In March of 2014, the First Circuit Court 
of Appeals affirmed the district court’s dis-missal. A petition for rehearing was denied in May 2014.
Davis v. Cox 
Defending Olympia Food Co-op Board Mem-bers against lawsuit brought by five of 22,000 members in response to boycott of Israeli goods.
Status: In April 2014, the Washington State 
Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of the case under the Anti-SLAPP (Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation) statute and its award of fees and $160,000 in 
damages, as well as upheld the statute’s consti-
tutionality. Plaintiffs’ petition to the Washington State Supreme Court for review is pending. 
People v. Sayeed, et al.—Irvine 11 (amicus)
CCR and Jewish Voice for Peace filed an amicus 
brief in support of the appeal to overturn the convictions of the “Irvine 11”—students who 
Racial Justice/Defending Dissent and ActivismCase Index
CCR, the Vulcan Society and co-counsel from Levy Ratner at 
a press conference announcing the settlement of our chal -
lenge to the FDNY’s racially discriminatory hiring practices.
Long-time animal rights activists and plaintiffs in CCR’s lawsuit challenging the AETA as a violation of the First Amendment.
Defending Dissent  
and activism38were criminally prosecuted for peacefully pro-
testing a speech by Israeli Ambassador to the U.S. Michael Oren in 2010. 
Status: The trial court’s judgment convicting 
the students for their protest was affirmed in February 2014, and the Court of Appeal denied defendants’ motion to transfer the case in May 2014.
Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Lively
Suit brought under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) by Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG), an um-brella LGBTI advocacy organization in Uganda, against Scott Lively, an anti-gay extremist  
pastor based in Massachusetts, for his direct 
role in an ongoing conspiracy to deprive LGBTI individuals of their fundamental human rights—including freedoms of speech and association and from arbitrary detention and 
torture based on their sexual orientation and/
or gender identity. In August 2013, the Court denied the Defendant’s motion to dismiss and, in a landmark opinion, ruled that persecution on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity is a crime against humanity and that 
the fundamental human rights of LGBTI people 
are protected under international law. Subse-quently, in February 2014, Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni signed the notorious Anti-Homosexuality Bill into law. Lively played a key 
role in the development of that law and also 
in moving forward anti-speech and advocacy laws in Eastern Europe and elsewhere. CCR will continue the fight to hold Lively accountable in 
a U.S. court on behalf of SMUG. 
Status: The case is progressing and has moved into the discovery phase.
Demanding Vatican Accountability for Rape, 
Sexual Violence and Torture 
CCR is working with the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP) to hold the Vatican and its officials accountable in inter-national human rights bodies for policies and 
practices that enable widespread rape and 
sexual violence by Catholic clergy. In February 2013, CCR and SNAP filed a groundbreaking 
report with the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child and participated in the 
Committee’s review of the Vatican in January 
2014 in Geneva. In April 2014, CCR and SNAP filed a report with the United Nations Com-mittee Against Torture, and participated in 
the Committee’s review of the Vatican in May 
2014. These UN Committees’ inquiries repre-sent the first time any international body has questioned the Vatican on these issues.Status: In February 2014, the UN Committee on 
the Rights of the Child issued its report, which 
found that the Vatican consistently placed the reputation of the Church ahead of the best interests of children, and that the Vatican’s poli-cies and practices had led to the continuation 
of sexual violence against children around the globe. In May 2014, the UN Committee Against Torture emphasized that rape and sexual vio-lence are forms of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, under international 
law and expressed concern that the Vatican had 
failed to meet its obligations to prevent, punish and remedy acts of torture in this regard.
Defending Dissent and Activism/Gender JusticeCase Index
Gender Justice
CCR, SMUG clients and allies packed the courthouse in 
Springfield, MA, at oral arguments in Scott Lively’s motion to dismiss our case against him.
SNAP representatives in front of the United Nations in Geneva, where CCR and SNAP held the Vatican accountable for widespread sexual violence.Cuba Travel Project 
National Lawyers Guild attorney and longtime CCR partner Art Heitzer 
continues to help us respond to inquiries about laws surrounding travel to Cuba. 
Death Penalty Mission
On October 10, 2013, the World Day Against the Death Penalty, CCR and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) released the Death Penalty Mission Report following a fact-finding mission in 
California and Louisiana. Through interviews with death row prison-
ers, exonorees, family members, advocates, legal counsel, NGOs, and documentary review, the Mission conducted a human rights assessment of current issues arising from or related to the use of the death pen-alty in the U.S. The Mission found that the death penalty as currently 
practiced in California and Louisiana is arbitrary and discriminatory, and 
that conditions on death row constitute torture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment. With the report’s release, CCR and FIDH called for an immediate moratorium on executions as well as procedural and 
prison reforms, including the end to the use of solitary confinement for 
those on death row, and set forth specific findings and recommenda-tions to bring the U.S. in line with its human rights obligations. The report is available online: www.CCRjustice.org/death-penalty.
GTMO Hunger Strike Advocacy
In February 2013, in response to degrading searches of the men’s Qu’rans and growing desperation from over 11 years of indefinite detention without charge, the majority of men at Guantánamo began a 
hunger strike that grew into the largest detainee protest at the prison. 
Eventually over 100 prisoners joined the hunger strike and as many as 40 were forcibly fed in restraint chairs, a practice widely condemned by the medical and international community as inhumane and torturous. Since the men were further isolated from each other and the outside 
world, it was all the more critical that CCR make frequent trips to Guan-
tánamo to hear directly from them about the conditions at the prison and their health, and bring that information to the public. CCR and habeas counsel wrote letters to the prison administration and Depart-
ment of Defense detailing our concern over the unfolding crisis; signed 
on to coalition letters calling on President Obama to address his failure to close the prison and to resume transfers; worked extensively with the media; and coordinated rallies and actions with grassroots groups and supporters. Our clients were central to these different forms of outreach 
and engagement.HOOD
HOOD is a human rights organization based in Yemen, which offers 
legal assistance to victims of torture and illegal detention. It has been active since Guantánamo opened, and for over a decade, HOOD has 
organized events, conferences, and protests on the ground in Yemen 
that help bring attention to the injustice of the prison and its effect on communities there. As a respected and trusted group in Yemen, it was through our partnership with HOOD that CCR and other Yemeni counsel were able to establish relationships with our clients’ families 
and, ultimately, gain access to our clients in the prison. Further, HOOD 
has helped connect CCR with Yemeni officials and has assisted CCR at-torneys with work on the ground. For example, in a recent trip to Yemen to film a documentary, HOOD facilitated most of our travel, advised us 
on various aspects of filming logistics, and travelled with the CCR legal 
team to meet our client’s family for the first time. 
HOOD has also been an invaluable partner in our targeted killings work. 
In 2010, they connected us with our client Nasser Al-Aulaqi in Al-Aulaqi 
v. Obama. It was in large part because of HOOD’s recommendation, 
and specifically that of Mohammed Allawo, that Dr. Al-Aulaqi ultimately decided to retain CCR as counsel. We continued to collaborate with HOOD, including in 2013, when we submitted joint testimony on vic-tims of targeted killings in Yemen to Congress, which was based on their 
on-the-ground research.CCR Joint Projects
HOOD was an invaluable partner during CCR’s trip to Yemen to film our documentary about 
our Guantánamo client, Fahd Ghazy, and his family.
39Human Rights Defenders Project
Human rights defenders stand up and speak out to defend the rights of 
everyone. Unfortunately, human rights defenders can be targeted by 
those who perceive defenders’ activities as threatening their interests. 
CCR, in partnership with the Center for Reproductive Rights, launched a project in December 2012 to promote the human rights defender 
framework found in international human rights documents among our 
domestic allies, community organizers and grassroots human rights organizations. The project includes a new website, video and a toolkit 
comprised of educational materials and a guide for U.S. organizations to 
use international or regional human rights mechanisms to protect their 
rights. Learn more about the project at: www.DefendingRights.org 
No Separate Justice Campaign
CCR has partnered with the No Separate Justice Campaign to shed light 
on and end a pattern of human rights and civil liberties abuses in federal 
terrorism cases in the U.S. criminal justice system. In early 2014, CCR 
co-sponsored the Campaign’s inaugural launch event and has remained involved in organizing around the Campaign’s core issues: inhumane 
conditions of confinement; fair trial and due process violations; First 
Amendment concerns and Material Support charges; and unlawful 
surveillance and entrapment. Since February, the Campaign has held 
vigils on the first Monday of every month in front of the Metropolitan Correctional Center (MCC) in Manhattan in order to bring attention to the inhumane conditions for terrorism suspects and others held at MCC 
and to highlight various cases (including those of CCR clients Fahad 
Hashmi and Yassin Aref) where defendants’ fundamental rights have been violated, both in courtrooms and prisons across the U.S. Through 
ongoing public education events, media work, research, and advocacy, 
the Campaign, CCR and allies are growing the movement to challenge 
the rights erosions happening on the domestic side of the U.S.’ “War  
on Terror.” 
Justice for Human Rights Defenders Killed or Injured by Israel
The presence of human rights defenders is critical in areas experiencing widespread human rights violations, such as the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory. Attacks on human rights defenders are a serious violation of 
international law. The U.S. has repeatedly failed to take meaningful mea-sures to demand accountability for the killing or injury of U.S. human 
rights defenders by Israel, despite its responsibility to ensure protection 
of its citizens. In response, in addition to its legal work in cases such as 
the Gaza Freedom Flotilla FOIA, CCR has long partnered with organi-
zations such as the U.S. Campaign to End the Israeli Occupation, the Rachel Corrie Foundation and our Gaza-based partner the Palestinian 
Center for Human Rights to demand the U.S. pursues accountability instead of hindering it. In 2013, for example, CCR hosted a conference panel entitled Justice for Human Rights Defenders featuring CCR At-
torney Maria LaHood and Cindy and Craig Corrie, the parents of Rachel 
Corrie who was killed by the Israeli military in Rafah, Gaza in 2003 and 
who CCR represented in Corrie v. Caterpillar. CCR has also produced factsheets, blogs, and organizational statements—including those signed by both Israeli and Palestinian human rights organizations—and 
engaged our supporters to call attention to the impunity.
Palestine Solidarity Legal Support
CCR, in partnership with Palestine Solidarity Legal Support (PSLS), and 
in collaboration with the National Lawyers Guild and others, is protect-
ing and advancing the constitutional rights of Palestinian rights activists 
in the U.S. CCR has long been committed to fighting for Israeli account-ability for international law violations, and as the Palestine solidarity 
movement in the U.S. has grown, so have attempts to silence, discredit, 
and punish students and activists who are critical of Israeli policies. 
CCR cooperating attorneys from PSLS—Dima Khalidi, Liz Jackson, and 
Radhika Sainath—are tracking incidents of intimidation of Palestinian rights activists and providing legal advice, representation or referrals, 
resources and advocacy support to activists. This repression against stu-
dents and activists has included administrative complaints, civil lawsuits, school disciplinary proceedings, harassment, government surveillance 
and even criminal prosecutions for non-violent protest. This past year, 
we successfully worked with allies to advocate for students whose activ-
ism was scrutinized in Department of Education Office of Civil Rights 
Title VI investigations and to mobilize to defeat numerous legislative 
CCR Joint Projects
In January, CCR and partners launched the No Separate Justice Campaign with a panel  
discussion on the case of CCR client Fahad Hashmi.
40threats to take away state funding from universities that fund mem-
bership or activities in faculty associations boycotting Israel. For more 
information about PSLS, please visit: palestinelegalsupport.org.
Communities United For Police Reform
Communities United for Police Reform, of which CCR is a founding 
member and steering committee member, is a campaign of more than 
60 organizations working to end discriminatory policing practices. Over 
the nearly 10-week Floyd v. City of New York trial, CPR and its mem-bership packed the court and held daily press conferences, rallies and 
events to draw public attention to how the communities they represent were being affected by unconstitutional and racially discriminatory stops 
and frisks. This critical organizing and aggressive advocacy behind the scenes, and in packing the court, was essential in securing the ultimate 
victory. See p.11 for more information.
Right to Heal Initiative
CCR joined Iraq Veterans Against the War, the Organization of Women’s 
Freedom in Iraq, and the Federation of Workers Councils and Unions 
in Iraq to form the Right to Heal Initiative in order to demand that the 
full costs of the Iraq war be assessed. Since the project launched in 2013, the coalition has focused on domestic and international advocacy, 
including outreach in U.S. Congress, signature gather on the streets of 
Iraq and online, media work, and public events. As the sectarian conflict reached a breaking point in June 2014, CCR helped build an echo 
chamber to amplify the messages of our partners in Iraq and Iraq War 
veterans critical of further U.S. military intervention. See p.19 for more information.Animal Rights/Ag-Gag Laws
CCR has long been at the forefront of defense work on behalf of animal rights activists targeted by the Green Scare, deepening our relation-
ship with this growing movement and helping to build a coalition that is 
now successfully pushing back against this corporate and government repression. In our most recent litigation efforts, CCR filed an amicus 
brief in a federal First Amendment challenge to Idaho’s so-called “ag-
gag” law, which punishes whistleblowing in animal agricultural facilities. The case was filed on behalf of a coalition of animal activists, journalists, 
workers’ rights organizations, environmental groups, and civil liber-
ties defenders, including journalist Will Potter, the animal sanctuary Farm Sanctuary, and the animal law organization Animal Legal Defense 
Fund. CCR Senior Staff Attorney and lead counsel in our challenge to 
the federal Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act, Rachel Meeropol, was also a featured speaker on the “Activist Repression” plenary panel at the 
National Animal Rights Conference, where she shared the stage with 
Potter and AETA plaintiff Sarahjane Blum. CCR’s annual and prominent 
presence at the National Animal Rights Conference allows us to not only 
broaden our understanding of the animal rights movement’s efforts, but also to connect with new partners.
On the 11th anniversary of the U.S. invasion of Iraq, Iraqi civil society leaders and U.S. 
military veterans testified to the lasting impact of the war and called for accountability in the U.S. government.
CCR legal team and plaintiffs in Blum v. Holder, along with animal rights activists, after February argument in Boston.
4142Partners in Litigation
Al-Aulaqi v. Panetta
• AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (ACLU)
Jameel Jaffer, Hina Shamsi, Brett Kaufman 
• ACLU OF THE NATION’S CAPITAL
Arthur Spitzer
Al-Bihani v. Obama• HOOD
Al-Hamiri v. Obama• CLIFFORD CHANCE LLP 
Jeff Butler
Al-Majalah Freedom of Information Act
• AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (ACLU)
Hina Shamsi 
Al Qahtani v. Obama
• CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS AT NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW 
Sandra Babcock
• GIBBONS P .C.
Lawrence Lustberg, Joseph A. Pace
• Ramzi Kassem
• Gitanjali Guttierez
Al Shimari v. CACI• AKEEL & VALENTINE, PLC 
Shereef Akeel
• PATTERSON BELKNAP WEBB & TYLER LLP 
Robert P . Lobue, Michelle W. Cohen, Sarah Lorr, Peter Nelson,  Jennifer Dixon
• George Brent Mickum
• Mohammed Alomari
• Jeena Shah
• THE GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
Ralph Steinhardt
• COHEN MILSTEIN SELLERS & TOLL PLLC
Agnieszka M. Fryszman
• CENTER FOR JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Kathleen Roberts
• INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS CLINIC AT HARVARD LAW SCHOOL
Tyler Giannini
• UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA SCHOOL OF LAW
Deena HurwitzAl Shimari v. CACI (cont.)• CENTER FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE AT SETON HALL UNIVERSITY  SCHOOL OF LAW
Jonathan Hafetz, Rachel Godsil, John Romberg
Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Otter (amicus)• NEVIN, BENJAMIN, MCKAY & BARTLETT, LLP 
Michael Bartlett
Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld/ Allaithi v. Rumsfeld• ORRICK, HERRINGTON AND SUTCLIFFE LLP 
Russell P . Cohen, Howard M. Ullman, Jason Cabot, Bob Rosenfeld
Ameziane v. Obama
• REFUGEE LAW OFFICE 
Andrew J. Brouwer
• CORNERSTONE BARRISTERS 
Sophie Weller, Jennifer Oscroft
Ameziane v. United States
• CENTER FOR JUSTICE AND INTERNATIONAL LAW (CEJIL)
Francisco Quintana, Charles Abbott
Aref v. Holder• WEIL, GOTSHAL & MANGES LLP 
Gregory Silbert, Eileen Citron, John Gerba, Andrey Spektor,  Lara Veblen, Robyn Lewis, Daniel Riegel 
• PORTLAND LAW COLLECTIVE
Kenneth A. Kreuscher
Ashker v. Brown• Jules Lobel
• LAW OFFICES OF CHARLES CARBONE
Charles Carbone, Evan Greenberg
• LEGAL SERVICES FOR PRISONERS WITH CHILDREN
Carol Strickman, Azadeh Zohrabi
• CALIFORNIA PRISON FOCUS
Marilyn McMahon 
• SIEGEL & YEE
Anne Weills 
• WEIL, GOTSHAL & MANGES LLP
Timothy Saulsbury, Aaron Huang, An Tran, Bambo Obaro,  Matthew Leung, David Sillers, George Gardner
• ELLENBERG & HULL
Gregory Hull
• CHRISTENSEN O’CONNOR JOHNSON KINDNESS PLLC
Carmen BremerThe Center for Constitutional Rights is grateful to the many cooperating attorneys, co-counsel and private law firms that joined with us in our 
legal work this past year. The people named in the list below were a critical part of our efforts to use the law in the struggle for social justice and human rights. We couldn’t do it without you.43Ba Odah v. Obama
• CLIFFORD CHANCE LLP 
Jeff Butler 
Bigwood v. Department of Defense• THE GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY 
Zachary Wolfe
• CIVIL RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL LITIGATION CLINIC AT  
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW 
Barbara Moses 
Blum v. Holder
• BENJAMIN N. CARDOZO SCHOOL OF LAW 
Alexander Reinert
• LAW OFFICES OF HOWARD FRIEDMAN, PC 
David Milton, Howard Friedman
Bush Torture Indictment (Canada)• CANADIAN CENTRE FOR INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE (CCIJ)
• Matthew Eisenbrandt
CCR v. United States/CCR v. Lind• Jonathan Hafetz
• ZUCKERMAN SPAEDER LLP 
William J. Murphy, John Connolly
Davis v. Cox• Barbara Harvey
• Steven Goldberg
• DAVIS WRIGHT TREMAINE LLP 
Devin Smith, Bruce Johnson, Angela Galloway, Sarah Duran, Ambika Doran
Floyd v. City of New York• COVINGTON & BURLING LLP 
Kasey Martini, Eric Hellerman, Gretchen Hoff Varner,  Philip Irwin, Bruce Corey, Theresa Lin
• BELDOCK, LEVINE AND HOFFMAN, LLP 
Jonathan Moore, Jenn Rolnick Borchetta
• EMERY CELLI BRINCKERHOFF & ABADY, LLP 
Matthew Brinckerhoff
• HISCOCK & BARCLAY LLP
Brian Whiteley
French Investigation into the U.S. Torture Program• EUROPEAN CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL  AND HUMAN RIGHTS (ECCHR)
Wolfgang Kaleck, Claire Tixeire, Andreas Schueller Gulino v. The Board of Education of the City of New York • DLA PIPER 
Joshua Sohn, Anthony Gill
• Joel Hellman
• Steve Seliger
IACHR Precautionary Measures on Guantánamo• CENTER FOR JUSTICE AND INTERNATIONAL LAW (CEJIL)
Francisco Quintana, Charles Abbott 
Haiti – IACHR Precautionary Measures on U.S. Deportations
• UNIVERSITY OF MIAMI INTERNATIONAL LAW CLINIC AND  
IMMIGRATION CLINIC 
• AMERICANS FOR IMMIGRANT JUSTICE
• ALTERNATIVE CHANCE
• STUART H. SMITH LAW CLINIC AND  CENTER FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE OF LOYOLA UNIVERSITY NEW  ORLEANS COLLEGE OF LAW
Hassan v. City of New York
• FLORIO, PERRUCCI, STEINHARDT & FADER, LLC 
Ravinder S. Bhalla
• MUSLIM ADVOCATES 
Glenn Katon, Farhana Khera, Adil Haq, Naheed Qureshi
• GIBBONS, P .C.
Lawrence Lustberg, Portia Pedro, Joseph Pace, Jonathan Manes 
CCR’s successful challenge to stop-and-frisk in Floyd v. City of New York was the 
focus of a recent Jeopardy answer. 44Hicks v. United States
• NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW
Joseph Margulies
• OFFICE OF THE CHIEF DEFENSE COUNSEL
Samuel Morison, Major Justin Swick (USAF)
• Stephen Kenny
Johnson v. Locke
• OUTTEN & GOLDEN LLP 
Adam T. Klein, Justin M. Swartz, Lewis M. Steel, Ossai Miazad,  
Amber C. Trzinski, Sally J. Abrahamson
• LAWYERS COMMITTEE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS UNDER LAW 
Ray P . McClain, Jane Dolkart
• COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY 
Judith Whiting, Paul Keefe 
• INDIAN LAW RESOURCE CENTER 
Robert T. Coulter 
• COMMUNITY LEGAL SERVICES, INC.
Sharon Dietrich 
• PUBLIC CITIZEN LITIGATION GROUP 
Michael T. Kirkpatrick 
• LATINOJUSTICE PRLDEF 
Jackson Chin
• Samuel R. Miller
Khan v. Obama
• JENNER & BLOCK LLP
Katya Jestin, Natalie Orpett, Prashant 
Yerramalli
Kiyemba v. Obama• BINGHAM MCCUTCHEN LLP 
Sabin Willett, Susan Baker Manning
• KRAMER LEVIN NAFTALIS & FRANKEL LLP
Eric A. Tirschwell 
• BAKER & MCKENZIE LLP
George Clarke
• REPRIEVE
Clive Stafford Smith, Cori Crider
• Seema Saifee
• Elizabeth P . GilsonMamani v. Sánchez de Lozada and Sánchez Berzaín • Beth Stephens
• Judith Chomsky
• KAIRYS, RUDOVSKY, MESSING & FEINBERG, LLP 
David Rudovsky 
• SCHONBRUN, DESIMONE, SEPLOW, HARRIS & HOFFMAN LLP
Paul Hoffman
• AKIN GUMP STRAUSS HAUER & FELD LLP
Steven Schulman, Michael Small, Jeremy Bollinger, Jonathan Slowik
• INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS CLINIC AT HARVARD LAW SCHOOL
Susan Farbstein, Thomas Becker, Tyler Giannini
• KURZBAN, KURZBAN, WEINGER & TETZOLI
Ira Kurzban, Geoffrey Hoffman
Mamilla Cemetery Human Rights Campaign• Dima Khalidi
National Day Laborer Organizing Network v. Department of Homeland Security• BENJAMIN N. CARDOZO SCHOOL OF LAW IMMIGRATION JUSTICE CLINIC 
Peter Markowitz, Sonia Lin, Lindsay Nash
• MAYER BROWN LLP
Anthony Diana, Therese Craparo, Lisa Plush, Jeremy Schildcrout, Gretta Walters, Bridget Kessler
Palestine Solidarity Legal Support• Dima Khalidi
• Liz Jackson
• Radhika Sainath
Patel v. Arpaio• ROBBINS & CURTIN, PLLC 
Joel Robbins 
• CIVIL RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL LITIGATION CLINIC AT SETON 
HALL UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW 
Barbara Moses 
People v. Sayeed, et al. – Irvine 11 (amicus)
•  Dima Khalidi
•  Liz JacksonPartners in Litigation45Phillips v. Snyder
• SUGAR LAW CENTER 
John Philo, Tova Perlmutter, Anthony Paris, Stephanie Vaught
• GOODMAN, HURWITZ, P .C.
Bill Goodman, Julie Hurwitz
• THE SANDERS LAW FIRM 
Herbert Sanders
• MILLER COHEN PLC 
Keith Flynn
• CONSTITUTIONAL LITIGATION ASSOCIATES
Cynthia Heenan & Alec Gibbs
Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Lively• LAW OFFICES OF SASSON TURNBULL RYAN AND HOOSE 
Luke Ryan
• Jeena Shah
• DORSEY & WHITNEY LLP
Mark Sullivan, Josh Colangelo-Bryan, Gina Spiegelman,  Vikram Kumar, Scott Skinner-Thompson 
Spanish Investigation into the U.S. Torture Program• EUROPEAN CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AND HUMAN RIGHTS (ECCHR)
Wolfgang Kaleck, Claire Tixeire, Andreas Schueller 
• BOYE-ELBAL Y ASOCIADOS 
Gonzalo Boye
Tanvir v. Holder• CREATING LAW ENFORCEMENT ACCOUNTABILITY AND  RESPONSIBILITY OF CUNY SCHOOL OF LAW
Ramzi Kassem, Diala Shamas
• DEBEVOISE & PLIMPTON LLP
Jennifer R. Cowan, Bob Shwartz, Rushmi Bhaskaran,  Erica M. Davila, Christopher S. Ford, Erol Gulay, Rebecca Hekman, Brandon H. Johnson
• Jeena Shah
 
Turkmen v. Ashcroft• COVINGTON & BURLING LLP 
Jennifer Robbins, Nancy Kestenbaum, Joanne Sum-Ping 
• Michael Winger
• NATIONAL IMMIGRATION PROJECT OF NATIONAL LAWYERS GUILD 
Trina Realmuto
• AMERICAN IMMIGRATION COUNCIL
Mary KenneyUnited States and Vulcan Society v. City of New York• LEVY RATNER, P .C.
Richard Levy, Dana Lossia, Alexander Rabb, Robert Stroup 
• SCOTT & SCOTT LLP 
Judy Scolnick
United States v. Khan• JENNER & BLOCK LLP 
Katya Jestin, Natalie Orpett, Prashant Yerramalli
• OFFICE OF THE CHIEF DEFENSE COUNSEL, MILITARY COMMISSIONS 
LTC Jon Jackson
United States v. Mehanna (amicus)• OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY MORITZ COLLEGE OF LAW 
Amna Akbar 
Wright v. Corrections Corporation of America
• FLETCHER, HEALD & HILDRETH, PLC 
Lee G. Petro
• WASHINGTON LAWYERS’ COMMITTEE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS AND 
URBAN AFFAIRS 
Phil Fornaci, Deborah Golden, Stacey Litner 46Anonymous
Ethel G. AckleySalah and Catherine Al-Askari
Elizabeth Alexander
Vicki A. AlexanderEvelyn AlloyThomas E. and Donna AmbrogiBarbra Apfelbaum
Carol Ascher
Ruth BardachPhilip BereanoGene C. Bernardi
Harvey Blend
David M. BlockBelinda Lawrence BreeseFrederick and Betty BriehlMary Carr
Margaret R. de Rivera
Theresa Del PozzoMarial DeloJeffrey DickemannGeorge and Minna Doskow
Carol F . Drisko
Wendy J. DwyerMargaret L. EberbachDonald and Martha FarleyCarl H. Feldman
George and Mary Ferger
Curt J. FirestoneSolomon FisherCecily Fox
Michele S. Garden and  
Lawrence Pruski
Mary J. Geissman
Nona GlazerEdward E. Goldman and Judith Riven
Peter Hanauer
Ellen and Ellis HarrisChandra HauptmanMarjorie HeinsCaitlin Kelly Henry
Martin and Mildred Hird
Timothy A. HolmesSumi HoshikoMartin and Carolyn KarcherBarbara Karwhite
Julie Kay
Richard Aronson and 
Joyce Kirschner
Elizabeth S. Landis
Susan Lee
Joan LewisDonald LipmansonZella LuriaRic MacDowell
Grant MarcusNorman Masonson
Priscilla J. McMillanEva K. Millette CoombsJoseph MortonEva S. Moseley
James Odling
Severo M. Ornstein and Laura GouldEdward H. PageLovel P . PerkinsRachel Porter
Jeanne Audrey Powers
Dolores M. PriemAnn E. ReinhartDavid G. Rich
Pamela A. Rogers
Marie Henderson RothmanJeremy RyePatricia R. SaxMichael A. Schlosser
Ann ShapiroAntonia Lhamo Shouse Salpeter
Robert M. SiegelLinda K. SleffelRosalie K. StahlMargot Steigman
Barbara Stewart
Mary B. StraussNancy and Bill StrongClio TaraziGlen C. Thamert
Mari Vlastos
Florence WagnerDiana Dunn WalkerPeter Weiss
Henry Werner
Barbara WestGinia Davis WexlerJohn H. WilsonEllen Yaroshefsky
Emerald Young
Our planned giving program forms the bedrock of our efforts to build an endowment for CCR and to create an institutional legacy dedicated to 
upholding the hard-won victories of your lifetime and protecting them from future attacks. By becoming a member of the Thelma Newman Society, you will join others committed to ensuring that CCR will be there to fight into the next generation. Please contact us if you have any questions about making a bequest, endowment, gift annuity, or other form of estate gift, or to let us know that you have included CCR in your estate plan.
carol Drisko 
At 84, Carol Drisko is unstoppable. Since retiring from her 
job as a children’s newspaper editor, she’s been involved fulltime with progressive activism—she can often be found at CCR’s public education events. Outside of politics, she enjoys time with friends, wine tasting, the opera and camping in the Adirondacks. Carol learned about CCR in the 1990s when she noticed how CCR worked on every issue she cared about. Today, CCR’s work challenging torture, drones, gov-ernment surveillance and racial discrimination in the FDNY are of most importance to her. 
“The issues that CCR attends to parallel those that have been on my agenda from early on in my life. 
Activities I took part in the 50s onward awakened my hopes for social justice and a fair society, that have turned out to be a continuing struggle never quite won. That’s why CCR is a beneficiary in my will and trust, so I can ensure that the fight for justice continues as long as it is necessary.”
Thelma Newman SpotlightThelma Newman Society
thelma newman Planned Giving society
Carol with CCR staff member Sara Beinert.47$250,000 and above
Anonymous
The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA)
Bertha Foundation
Fidelity Charitable Gift FundMayer Brown LLP
Open Society Foundations
$100,000 to $249,999
Anonymous
Kurz Family Foundation
Credo Mobile
The CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy
The Ford Foundation
The Kaphan Foundation
Shel Kaphan
The Tides FoundationWallace Action Fund
Randall and Janet Wallace
John H. Wilson
$50,000-$99,999
AnonymousThe 1848 Foundation
David Rockefeller Fund
Leonard C. Goodman
John and Kathryn Greenberg
Horizons Foundation
Hubert and Rachelle Marshall
Richard C. Mehl
† and Paula Allred
Katherine Moore
The New York Community Trust
Samuel Rubin Foundation
Schwab Charitable Fund
The Vital Projects Fund, Inc.
The Wallace Global Fund
Victoria R. Ward
† deceasedCCR Donors
In 2005, The Atlantic Philanthropies selected CCR as a legacy organization, and for the 10 years 
since, CCR has been proud to be a grantee.
Atlantic has supported the Center with both generous capacity-building support, as well as pro -
grammatic support for our longstanding challenges to the post-9/11 national security state. The 
Atlantic Philanthropies has been a true partner in our work: challenging us in 2005 to grow the Center to meet the extraordinary demands of our post-9/11 work (CCR’s staff has doubled in size since 2005, and our budget has nearly tripled); and preparing us for their eventual closure in 2016 by requiring CCR to match their support in order to ensure there would be funders to replace them. Atlantic understood that unless an organization is built on a stable foundation, the programmatic work would suffer. With their capacity-building grants, The Atlantic Philanthropies supported  necessary, if often unglamorous, items, such as strategic planning, server upgrades, phone systems, and website redesigns; knowing that without this type of support, these essential items would either go unfulfilled or paid for with programmatic funds—either option hindering our effective -
ness. By challenging CCR to match their funding, they have positioned the Center for a life without Atlantic, which will close its doors in 2016 after spending out its remaining funds. 
Beyond the capacity support, Atlantic was also an early and ardent supporter of CCR’s challenges to 
civil liberties and other human rights abuses that resulted from the so-called “Global War on Terror.” With their support, The Atlantic Philanthropies encouraged other foundations and donors to come to the table. Atlantic is bookending their decade of support for CCR with a second capacity-building grant aimed at helping us increase funding and broaden awareness for the breadth of our work—  
including racial justice and international human rights—beyond our well established role as a leader in the post-9/11 field. Atlantic’s funding truly revolutionized the way the Center works. It is not hyperbole to say that without The Atlantic Philanthropies, CCR would not be the organization it is today. While Atlantic may be closing its doors soon, in keeping with their founder, Chuck Feeney’s “Giving While Living” approach, CCR is honored to have been selected to be one of the last grant -
ees that they not only strengthened, but left better than they found us.
“Human rights problems exist everywhere. as a result, we believe that 
our most important legacy is a sustainable set of organizations with the 
proven ability to protect and advance rights.” 
 – the atlantic Philanthropies48$25,000-49,999
Anonymous
Laurie Arbeiter and  
Jennifer Hobbs
The Common Counsel  
Foundation
The Firedoll FoundationKatherine FrankeRobert A. Friedman and  
Anita Davidson
Sherry and Leo Frumkin
The Funding Exchange
The Herb Block FoundationNeil A. HoltzmanLorraine HonigThe Jewish Communal FundThe JKW FoundationHerbert KurzThe Libra Foundation
Nancy Meyer and Marc Weiss
The Normandie Foundation
Domitila Barrios de Chungara Fund 
of the Silicon Valley  
Community Foundation
Dennis A. Rosenblitt and  
Arlene M. Pitman
The Scherman Foundation
Silicon Valley Community  
Foundation
Jean Stein
$10,000-$24,999
AnonymousThe Alfred and Jane Ross  
Foundation
Franz and Marcia AllinaThe Altschul FoundationThe Angelina Fund
Eric and Cindy Arbanovella
Bert
† and Barbara Aubrey
The Baldwin Family Fund for Peace 
and Justice
Frederick and Jutta Benenson
Ara and Linda Bernardi
The Blue Oak Foundation
Elizabeth A. Castelli
craigslist Charitable Fund
David Kimmel Foundation
Mary Pat Davis
The Epstein Teicher  
Philanthropies
Lois Blum Feinblatt
Roma B. Foldy†
The Frances and Benjamin  
Benenson FoundationThe Grodzins Fund
Marjorie HeinsJohn B. and Sarah Lloyd HenryJoan HollisterJewish Federation of ClevelandJulie Kay and Tom FergusLuis and Lee LainerLee & Luis Lainer Family  
Foundation
The Lehman-Stamm Family FundThe Lois and Irving Blum  
Foundation, Inc.
Holly Myers and Kirk NeelySevero M. Ornstein and  
Laura Gould
Frances R. PoselRalph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc.
David Ratner
Emily F . RatnerThe Ratner FamilyAlfred and Jane RossThe Bright Horizons Fund  
of the Tides Foundation
The San Francisco FoundationThe Seed FoundationShaffer FamilyLouis SlesinBeatrice SternMary B. StraussTony TabatznikThe Vanguard Charitable  
Endowment Program
Whuffie Fund, LLCSamuel Wiener, Jr.
$5,000-$9,999
AnonymousAmerican Endowment FoundationMichael and Shirin AminWilliam and Kendall S. AnthonyJoan Antonucci
†
Arkay Foundation
† deceasedCCR Donors
Bret currently serves as the Executive Director of the Abolitionist Law 
Center in Pittsburgh, PA which is a public interest law firm organized for the purpose of abolishing class- and race-based mass incarceration in the United States. He has worked with the Human Rights Coalition since 2007 as an investigator, organizer, and researcher and was the Isabel and Alger Hiss Racial Justice Fellow at the Center for Constitu-tional Rights in 2012. He graduated from the University of Pittsburgh Law School in May 2013 and was recognized as the school’s Distin -
guished Public Interest Scholar.
“My time with CCR in the Ella Baker program enabled me to  
develop a deeper set of understandings and relationships with people committed to cultivating a style of lawyering rooted in recognition of the need for radical social transformation and the prioritizing of political struggle in a movement-building context. In addition to building practical skills, the program aims to further the evolution of a lawyering methodology that serves the oppressed, challenges state and corporate power, and refuses to engage in the pragmatic rationalizations of an intolerable social order that typically define the legal profession.”
Ella Baker Profile bret Grote49Rita L. and William J. Bender
Kay Berkson and Sidney HollanderDiane BoehmVirginia BrodyThe Chicago Community  
Foundation
The Columbus FoundationRosemary R. Corbett and  
David Kaiser
DLA Piper, LLP
Rodney and Carole Driver
Shirley EvenitskyDonald and Martha FarleyLeona Feyer
†
Daniel and Anita FineFowey Light FundJames B. and Louise FrankelGobioff FoundationThomas M. and Rainbow GoetzlAdelaide GomerGoogle Matching Gifts ProgramDaniel Greenberg and  
Karen Nelson
Richard S. Hobish and  
Florence Wiener
Lisa HonigJon and Katherine Dart  
Charitable Foundation
The Key FoundationWilliam D. KirbyMelodee KornackerLandau Family FoundationHelen S.
† and Robert E. Lane
Eileen and Paul F . LeFortLeon Lefson
†
Joan LewisThe Liberty Hill FoundationPaula and Barry LittRic MacDowellMaximum Difference FoundationRob McConnell and  
Maria DeCastroMicrosoft Matching Gifts ProgramMaryanne MottNetwork for GoodPeter J. Neufeld and  
Adele Bernhard
Barbara Adler Zeluck Fund, 
North Star Fund
Richard L. PearlstoneThe Peggy Meyerhoff  
Pearlstone Foundation, Inc.
Eve PellJonathan PerlowMitzi C. RaasRoseben FundRobert E. Schoen and  
Nancy Bernstein
Zachary SchulmanPeter and Elizabeth C. ShepherdShirley and Al Evenitsky Fund  
for Social Justice
Sidney Stern Memorial TrustRichard A. SobleJoshua SohnThe Spingold FoundationJames SquireAdam and Jane Stein
The Stewart R. Mott Foundation
Merry TuckerWendy Vanden HeuvelThe W. TrustGeorge WallersteinWilliam B. Wiener, Jr.The William B. Wiener, Jr.  
Foundation
Chic WolkWorkable Alternatives Foundation
$2,500-4,999
AnonymousLeslie Abbey and Steve DietzEugene Auerbach
†
Margo BaldwinCharles R. and Linda BrainardMartin BranningBelinda Lawrence BreeseJames T. Campen and Phyllis EwenCastagnola Family Fund, Sante Fe 
Community Foundation
John A. Chandler and  
Elizabeth V . Tanis
Shulamit DecktorWilliam L. Donnelly and  
Marcia Mason
Jean M. EntineGreenleaf Avenue Foundation
Susan J. Haas and Keith J. Patti
Dick S. and Loretta HeiserThe John D. and Catherine T. 
MacArthur Foundation
Ira G. Kawaller and Joanna KnoblerCharles L. and Anna KersteinMarily Kay KnieriemenWilliam Fleet LankfordTimothy J. Lee and  
Eleanor McBride
Thomas A. LehrerSusan E. ManuelWilliam G. MascioliMarcia Mason and  
William L. Donnelly
Vincent McGeeRobert H. and Ellen V . MeeropolKaren MockNational Philanthropic Trust
Jill W. Nelson and Thomas R. Bidell
Wendy R. Olesker and John CrowWayne OuttenStuart OzerMary R. and Benjamin I. PageLovel P . PerkinsCharles Ratner and  
Ilana Horowitz-Ratner
James and Susan RatnerMark and Nancy RatnerRonald and Deborah B. RatnerClaire ReedAnn E. ReinhartDorothy RinaldoAlex J. and Carole RosenbergWilliam L. and Sandra L. RosenfeldAlice RothchildWallace M. ShawnClio TaraziAnne Heath Widmark
$1,000-$2,499
AnonymousA & J Saks Foundation, Inc.Advantage Performance GroupHesham R. and  
Diane Al-Alusi
Salah and Catherine Al-AskariPaul J. AllenRobert and Sarah AlsdorfTheresa F . Alt and  
E. Wayles Browne
Daniel L. Alterman and  
Li Wah Lai
Donna Katzin Altschuler and  
Alan Altschuler
Nabil M. and Ann S. AmerHeather Andersen and  
Leslie Christian
Harry Anduze MontañoR. S. AnthonyBarbara Mains and  
Alessandro Armento
Janet S. Arnold and  
Michael H. Rubin
Sally Arnold and Christine WeirJudy A. Austermiller and  
Warren R. Betty
Radhika Balakrishnan and  
David W. Gillcrist
Joseph Baribeau
Bruce E. Barkley and Sonia Baur50Harriet Barlow
William BarnickleAmy BashitiRichard BealeJay BearThe Beavertides FoundationJudith E. BelskyDouglas J. Bender and  
Emma B. Trejo
Matthew A. Berlin and  
Simone Liebman
Catherine Bishop and  
J. Kenneth Donnelly
Meredith A. and Bill BlauLinda and Mitchel S. BollagFraser BonnellEve Borenstein and  
Candace Falk
Judith T. and Donald S. BroderAllan and Muriel BrotskyJonathan W. Brown and  
Brynnen Ford
Michael E. CahillJohn CallasSteve and Barbara CallasIra CarpAva H. CheloffJerry and Caroline CohenThe Community Foundation  
of Santa Cruz
The Community Foundation  
of Western Mass.
Community Futures CollectiveAnnemarie CongdonConservestMichael A. CooperMary Ellen Copeland and  
Edward M. Anthes
Charles M. Crane and  
Wendy Breuer
Lynn-Marie CriderE. Patrick Curry and  
Susan B. Campbell
Susan R. Curtiss and  
John M. Gresham
The David and Sylvia  
Teitelbaum Fund, Inc.
Emily Deferrari and Mel PackerMadeline H. deLone and  
Robert L. Cohen
Meera and Manoj Deo
Gerald L. Dickinson
Stephanie and Vikas DidwaniaJames K. DonnellAlan DonovanDorsey & Whitney, LLPDaniel L. and Lee M. DrakePaul DurrantDiane Early and Daniel GigoneMargaret L. EberbachShiva EftekhariHarrison Eiteljorg, IIRobert M. FactorRosemary F . FaulknerMartin R. FeinmanRobert Fertik and Antonia StolperAbraham FlaxmanFoundation SourceEleanor Friedman and  
Jonathan Cohen
John GilmoreSherna B. and Marvin GluckStephen Gockley and Ellen PoselPeter J. GollonCarlos and Carrington GoodmanWaleed K. and Hannah GosaynieLynn Greiner and John B. MidgleyStuart J. and Joan B. GrossPeter HanauerCollier M. HandsMarge HarburgBernard Harcourt and Mia RuyterGuy M. HarrisLouis R. HellwigDavid Henkel and Cleo GriffithMartin HennerEdward S. and Mary W. HermanRobert and Claire HeronMichael J. Hirschhorn and  
Jimena P . Martinez
John Hoffmeyer and  
Janet M. Corpus
Randall D. Holmberg and  
Evelyn Yee
Catherine Newman and  
Stephen D. Holmes
Timothy A. HolmesHoneybee FoundationEmbry M. HowellDavid HurwitzSteven and Miriam HymanZeljko IvanekGail K. JohnsonKenneth M. Jones and Carol KouryWilhelm Joseph, Jr.William Josephson and  
Barbara Haws
Just GiveEugenia KalnayHerschel and Margrit KaminskyMartin and Carolyn Karcher
Terry Lynn Karl
Patrice KaskaArthur KennedyBarbara I. and John I. KennedyJerry KickensonMichael KieschnickAshish KilamRichard Aronson and  
Joyce Kirschner
Joanna Knobler and  
Ira G. Kawaller
David A. KormanKaren Krahulik and Susan AlleeFayette F . KrauseEdward M. Krishok and  
Peggy K. Hong
Mary U. KruseEmily KunreutherSabyl Cohen LandrumKay Lehman SchlozmanPhyllis B. and John LehmanEric L. Lewis
Judith Lichtenberg and  
David J. Luban
Philip and Elsa R. Lichtenberg
Jules Lobel and Karen EngroLeslie Singer LomasGail K. Lopez-HenriquezM. Brinton Lykes and  
Catherine M. Mooney
Lorraine LymanRamsay MacMullenAnnie MakhijaniEvan Mason and Garrard BeeneyAaron McGrathThe McKenzie River Gathering 
Foundation
Juliet A. MelamidBenjamin Mellman and  
Ann Chung
Carrie Menkel-Meadow and  
Robert Meadow
Joyce MillerGerrish MillikenJeanne E. and Franklin E. MirerL. David MirkinDaphna H. MitchellRichard W. and Barbara F . MooreMorgan Stanley Global  
Impact Funding Trust
Judy and Roy NakadegawaNathan NazeGuy
† and Tamara NelsonCCR Donors51The New Prospect Foundation
Hans NollIsabelle C. OsborneNorman Oslik and  
Madeleine Golde
The Overbrook FoundationGloria C. Phares and  
Richard Dannay
Hanna F . PitkinTim Plenk and Janet Axelrod
Sandra Polishuk
Nancy R. PoselThe Presbyterian FoundationCamilo RamirezMargaret J. Randall and  
Barbara Byers
Albert RatnerBrian J. RatnerVanessa RedgraveMarcus Rediker and  
Wendy Z. Goldman
Joyce L. RichardsonLawrence and Janet A. RivkinChristy RobbTim RobbinsJohn H. RodgersGeorge S. Rothbart and  
Ingrid Scheib-Rothbart
Judith Rothchild
Albert Ruben
Dean Graham RubyJoseph L. RubyGladys B. and Richard RustayArnold S. SaksMarc Sapir and Sheila ThorneEdmund SassoonJack SawyerJohn M. ScanlanJulie SchecterGordon Schiff and Mardge CohenDaniel SchlozmanWilliam J. and  
Katherine L. Schrenk
Edwin M. Schur and  
Joan Brodsky Schur
Steven SchwartzSteve SeltzerDaniel ShapiroSusan L. SheinfeldAlbert D. Shuldiner and  
Emily B. Myers
Neville Roy SinghamPaul Slagle
Seymour Smidt
Michelle D. SmithMorton Sobell and  
Nancy Gruber
Romaine Gustava SolbertLawrence SpearsAnn W. SpeckmanEmily A. Spieler and  
Gregory Wagner
Nancy StearnsJulia SteinbergerAmanda J. StentAlan and Victoria SussmanThe T. Rowe Price Program  
for Charitable Giving
Richard TeitelbaumThe Arthur & Henrietta A.  
Sorin Charitable Trust
Michael C. ThielmannSue Lee K. TroutmanHazel Tulecke and  
William B. Houston
Barbara C. and Franklin M. TurnerJames S. TyreAnne Venhuizen and James KingStephen WaiteJames E. WallaceStephen WarrenNancy WassermanBarbara S. WebsterSabin and Marta WillettRussell WilliamsDavid WilsonLincoln and Wilma C. WolfensteinEllen YaroshefskyAnn Yasuhara
Michael D. Yokell
Sandra A. ZagarellMichael J. and Naomi P . ZigmondMichael F . Zweig and  
Kathy Chamberlain
Doris and Donald Shaffer were longtime members of 
the CCR community; as donors and volunteers they gave generously of their time and resources. Sadly we lost both over the last few years, but their sons Na-than, David and Robert continued the family tradition of supporting CCR by establishing the Doris and Don Shaffer Memorial Internship and making a generous gift to CCR. The five-year pledge funds the fellowship stipend, supports CCR programmatic work, and fulfills their parents’ wish that there continue to be “Shaffers” in the CCR community. 
The Shaffer intern will participate in the Center’s Ella Baker Program, part of our mission to train the 
next generation of movement lawyers in partnership with the Bertha Justice Institute. Interns receive hands-on training working closely with CCR attorneys, clients and allies. This year’s intern was Leena Odeh (see p.52).
The Center is honored to have this opportunity to carry on the Shaffers’ tradition of supporting social 
justice and progressive activism and is grateful to their sons for making support of CCR a family affair. 
Doris and Don Shaffer Memorial Internship52$500-$999 
Anonymous
David J. AalderksRobert and Miriam AbramovitzMerritt and Barbara AbrashKatherine AceyEmily P . and  
Benjamin M. Achtenberg
Andrew AckermanMargaret T. and Frank T. AdamsAdobe Systems Incorporated
Cathy Albisa and Waldo Cubero
Michael Altman and Barbara OgurMelinda Delashmutt and  
Francisco Altschul
Thomas E. and Donna AmbrogiGrace AmbroseMark AmsterdamM.L. ArmstrongGail AustinBo BarkerJames A. BeckerCarola and Eliza BeeneySara E. BeinertJames M. Bergin and  
Ellen P . Lukens
Rick Best and  
Susan Douglas Taylor
Judy BierbaumGeorge and Eleanor BollagThe Boston FoundationEileen Brenner
Richard Brodsky
David and Patty BroilesHarold BrokerEdward J. and Marion D. BronsonRobert E. L. and  
Sylvie Maria Brown
BTS USA, Inc.Carol Buell and  
Olivia Hicks
Judith ButlerCalvert Social Investment  
Foundation
Phil M. and Virginia CampbellFlorence ChanTimothy CoffeyJeffrey D. and Lilia CohenDouglas ColeJesse ColemanThe Colyton FoundationThe Community FoundationDavid B. Cone and Kellie StoddartJanet M. ConnCraig R. and Cynthia B. Corrie
Clare M. Coss and  
Blanche Wiesen Cook
Jennifer R. Cowan and  
Dan M. Jacob
Brenda Cravens
John M. CrewSusan CrileDavid P . Dean and  
Catherine M. Bergmann
Thomas E. DeCourseyLarry DenenbergJeron E. and Marjorie B. DonaldsDavid DowAlan and Susan S. DranitzkeBarry N. and Ismartilah  
Drummond
Robert Dubrow and  
Melinda A. Tuhus
Steven ElkintonRay H. and Marilyn EllingPeter and Stella EllistonElsberg Family FoundationWallace B. and Heike EubanksLenore Feigenbaum and  
Simon J. Klein
Sydney and Eric FisherErwin FlaxmanKobie FlowersKathleen FonesJulian N. Gaa and  
Ruth Y . Gaa-Spano
Kit Gage and Steven J. MetalitzCynthia Gallagher and  
Shaun Manchand
Ronald E. and Jacqueline GarrettMargaret A. GeddesSheila GeistPaula GellmanDaniel GillmorFrederick S. Golan and  
Anne M. Kenney
Kurt and Sorel GottfriedAllen H. Greenleaf
Ruthe S. and Arnold Grubin
Anne GuloyanLloyd H. and Mary Ellen GuptillHans C. and Linda HaackeDwight HahnDavid HalperinBeth HarrisEmily HauptmannAnthony HeilbutJenny HeinzPeter Niels HellerBrian and Rose Batchelor Henley
CCR Donors
Leena is a founding member of Ella’s Daughters, a network of artists, 
scholars and writers working in the tradition of civil rights activist Ella Baker. Her family is based in Chicago and she currently studies at Northeastern University of Law after graduating from Carleton Col -
lege. Leena works as an organizer around Palestinian and other pro-gressive issues and is a life-long activist for racial justice in Chicago and internationally. She has worked closely with the Southwest Youth Collaborative doing leadership and political education with Black, Latino and Arab youth.
“For me this work is life long and it goes beyond my day job as 
this will always be part of my life and who I am…so having the opportunity to meet like-minded folks who are committed and passionate but also have the same values deep from within and building that community of trust with them, it’s exciting.”
Ella Baker Profile leena odeh53Joseph Herron and  
Patricia Baird
J. Michael Hershey and Jo Didner
Virginia S. Hildebrand and  
Jan Neffke
Francine S. and Benjamin R. HillerZach Hochstadt and Sadie HoneyStephen J. HrinyaKevin M. Hunt and  
Margaret Downing
Allen HunterInstitute For Women’s  
Policy Research
Abdeen M. Jabara  
and Holly Maguigan
Chung-Ja JadwatBrigitte JaenschKevin and Adrienne JamesJewish Community FederationHenry S. Kahn and  
Mary Gillmor-Kahn
Donald D. and Margaret A. KioseffJoanne Kliejunas and  
Irving Lubliner
Kornblith and Lasser FamilyJohn W. and Claudia LampertiJoseph Landau and  
Joseph Fitzgerald
Nancy Lawton
Edward Leinartas
Judy LernerJoe LervoldGeorge K. and Ann C. LevingerRichard A. Levy and Jane R. 
Hirschmann
David R. LewisLinkedIn Matching Gifts ProgamRichard and Rita G. LipsitzJason and Lika LittGreen Meadow Fund of the  
Maine Community FoundationRichard Makdisi and  
Lindsay Wheeler
Malcolm Cravens FoundationElena S. ManitzasGerald E. Markowitz and  
Andrea Vasquez
Warren E. and Joyce W. MathewsPriscilla J. McMillanBarbara J. MeislinBeth and David P . Meshke
Middle Road Foundation
Bruce K. and Jane O. MillerMark MitchellThomas V . MullerRobert M. NelsonBruce D. Nestor and  
Susana De Leon
Thomas B. and Johannah NewmanLouie D. Nikolaidis and Rachel 
Horowitz
Michael O. and Robin NimkoffClaes OldenburgAlicia and Jeremiah P . OstrikerEdith OxfeldJohn PaarArthur Perkins and  
Bertille De Baudiniere
Rosalind PetcheskyNancy Pick
Arlene M. Pitman and  
Dennis A. Rosenblitt
Barbara B. Polk
Bruce K. PollockEllyn and James PolshekBennett M. Pudlin and  
Margaret Ann Judd
Larry RabinowitzSusan G. RadnerJulie RatnerJulia B. RauchGertrude and Daryl D. ReaganKay Gunderson ReevesPaul W. Rehm and  
Katja Sander-Rehm
Leila J. RichardsLeonard RodbergPaula RogovinJill and Ronald RohdeBarbara and Oren RootEve S. RosahnThe Rose Foundation for  
Communities and the  Environment
Stephen Rose and Christina CernaSarah Rosenwald VaretMarcie A. Rubel and Michael RufoMark Rudd and Marla PainterDavid RudenstinePhillip M. RunkelLowell SachnoffNaomi SagerAnthony SaidyAnn SchaetzelSteven A. and Janet H. SchneiderClaudio L. SchnierAnne and Bennett M. SchwartzRenata Manasse SchwebelEvan D. and Janet ShaadAnthony ShihJoel A. and Ethel H. Shufro
Alix Kates Shulman and  
Scott York
Robert M. Siegel
Christopher SimpsonJaswinder Pal Singh and  
Silvia Ercolani
Dorothy Slater-BrownDaniel SleatorLinda SleffelSteve SmahaCarl and Jane SmithCherida Collins SmithMichael Steven Smith and  
Debby Smith
Stephen Samuel SmithErwin P . and Pearl F . StallerBen R. Stavis and Marjatta LyyraWylie M. StecklowDavid SternStevenson-Cannon Family FundIan E. StockdaleRoger A. Stoll
The Stonbely Family Foundation
Elizabeth and Byron StookeyLeana StormontBert Stover and Teresa HolderDavid SuismanMyles SussmanBrian SwansonBrian ThompsonJoseph and Cornelia C. TierneyRachel TivenMichael Touger and  
Margaret Levitt
Randall H. Trigg and  
Caitlin Stanton
David B. TurnerThe U.S. Charitable Gift TrustCharles W. and Letitia UffordLisa M. Vidigal and  
Antony P . Falco
Mark D. Wainger and  
Rhoda Han Pu Woo
Bela August and  
Jennifer Flynn Walker
Ian Wallach and  
Cindy Chupack
Jennifer WarburgRob and Jennifer WardenVincent Warren and  
Ann Marie Scalia
David WeinraubJeffrey Weinrich
† deceased54Daniel Weiss and  
Anne Stewart
Peter and Cora Weiss
Lawrence Weschler
Jeffrey and Lucinda WilnerMiranda Worthen and 
Brian Shillinglaw
Ann Wright
Wye Financial & Trust
Robert J. and Karen R. Zelnick
$250-$499
AnonymousAaron AbendWilliam H. Abrashkin
Emory W. and Marilyn M. Ackley
Ethel G. AckleyLaila Al-ArianAnnamaria AmentaSusan D. Amussen
Andrew M. Ansorge and  
Laura S. Koopman
Barbra ApfelbaumNoha ArafaKevin J. Armstrong
Sharon S. ArmstrongNicholas AtwoodBella D. August and  
Everett Belvin Williams
Kent AutreyGeorge S. and Jill S. AvruninThe Baltimore Family FundDavid Baltimore
Michael Bass and Carole Brown
Paul W. Beach, Jr.Will BeattyMekayla Beaver and  
Gregory K. Brown
Michael BeerEdith and Alice BellNancy BernsteinChandra Bhatnagar and  
Sunita Patel
Bani BhattacharyaPeggy BillingsStephanie G. and  
Jacob G. Birnberg
Evelyn BlackmanCarolyn Patty Blum and  
Harry W. Chotiner
BNY Mellon Community  
Partnership Employee Funds
Renee L. BowserBarton and Barbara BoyerBill Bragin
Kevi P . Brannelly
Carole R. BrownBernice R. BulgatzAntonio W. Burr and  
Diane di Mauro
Bennett CapersAlex CarlinGordon A. ChapmanMichael Alan ChinnRenee D. Chotiner and  
Stuart W. Gardner
Antonie K. Churg and  
Enrique De Los SantosClascola Trust
Fritz Cohen
David M. ColbertHarvey and Maxine ColchamiroJim and Cecilia A. Conroy
Farok J. Contractor
Julia and Craig CurrieAnya Elizabeth Darrow and  
Louise Ann Harrison
Chandler Davis and  
Natalie Zemon Davis
Colin DayanDale S. and Peter M. DemyRichard A. DenisonMichelle DePass
Jonathan and Kate Dixon
Stephen N. and Phyllis B. Dorsi
George and Minna DoskowLewis and Edith S. DrabkinMichael Drohan and  
Joyce Rothermel
David B. DunningLeslie Ebert
in memor Y oF
Friends, family and loved ones made gifts to CCR in memory of the people listed below. By designating CCR for support (often instead 
of flowers), donors both promote their own social justice values and recognize that the individual being honored shared these valu es 
and would want the work to continue after them. 
13+ Killed by Drone in Yemen
Milton AbelsonOlivia I. AbelsonTora BiksonRose and Morris BlauGladys and Tippy BlumRobert and Frances BoehmMarguerite D. BomseMiranda CampbellMarilyn B. Clement
Nicholas Cominos
Rhonda CopelonJessica DavidsonJames A. DombrowskiTod EnsignHerbert S. FeinbergLotte E. FeinbergPhilip FieldGregory H. FingerEdward A. FoxWalter GoodwinLinda GreenEllen B. HardyJane Holtz Kay
Victor Honig
Dorothea Jameson Hurvich  
and Leo M. Hurvich
Peter KapeluckArthur KinoyAlfred KnoblerSelma KnoblerUlrich E. KruseWilliam KunstlerSaul LandauAbby MalmgreenIris MansourPhilip MurraySyed Nabi
Michael Nussbaum
Jesse W. PageBill ParsonMahlon Fay PerkinsRobert Carl RiddleRichard RoastMilton and Margot RosenblittEdith RosenthalDouglas Jay SorensenMorty StavisGeorge R. TillerJoseph J. TroyWilliam and Selma TuckerMark Tuminaro
Nancy Winkler
Anne and Jack WysokerCCR Donors55Katherine Acey
Cathy AlbisaLauren J. AmsterdamOscar Arnold-NesselJulian AssangeRadhika BalakrishnanRobert and Mary BerlindJane BowmanL. BrinkinAnn M. Cammett and  
Marcia Gallo
Michael ChechanoverAtessa Chehrazi and Karl Krooth
Gianpaolo Ciocco
Laney CohenBethann Corr and FamilyNancy Costello and  
Katherine Rodway
Theodore Ade CrooksAnnette Warren DickersonSusan DunhamDavid P . Elkinton and Janis HurstNiki and Matt EllisTraci L. ExtAnn Fawcett AmbiaThe Fennell FamilySheri FinkMarilyn ForbesKatherine FrankeJeff FurmanThomas A. GainesKatherine M. GallagherRoy GiordanoKris GlenMark GoldstoneGrace GoodmanJerry GriffinGuantánamo Bay Project
John P . Guros
Linda Hamalian and Paul AvrinEmily B. HartingLouise HauserJoyce HawesDinah Hayse and  
Manuel Kraemer
Sally IsraelJaima JacksonPaul JorjorianDavid Judd and  
Stephanie SchwartzRichard P . KeavneyPaul KennedyJohn KimMaria Couri LaHoodLisa Levy and Carrie DavisBritta Lindgren’s DaughterChelsea ManningPatricia MansorErik MeansKaia MeansRachel MeeropolMeg and ZacDavid Miao and Jeannie Rusten
Charles and Chantel Modiano
Ken MooreFrances MottWilliam J. MurphyRalph NaderPhilip Tajitsu NashMarilyn Kleinberg NeimarkMerry E. NeisnerAdamantia PollisWilliam P . QuigleyMichael D. RatnerJulia B. RauchJoan and William RentzAlex J. RosenbergDaniel J. RussoAri Rutkin-Becker and  
Harris Goldman
Chris and Amy SchaeferDan SchemberJeffrey SchwartzAndrew E. and Veeta SleddBarbara Ellen SmithMichael Steven SmithAlisa SolomonAaron Stark and Cecilia Chu
Nancy Stearns
Linda SteinLynne StewartBonnie Tamres-MooreSarah TsalbinsJohn WaideVincent WarrenPeter WeissEllen YaroshefskyMike and Mary Lu YavendittiMichael J. and Naomi ZigmondSusan Zucker Leff
in Honor oF
Those listed below had donations made to CCR in their honor by thoughtful friends, family members or organizations that wanted to make a meaningful gift with lasting impact. Many of these donations were in lieu of birthday, wedding or holiday gifts, or in commemo-ration of a special occasion. We thank both the donor and the recipient for sharing their support and for introducing new people to CCR’s work.Camille Ehrenberg
Michael EhrlichColin Eisler
Jodie Evans
Saralee E. EvansTraci L. ExtMoneim and Lieselotte FadaliJeffrey A. Fagan and  
Connie S. Fishman
Nancy FleischerAnne E. FlynnFranklin Templeton  
Charitable Giving Fund
Elliot Fratkin and  
Martha A. Nathan
Maria C. Freeman and  
Donald K. Larkin
Terry FreundAnn Fridlind
Paul Friedlander
David F . FunkhouserRacheli GaiElizabeth Gaines and  
John D. Mason
William H. Gavelis
Mary Geddes
Edward I. GeffnerMartin GellertMargo R. George and  
Catherine Karrass
Frances Geteles-ShapiroWilliam J. Gilson and  
Georgia WeverLeah GitterMary G. GleysteenRichard A. and Carolyn Glickstein
Brian Goble
Jean R. GoldmanDeborah GoldsmithCarla M. Goldstein and  
Nathaniel K. Charny
Toby GolickRichard A. Gollub and  
Rita A. Clark-Gollub56recurrinG
The following donors have made recurring gifts to CCR. Often made monthly, these gifts provide a convenient way to donate, as well as 
a reliable stream of support for the Center. Recurring gifts make it possible to sustain our ongoing cases and advocacy. Thank you!
Anonymous
Cathy Albisa and Waldo Cubero
Margaret and Allen Alexander
Theresa F . Alt
Tom Angotti
Barbra ApfelbaumNoha Arafa
M.L. Armstrong
T. Witt Athey, IIIEverett B. Williams and  
Bella D. August
Kent Autrey
Elaine Babian
Susanne BaderRadhika Balakrishnan and  
David W. Gillcrist
Jerome and Ruth BalterLester BaltimoreAjamu Baraka
Harriet Barlow
William BarnickleJeremy Barth
Barbara and Philip Bayless
Paul W. Beach, Jr.Will Beatty
Sara E. Beinert
Christina Benacci
Ruth G. and Carl S. Benson
Ara and Linda BernardiSheila A. BloomHerman T. Blumenthal and  
Margaret G. Phillips
Fraser BonnellKevi P . Brannelly
Eileen Brenner
Judith and Don Broder
Harold BrokerBetty Brown
James C. Bryan
Rachel Burd
James Byrnes
Matthew Calabaza
Terry CarlsonRandi Cawley
Darlene Ceremello and  
Jessea Grennman
Ralph C. and Sara P . ChernoffZane Clausen
Joanne M. Collier
Christopher Colvin
Jim and Cecilia A. ConroySusan CrileManuel Criollo
Susan R. Curtiss and  
John M. Gresham
Kenneth DeedRoger R. Dittmann
Diana DuarteKristen Dunn
Richard Eastman
Margaret L. EberbachBrandon Eddy
Ray H. and Marilyn Elling
Michael Elmendorf
Susan Epstein
John EverhartJean S. FallowAnn Fawcett Ambia
Elliot Fratkin and  
Martha A. Nathan
Betty FridenaPaul Friedlander
David F . Funkhouser
Bix GabrielRacheli Gai
Dean Gallea
Ronald E. and Jacqueline Garrett
Jason Gibson
William J. Gilson and  
Georgia Wever
Jude GlaubmanJoan and Bert Golding
Elizabeth GolubitskyJack Gordon
Waleed K. and Hannah Gosaynie
David L. Greenwood
David Gregozek
Gregory GriffinMargaret and David GulletteGitanjali Gutierrez and  
Fabian Minors
Robert HabermanRobert Hahn
Albert and Virginia Hale
David HalperinJay Hannah
Jesse Harold
Guy M. HarrisBeth Harris
Emily B. Harting
Emily Hauptmann
Jenny Heinz
Brian K. HenleyDavid G. HerrmannAmy Hoch
Ingrid Hogle
Timothy A. HolmesEric Hopley, Jr.
Julie Hungar
Kevin M. Hunt and  
Margaret DowningChris A. Ives and Mishy Lesser
Rachel Kahn-Hut
Martin and Carolyn Karcher
Julie Kay
Virginia KayArthur Kennedy
John and Phyllis Kirkwood
Steve P . LaBash
Caroline Lagenfelt
Nsombi Lambright
Timothy J. Lee and  
Eleanor McBride
Phyllis B. and John LehmanTim Lennon
Marilyn Levin
Eleonore K. Levine
Mark Levitan
Bruce Luecke
Nancy Lukens
David C. and Penelope Mace
Gerald E. MarkowitzWilliam G. Mascioli
Jason Mayerfeld
Paul Meyer-Strom
Zack Michaelson
Bruce K. and Jane O. Miller
James Mills and  
Louise H. Robinson Mills
Jaime MoodyFrank Morrow
Denis D. Mosgofian and  
Lori Liederman
Mary and Michael Murphy
Jason A. Neidleman
Frederick Nicholson
Rael Nidess
Hans NollCCR Donors57Claire Gottfried
Bernard and Jane GottschalkHarvey Green
Elizabeth P . Greenberg
Frank and Judith GreenbergAllan Greenleaf and  
Alexandra J. Terziev
Ronald J. Grele
Philip I. Greenblat and  
Gloria Greenblat
Kathy J. Gruber and Fred J. Levy
Catherine Gund
Alice L. Hageman and  
Aubrey N. Brown
Robert Hahn
John L. HammondDavid Harbater
Jed Hartman
Marguerite H. V . HasbrouckKeith Hefner and Diana Autin
Eric Hegblom
James HeintzJanet Helson and Betty LundquistBetty and Jackson HerringDavid G. Herrmann
Paul Hertz and James Rauchman
Joyce M. HormanGurdon L. HornorRichard R. and Elizabeth C. HoweHP Company Foundation
Alice S. Huang
Stanley Trezevant HutterStella JacobsOmar Jadwat and Molly DohertyThe Jewish Community Foundation
The Cecile Goldberg Levine 
Philanthropic Fund of the Jewish 
Community Foundation of the Jewish Federation of Greater 
Pittsburgh
Jewish Foundation of Greensboro
Aaron JohnsonBen and Kathleen JoneCarolyn Jordan and Harry R. FairMichael and Louise KatoCindi Katz
Joe Kear
Robert KehrGregory KellyBilly KesslerJacqueline M. Kienzle
Julia Koehler
Ellen D. and Marshall M. KolbaRochelle Korman and  
Richard Fredman
Jane KristofRachel and Joseph KruskalRobert P . KunreutherKarin Kunstler Goldman and  
Neal Goldman
Daniel KunstlerSteve LaBashLouise Lamphere
Eleanor Lange
Wendy LaRiviereSusan LeeMartin S. and Gita M. LefsteinGerald and Catherine Leibowitz
Shari Leinwand
Tim LennonLeo J. and Celia Carlin FundArt LeonardMarilyn Levin
Claire and Lawrence Levine
Mark LevitanIda J. LewensteinGeorge F . Loewenstein and  
Donna Harsch
Matthew LondonMarsha L. Love and  
Maarten Bosland
Amy Lowenstein
Mary Waterman Lunt
Russell LyonsArthur MacEwan and  
Margery W. Davies$250-$499 (continued)
Marina Oshana and David Copp
John PaarHertha Poje-AmmoumiLouise B. PopkinWarren PoppRachel PorterAlmerindo PortfolioSeemin QayumRichard M. Rabin and  
Bernice Rabin
Camilo RamirezRoger RankinJulia B. RauchKay G. ReevesDenise RicklesAndrew RockLeonard RodbergPaula RogovinAndrea Rosanoff and  
Steve Sparks
Marguerite RosenthalPatricia RosnelMary M. and William H. RussellGladys and Dick RustayJack SawyerPatricia R. Sax and Kay TaylorPaul SayvetzKathleen ScarboroughAdam Schneider
Manuel and  
Bonnie Schonhorn
Ernest A. Schulte
Bennett M. SchwartzWilliam SeffAlan SeidenDaniel ShapiroSusan L. SheinfeldJoy ShigakiRafael ShimunovJoel A. and Ethel H. ShufroStephen ShuttleworthRoberta SingerLinda K. SleffelMaureen SmithNathaniel SmithRichard A. SobleVera U. SpohrDavid J. Steichen, Jr.Amanda J. StentMelvyn T. StevensLeana Stormont
Bert Stover and Teresa Holder
Susan Raikes SugarBill SummersMary L. SutphinBo SvenssonAlice C. SwiftCarlyn Syvanen and  
Stephen F . Vause
Michael C. ThielmannBrian ThompsonDouglas ThompsonSue Lee K. TroutmanVictor and Barbara UlmerIsrael VaughnFelice M. VegaLise VogelSusan von ArxRandall WayneRobin Webster
Stan and Susan Weingast
Jeffrey D. WeinrichDeborah WeissmanKevin WhelanLawrence B. WilliamsEmerald YoungMona YounisLeonard and Ellen ZablowRichard and Lucy Zaslow
Margaret Zierdt
Loy Zimmerman58William H. and Judith W. Matchett
Elaine MatthewsMarc Mauer and  
Barbara Francisco
Peter J. MayerLynne MayocoleMary Gayle McCallGary E. McDole
Jennifer E. Meeropol
Martin and Margaret MelkonianBill MetzgerPaul Meyer-Strom
Zack Michaelson
Cora MilesMarvin and Marline MillerDonna L. and Sean C. MoffatMahmoud D. and Laila Mohamed
Jaime Moody
Helen R. MooreTodd MooreJose Luis Morin and  
Jeanette Guillen-Morin
J. Malcolm and Mary MorrisStephen MorrisLawrence B. and Claire K. MorseRichard H. MorseJames Moschella
Denis D. Mosgofian and  
Lori Liederman
Holly L. Mosher
Peter D. and Gail S. Mott
Ellen L. and George Mozurkewich
Kathryn L. MulveyMary and Michael MurphyPeter F . NaccaratoThe Nash Foundation
Ronald Neschis
Robert C. NewmanRael NidessRalph NielsenNYCharities.Org
Kristin Ockershauser Dunn
Craig OettingerDavid R. Oran and Silvia M. ArromNancy OswaldEdward H. PageCynthia L. Pansing and  
Arlin S. Wasserman
Timothy PattersonNora C. and Arnold M. PeaceElizabeth PerkinsSuzanne D. and Robert J. PetrucciPfizer Foundation Matching  
Gifts Program
Katrina C. PflaumerHertha Poje-AmmoumiJames Porter, Jr.
Florence B. Prescott
Bruce and Dianne PringleChristopher H. and Cynthia F . PyleSeemin QayumChloe Quail
Qualcomm Matching  
Grant Program
Judy Rabinovitz
Alan and Andrea RabinowitzJoni Rabinowitz and John Haer
Jim Radford
Deborah RandMark RapparportAmelie L. RatliffSyed Razi
Kenneth C. Regal and  
Judith A. Ruszkowski
James Reif
Judy F . Richardson
William L. Rittenberg
Lisa RobinsonAndrea Rosanoff and Steve SparksJeffrey Rosenberg and  
Sally Stanley
Paul C. RosenblattMarguerite RosenthalPatricia RosnelRussell RoybalSteve and Elizabeth Rummage
Jane P . Rundell
Kris RustSigrid A. SaloGail A. and M. H. SangreePatricia R. SaxRobert Schaibly and  
Steven Storla
James A. Schamus and  
Nancy Kricorian
Vivian SchatzEllen Schrecker and  
Marvin Gettelman
Henry SchreiberMatthew Scot Schultz and  
Catherine E. O’Connell
Lloyd F . and Ann B. Scott
Richard and Betty Seid
Alan SeidenGrace and Solomon SevyRupa ShahSallie Shawl
Nancy Shealy
Joy ShigakiAnn and Ahmad ShiraziStephen ShuttleworthCarol Smith and  
Joseph Esposito
Marjorie M. SmithTed SmootRebecca SolnitCarolyn Sonfield
Douglas K. Spaulding
Victoria A. Steinitz and  
Elliot G. Mishler
Cal Stone
Susan M. Strasser
Nancy and Bill StrongSusan Raikes SugarCharles J. SugnetHarsh P . Sule and Katharine Larsen
Thomas P . Sullivan
Anand Swaminathan and  
Bethany Turke
Daniel B. SzyldIgor Tandetnik
Kelly F . and Benjamin Taylor
C. Gomer Thomas and  
E. Jane Cameron
William ThomasBonnie E. Thomson and  
Eugene Tillman
tripadvisor Gift Matching Program
Dominick and Mardi Tuminaro
Shamya M. UllahVictor K. and Barbara UlmerMarc Van Der Hout and  
Jodie Le Witter
Benedict VigliettaSteven Vogel and Jane HendersonKatherine Waldbauer and  
Ronald L. Henry
Todd WalkerSamuel WallaceJoan M. WarburgLarry WartelStan and Susan Weingast
Carol Weinstock
Deborah WeissmanCarol Wells and Theodore T. HajjarHenry Werner and Holly ThauRichard P . and Tobey M. Wiebe
Lawrence B. Williams
Allison Wilson and  
Jonathan Latham
Ellen J. Winner and  
David A. Lewis
Tom WirtshafterDaniela Wittmann and  
Jonathan Cohn
Thomas and Carol Wolf
Andrea Wolper
Leighton WoodhouseFred WoodsMichael WoodsRobert R. and Blaikie F . Worth
Gregg Wright
Alec WysokerJudith Yanowitz and  
Harry S. Hochheiser
Mona Younis
Noah Zatz
Jeanette ZelhofLoy ZimmermanThomas Zimoski
CCR Donors59Program Services $5,461,392
Supporting Services $1,773,836
Total Expenses  $7,235,228Net Assets as of June 30, 2013 $6,324,820
Change in Net Assets $(361,821)
Net Assets as of June 30, 2014 $5,962,999    ExpEnsEs  nET AssET s Financial Report July 1 2013–June 30 2014 *Audited pending board approval
n Grants and Contributions  $5,825,150
n Court Awards and Attorney Fees $649,062
n Investment Income  $329,533
 Other Income/loss  $(3,786)
* Other Income = Miscellaneous, Publications Income,  
 and Speaker Feesn Program Services (Litigation and Advocacy)  
 Litigation   $3,791,622
 Education & Outreach  $1,669,770
n Supporting Services (Administration and Fundraising)
 Administration & General  $713,539
 Fundraising   $1,060,297total r evenue, Gains 
and o ther s upport 
$6,799,959total expenses
$7,235,22860Board of Directors
Katherine Acey 
Laila Al-Arian Catherine Albisa, Chair Harry Anduze MontañoRadhika Balakrishnan, TreasurerAjamu BarakaChandra Bhatnagar, Vice ChairKatherine FrankeSherry FrumkinAbdeen JabaraWilhelm H. Joseph, Jr.Julie F . Kay, Secretary Nsombi LambrightPaula LittJules Lobel, PresidentMichael Ratner, President Emeritus Alex Rosenberg, Vice-PresidentMichael Steven SmithRichard A. SoblePeter Weiss, Vice-PresidentEllen Yaroshefsky
Management Team
Vincent Warren, Executive DirectorBaher Azmy, Legal Director Dorothee Benz, Communications Director Kevi Brannelly, Development Director Carolyn Chambers, Associate Executive DirectorAnnette Warren Dickerson, Director of Education & Outreach  
(through November 1, 2013)Administrative Staff
Amnah Almukhtar, IT and Administrative AssistantGregory Butterfield, Administrative ManagerOrlando Gudino, IT ManagerLisa Levy, Human Resource Systems and Special Projects ManagerChase Quinn, Executive AssistantJeffrey Weinrich, Finance DirectorAlberto White, Office Manager
Communications
Lauren Gazzola, Communications Associate for Publications Jesse Harold, Web Communications and Multimedia ManagerJen Nessel, Communications CoordinatorCamilo Ramirez, Communications Associate for Social Media 
Development
Sara Beinert, Associate Director of Development, Individual Giving
Pam Bradshaw, Grant Writer
Kevin Gay, Database and Online Giving ManagerEmily Harting, Associate Director of Development, Foundations Christine Kim, Annual Fund ManagerJosé Monzon, Development AssociateJeremy Rye, Senior Major Gifts Officer
Education & Outreach
Leili Kashani, Advocacy Program Manager, Guantánamo Global 
 Justice Initiative (through February 28, 2014)
Laura Raymond, Advocacy Program Manager, International  
Human Rights
Meejin Richart, Education and Outreach Administrative AssociateNahal Zamani, Advocacy Program Manager, Government Misconduct 
and Racial JusticeCCR Board and Staff61Legal Department
Alexis Agathocleous, Senior Staff Attorney
Darius Charney, Senior Staff AttorneyClaire Dailey, Legal WorkerJ. Wells Dixon, Senior Staff AttorneyAbigail Downs, Legal WorkerOmar Farah, Staff AttorneyKatherine Gallagher, Senior Staff AttorneyIan Head, Legal WorkerSusan Hu, Bertha FellowAliya Hana Hussain, Legal WorkerShayana Kadidal, Senior Managing AttorneyPardiss Kebriaei, Senior Staff AttorneyMaria LaHood, Senior Staff AttorneyJessica Lee, Bertha FellowRachel Meeropol, Senior Staff AttorneySunita Patel, Staff AttorneyIbraham Qatabi, Legal WorkerGhita Schwarz, Senior Staff AttorneyPurvi Shah, Bertha Justice Institute Director Pamela Spees, Senior Staff AttorneyLeah Todd, Assistant to Legal DirectorAn-Tuan Williams, Bertha Justice Institute  
Program Associate
Chauniqua Young, Bertha Fellow
Consultants
Riptide Communications, Communications and MediaNicholas Coster, Graphic DesignSophie Weller, Guantánamo Resettlement LiaisonJennifer Oscroft, Guantánamo Resettlement LiaisonMihal R. Ansik
Adriana BallinesKristine BeckerleTianna Bethune
Lilian Boctor
Neijla CalvoMatthew DaloisioDiana DamschroderRachel DavidsonPawanpreet K. DhaliwalZamira DjabarovaClaunick DuronvilleEric EingoldKatherine EricksonFarbod Faraji
Andres J. GallegosSophie Gebreselassie
Dawit GetachewScheagbe M. GrigsbyAntonia House
Bianca Isaias
Brenda KomboAparna KrishnaswamyWhitney G. LeedsMichael MangelsAlexandria E. McKeeSophia MireHoda MitwallyZachery MorrisJasmina NogoNanjala Nyabola
Leena OdehNikkita R. Oliver
Nikita ParekhSarah RaabBruce Reilly
Caitlin Russell
Robert D. SandermanMelissa StewartNicole A. SummersLeana S. TaingMariah ThompsonJesus Torres GarzaMegan WachspressKyle WebsterLeah WestonTyler Whittenberg
2013-14 Ella Bakers
Interns
Arwa AlhoribiAmanda BassIsabel Benincasa-ReadeClark Binkley
Jessica Brand
Christian CastaingScott FolettaMax GellerEmerson  
Gordon-MarvinRue HogarthSimratpal KaurTanya KeilaniErica Maldonado
Meagan McKinstry
Tamara MorgenthauMeave MurphyChristina MurphyClaerwen O’HaraKevin ParkTessa RubenDesiree SalomoneRachel SilvermanMica Sloan
Kayla M. Smith
Pamela StamoulisJenna TabatznikKevin TangEllen Weinstein
Volunteers
Barbara AubreyMegan BeanRobert BloomSara CordaRosemary F . Faulkner
Mary J. Geissman
Natalie KabasakalianRuth KreinikGrainne MellonKate MorrisMerry E. NeisnerNaomi Sager
Douglas B. Sapola
Sally SaulvesterManuel SchonhornJeena ShahDan ShainPeter ShepherdMargaret Tobin
John H. Wilson62In Memoriam
ruby Dee
Legendary actress and civil rights activist Ruby Dee passed away peace -
fully at the age of 91. She lent her voice and presence to the cause of 
racial equality inside and outside of show business. She was an active member of the Congress of Racial Equality, the Student Nonviolent Coor-dinating Committee, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. In 1946 she joined the cast of “Jeb,” where she met her future husband Ossie Davis. Over their nearly 60 years together, they supported various causes including CCR. The day of Dr. King’s historic March on Washington, they were the masters of ceremonies for the entertainment event where Dee delivered a stirring reading. Over the course of her acting career, which 
spanned from the 1940s to the 21st century, she earned an Emmy, a Grammy and a Screen Actors Guild Award, along with a 2008 Oscar nomination.
tod ensign
A leading lawyer and activist for U.S. veteran’s rights, Tod Ensign made a huge impact on the lives of GIs, veterans and those opposed to war. In 1969, Tod co-founded Citizen Soldier and participated in a range of cases, including the Agent Orange class action and the Vietnam-era Winter Soldier Investigation. Tod worked to provide health care and compensation to thousands of veterans and helped organize the legal defense of Iraq war resisters. He also challenged the military’s policy of discrimination against LGBT servicemembers. Tod’s personal passions included wine, food, travel and jazz. His partner Francine Smilen and their daughter Rachel Ensign chose CCR as the recipient of gifts in his memory to ensure that his work for justice continues. Tod also served as co-counsel to CCR.
richard mehl 
Richard C. Mehl had two passions during his life: social justice and lifelong learning. By high school, he had become a socialist who valued individual freedom. He opposed violence and was a conscientious  
objector during the Vietnam War. He met his wife, Paula Allred, at Kalamazoo Friends (Quaker) Meeting in 1971, and the two began a life together filled with a love of nature, music, and entrepreneurship. In Richard’s later years, he worked in the library at Western Michigan Uni-versity, which gave him ready access to the books that he so voraciously devoured. CCR is grateful that he remembered the Center in his will with a generous bequest.
Bert Aubrey
Peg Brennan
Peter Broner
Maxine Burress
Wallace B. Cleland
Norman Eisner
Roma B. Foldy
Winifred W. Hirsch
Helen S. Lane
Rosemarie D. Lehman
Irwin Luckman
Jean A. Mann
Philip Murray
H. Milton Peek
Jennie Rhine
Margot Rosenblitt
Sylvia Schreibman
Peter and Toshi Seeger
Kenneth E. Tilsen
Murray Tobak
Nancy Winkler
Tanja WinterThe following CCR supporters passed away this year and  many thoughtfully honored CCR with a bequest. It is always sad to lose a member of our community, but their ideals will live on in the work they supported at CCR.Give to ccr and 
Your Gift Will Have  
Twice the Impact!
Thanks to our friends at The Atlantic Philan-
thropies, CCR has an exciting opportunity to raise an additional half million dollars this year. From July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015, Atlantic will match, dollar for dollar, up to $500,000 from:
• First time donors to ccr. Any gift you 
make will be matched 100%; 
• Donors who increase their giving to ccr.  For example, if you gave $100 last year 
and increase your giving to $150 during the matching period, $50 will count toward the match; 
• lapsed Donors. Haven’t been able to give 
to CCR in over two years? Now is the time to renew your support! Give today and 100% of your gift will count toward the match. 
We are incredibly grateful to The Atlantic Phi-lanthropies for this tremendous opportunity to fuel the fight for justice, and hope that you will join with CCR to help us reach our goal. Thank you for your goodwill, generosity, and for part-nering with CCR to make a more just world. 
to donate online, go to
CCRjustice.org/ 
donatetodayWays You can support ccr!
use social meDia  and share the news. Follow @theCCR on Twitter and 
retweet us. Like “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook and share our 
posts. Subscribe to our email list at: www.CCRjustice.org and forward our newslet-
ters and action alerts to your friends. 
maKe an online GiFt at: www.CCRjustice.org/donatetoday. It’s 
fast, easy, and secure, and your gift will go to work right away. Online gifts are 
a greener way to give—and reduce mailing expenses and supplies so more of 
your gift goes to programs.
attenD a local event  if CCR is in your neighborhood—and bring 
a friend! If you are on our email list you will receive invitations, though public 
events are also listed on our calendar at: www.CCRjustice.org/calendar.
Host a House P artY  to fundraise for CCR and introduce friends and allies 
to CCR’s work. Public events are also listed on our calendar at: www.CCRjustice.org/calendar.
Give tHe GiFt oF ccr! Ask friends and family to make gifts to CCR in your 
honor as your holiday gift OR give to CCR in honor of folks on your list. You will pay tribute to our shared social justice values, while fueling CCR’s efforts to protect and 
extend human rights. Do this online at: www.CCRjustice.org/donatetoday
maKe Y our GiFt recurrinG These gifts provide CCR with a reliable, 
steady source of support making it possible for us to plan better and take on more cases. 
Sign up for a monthly recurring gift on our website: www.CCRjustice.org/donatetoday.
Donate stocK  If you donate appreciated securities to CCR, you may 
avoid capital gains taxes and receive a charitable deduction. Please contact CCR at 212-614-6489 for stock transfer instructions. 
incluDe ccr in Y our Will  Including CCR in your estate plan is an 
excellent way to make a statement about the values you held during your lifetime, while ensuring CCR stays strong for the future. Just call Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448 
for suggested language.
www. ccrjustice.org