1
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial Report
 Biennial Report
2013-14 This report covers the period from January 
1, 2013 to December 31, 2014 and financial 
information for September 1, 2012 to August 
31, 2014.
Copyright © 2014 Cultural Survival
Cultural Survival
Main Office:
PO Box 381569
Cambridge, MA 02238 USA
t: 617.441.5400
f: 617.441.5417
culturalsurvival@cs.org
www.cs.org
Facebook.com/CulturalSurvival
Twitter @CSORG
Cover: Cultural Survival Staff proudly marches 
at the People’s Climate March in New York City 
on September 21, 2014. L-R: Rosy Gonzalez, 
Cesar Gomez and Suzanne Benally. Photo by 
Danielle DeLuca.
Right: 311,000 demonstrators attended the 
People’s Climate March in New York City on 
September 21, 2014 demanding climate justice. 
Indigenous Peoples marched at the frontlines. 
Photo by Danielle DeLuca.3
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial Report
4
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial ReportA MESSAGE FROM 
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
I’m very pleased to share with you in this biennial report Cultural Survival’s 2013-
14 progress to advocate for and serve Indigenous Peoples around the globe. 
This work is deeply meaningful to me. 
Growing up culturally, Diné (also known as Navajo) and Santa Clara Tewa, I 
consider my vocation to be a lifetime progression, an inter-generational process, 
and a web of experiences that shape commitment, passion, and advocacy. I draw 
inspiration every day from my great, great grandmother five generations back 
who made her way alone on foot from the Fort Sumner concentration camp in 
New Mexico to her Aboriginal homelands. 
Her journey was one of taking back control that had been stripped from her (and 
her family and community) and finding a new life that allowed her to pass along 
her wisdom to the next generation – on her own terms.
Similarly, Cultural Survival’s journey over the past two years has been one 
focused on empowerment while ensuring that Indigenous cultures are practiced 
and respected.
While Cultural Survival’s 2013-14 activities are impressive, collectively and 
even more significantly, they represent a growing movement to ensure that 
Indigenous Peoples have a seat at the table. Cultural Survival is at the front lines 
of this work that actually has far-reaching ramifications. 
Increasing development pressures by governments and multi-national 
corporations to exploit finite and sensitive Indigenous resources is making our 
efforts more urgent. An estimated 95 percent of the top 200 places on earth with 
the highest and most fragile biodiversity are located on Indigenous territories.  
When these lands are plundered for minerals, timber, farmland, oil, and other 
resources – as they routinely are – there are global implications for the future 
of our planet. Simply put, if these delicate resources are gone, we will face not 
only loss of cultures, languages and lifeways, but also changes to our own local 
environments. 
Thankfully, Cultural Survival does not work alone. I am humbled by the dedication 
of our Board members, talented staff, Indigenous partners, allies in the nonprofit 
world and at government agencies, and donors who lend their time, expertise, 
networks, activism and financial support. 
Together, and with friends like you by our side, we will continue to persevere until 
Indigenous communities secure the rights – human rights, the right to participate 
and have a voice, the right to practice their cultures and speak their languages, 
the right to access the same opportunities as others, and the right to control and 
sustainably manage their assets and resources – to which they are legally and 
morally entitled. 
I offer my most sincere thanks to all who share our values, concerns and 
priorities and whose support will undoubtedly make a difference as we move 
forward.
Sincerely,
Suzanne Benally (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa)
Executive Director
5
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial Report
5 Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial Report
OUR VISION
Cultural Survival envisions a future that respects and honors 
Indigenous Peoples’ inherent rights and dynamic cultures, deeply and 
richly interwoven in lands, languages, spiritual traditions, and artistic 
expression, rooted in self-determination and self-governance.
OUR MISSION
Cultural Survival advocates for the rights of Indigenous Peoples 
and partners with Indigenous communities to protect their lands, 
languages, and cultures.
OUR HISTORY
The impulse for the founding of Cultural Survival arose during the 
1960s with the “opening up” of the Amazonian regions of South 
America and other remote regions elsewhere. As governments all 
over the world sought to extract resources from areas that had never 
before been developed, the drastic effects this trend had on the 
regions’ Indigenous Peoples underscored the urgent need to partner 
with Indigenous communities to defend their human rights. Cultural 
Survival was founded to help Indigenous Peoples in their struggles for 
human rights, sovereignty, and autonomy.
Throughout the 1970s, Cultural Survival’s founders David Maybury-
Lewis, Evon Vogt, Jr., Orlando Patterson, and Pia Maybury-Lewis 
functioned out of a space made available by Harvard’s Peabody 
Museum. The organization was incorporated in 1972 as a tax-exempt 
NGO in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Since its inception, Cultural 
Survival has been at the forefront of the international Indigenous 
rights movement. Cultural Survival’s work has contributed to a 
revolution of empowerment for Indigenous Peoples around the world.6
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial ReportADVOCACY PROGRAM
If Cultural Survival had not stepped in to investigate, stand up 
for us and our rights, and continue to fight for us, we would 
not be able to still exist. Cultural Survival is like our warrior for 
our entire tribe.”
JOHN LENANYANGERRA, SAMBURU COMMUNITY LEADER, KENYA
We have transitioned our former Global Response 
Program into a broader Advocacy Program that 
encompasses a range of advocacy actions.  Cultural 
Survival’s advocacy work supports grassroots 
Indigenous movements as they put pressure on 
governments and corporations to protect, respect, 
and fulfill the rights of the United Nations Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples to honor 
Indigenous Peoples rights-- to their lands, lives, 
cultures, and the right to determine for themselves 
the future they will lead. 
Reports to international bodies, representation at 
international gatherings, advocacy campaigns, training grassroots activists and communications 
supported Cultural Survival’s Advocacy 
Program.
During 2013-14, Cultural Survival 
published and submitted seven reports to 
the United Nations Human Rights Council 
during its Universal Periodic Review 
process of evaluating a country’s human 
rights performance. Our reports on 
Honduras, the Marshall Islands, Mongolia, 
Panama, Kenya, the United States, and 
Belize recommend improvements for 
respecting Indigenous rights. 
6 Cultural Survival //  2013-14 Biennial ReportCultural Survival ensured that our organization and several Indigenous leaders were represented at 
international gatherings at the highest levels, including the: 
May 2013 
May 2014 UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) in New York City, a two-week long 
event during which state representatives, UN officials, and Indigenous Peoples and their 
organizations meet to address themes and concerns that affect Indigenous Peoples. At the 
2014 event, Cultural Survival hosted representatives from Indigenous communities in Peru, 
Guatemala, and Kenya who met with the Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples and other UN bodies;
June 2013 World Conference of Indigenous Peoples  in Alta, Norway (coverage was picked up and 
featured by Native Public Media, a major Native American media network);
Sept 2014  World Conference on Indigenous Peoples in New York City, with an Indigenous media 
team providing coverage and producing informational radio programs for dissemination to 
Indigenous community based radio stations worldwide;
International Funders for Indigenous Philanthropy’s World Summit on Indigenous 
Philanthropy in New York City; and
People’s Climate March in New York City attended by 311,000 people and 1,500 
organizations making it the largest climate march in history.7
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial ReportNumerous advocacy campaigns, supported by Cultural Survival’s online 
communications reaching international audiences, letter writing, site 
visits and bringing Indigenous leaders to international gatherings 
brought to light environmental damage, removal from Indigenous lands, 
and violations of Indigenous rights. While some victories have been won 
(for now), other fights are still in progress. Besides campaigns supporting 
efforts in Russia, Bangladesh, Cameroon, Peru, Kenya, Belize, Guatemala, 
and Ethiopia, others include: 
• Mayan leaders in Peru successfully holding 
off US Capital Energy, a Texas-based oil 
company, from initiating drilling on their 
lands.  The group also successfully won 
Supreme Court appeal that re-affirmed 
the Maya people’s rights to collective land 
ownership throughout southern Belize. 
They developed a thorough consultation 
framework defining procedures for gaining 
the Free, Prior, and Informed Consent of their 
communities for projects on their land, and 
U.S. Capital Energy has taken some steps 
toward respecting this process. 
• The Iberá wetlands system in Corrientes, 
Argentina is one of the world’s largest bodies 
of freshwater. The livelihoods of the Guaraní 
people have suffered from the elimination of 
biodiversity in more than half of the wetlands 
and devastated freshwater levels resulting 
from Harvard Management Company’s 
investment in vast mono-crop pine and 
eucalyptus plantations. Efforts are underway 
to press Harvard University to divest itself of these harmful interests.  
• Quechua activists in the Peruvian Amazon 
who are fighting 40 years of corporate oil 
contamination of a delicate rainforest and 
Indigenous water systems. A Cultural Survival-
produced video was featured on national 
news in Peru. We also facilitated meetings 
for Indigenous leaders with both current and 
former UN Special Rapporteurs. Today, the 
battle still wages to protect communities from 
an extension of the oil company’s permits. 
• In British Columbia, Canada, the Tsilhqo’tin 
Nation protected its sacred lake from turning 
into a toxic waste site when Canada’s Federal 
Environment Minister put an end to a mining 
proposal.  Since then, the Supreme Court of 
Canada issued a ruling giving land title to 
the Tsilhqot’in Nation, and the Tsilhqot’in 
have declared the area around Fish Lake as a 
tribal park for the use and enjoyment of the 
community. 
• The Masaai people of Kenya, who have been 
forcibly evicted from their homes in the name 
of biothermal energy extraction, gained 
enough attention to receive visits from World 
Bank representatives and the UN Special 
Rapporteur on Indigenous Rights. Hopefully, 
these first steps will help to bring justice to the 
Maasai.
An on-site training in Punta Gorda, Belize and a widely disseminated printed guide has spread the 
word to Indigenous communities on their right to Free, Prior, and Informed Consent. In addition, two 
workshops in Massachusetts trained representatives of New England Tribes on the process of the 
Universal Periodic Review and helped to contribute to the UPR report on the United States submitted 
by Cultural Survival. 
Advocacy Program efforts (and all of Cultural Survival’s programs) were complemented by 
Cultural Survival’s communications program that includes an online presence (through our 
website and social media), mainstream media coverage, publications (including our award-
winning Cultural Survival Quarterly), and e-newsletters.  In these ways, Cultural Survival 
mobilized allies, brought international attention and pressured governments and corporations 
to respect the rights of Indigenous peoples, and provided a platform for Indigenous leaders to 
speak for themselves. 
Apu David Chino inspects the toxic waste left by 
Argentine company Pluspetrol Norte which oper-
ated petroleum extraction for over 43 years in his 
community of Nuevo Andoas on the Pastaza River 
in northern Peru.  Photo by Danielle DeLuca.8
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial ReportThe goals are to empower the Indigenous Peoples of Guatemala to access and control 
information of importance to their rights and cultures, ensure that they have the ability to 
participate in the country’s nascent democracy, promote their freedom of expression, and 
secure the right of Indigenous communities in Guatemala to own and operate community 
radio stations.
2013-14 witnessed significant steps forward for the Community Media Program 
(previously called the Community Radio Program) overall, with some individual 
radio stations suffering from raids and persecution by the Guatemalan 
government. 
Training events built the capacity of approximately 1,000 radio station 
personnel, community members and young people. An estimated 40% were 
women and 50% were youth. Trainings were offered through conferences and 
workshops hosted by Cultural Survival and others. A series of 24 exchanges 
between radio stations during 2013 and 2014 offered station personnel 
the opportunity to learn from one another, create bonds that continue to 
strengthen commitment to the community radio movement, and discuss 
approaches to protecting local environments and Indigenous self-sustainability. 
Three youth conferences in 2013 organized by Cultural Survival with three 
grassroots, Indigenous organizations from Belize, Guatemala and El Salvador 
reached more than 50 young people who will be the next generation of 
journalists and radio activists.
One useful aspect of the training resulted in the development of a Community 
Radio Impact Assessment tool that measures if and to what extent that station 
is achieving its goals. Resulting from their own assessments, stations adjusted 
their programming based on listeners’ feedback. 
COMMUNITY MEDIA
40%
WOMEN
50%
YOUTHStrategizing in front of community radio station, Radio Xob’il Yol 
Qman Txun, in Todos Santos Cuchumantan, Guatemala.9
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial ReportCultural Survival’s network of 80 community radio 
stations across Guatemala grew to include three 
new stations in Guatemala, El Salvador and Belize. 
A meeting in September 2013 with 33 community 
leaders from communities in the municipality 
of El Estor, Izabal in Guatemala may lead to the 
establishment of a new station. 
Our Guatemala staff and our allies at 
Sobrevivencia Cultural raised the issue of 
Indigenous and free media in national, regional, 
and international discussions.  Venues included: 
the May 2013 UN Permanent Forum on 
Indigenous Issues in New York; the September 
2014 UN World Conference on Indigenous 
Peoples; the September 2014 World Summit on 
Indigenous Philanthropy hosted by International 
Funders for Indigenous Peoples; the November 
2014 National and International Forum of 
Indigenous Communication and Public Policy in 
Popayan, Cauca, Colombia; and the August 2014 
“Second National Congress on Discrimination 
and Racism” organized by the Presidential 
Commission Against Racism in Guatemala. 
Beyond public outreach, the courts have been 
another avenue through which Cultural Survival 
has pursued legal remedies for community 
radio stations. Following up on 2011 and 2012 
legal arguments regarding whether current 
Telecommunications law denies Indigenous 
Peoples their rights, and Guatemalan Constitutional Court’s ambiguous findings, 
Cultural Survival heard in March 2014 that our 
petition (with the Inter-American Commission 
on Human Rights (filed in September 2012) has 
been selected as a case for priority handling. Our 
March 2013 meeting with the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights in Washington, D.C. 
to plead our case undoubtedly helped to move 
this forward. We received a favorable response 
from the Commission who denounced the 
discriminatory laws and urged the Guatemalan 
Congress to change this legislation. 
To bring to light the need to legalize community 
radio in Guatemala, in May 2014, Guatemala 
staff met with the UN Special Rapporteur for 
Indigenous Peoples, the Danish Embassy, the 
German Embassy, the Guatemalan Ambassador, 
and the Chilean Ambassador in New York during 
the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.  
Thanks to Cultural Survival’s resources and 
resourcefulness, in August 2014, Radio Jun Toj 
of Rabinal, Baja Verapaz celebrated its return to 
the air after more than two years off the air. In 
May 2014, our team delivered computers and 
consoles to four radio stations, including two that 
had been raided and taken off the air (Radio San 
José and Radio Damasco). Following a December 
2014 raid, Radio Juventud reclaimed its radio 
station equipment (aided by a judge who reversed 
an order) that was seized by government 
authorities. This was an unprecedented move on 
the part of the justice system.
International agreements 
and human rights treaties on 
freedom of expression, as 
well as the UN Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples, guarantee the right 
of Indigenous Peoples to have 
access to their own media 
and support the creation of 
local reports, written press, 
television, blogs and websites, 
and community radio”
ANSELMO XUNIC AND CESAR GOMEZOn air at Radio La X Musical Cajola, in Cajola, Quetzaltenango, 
Guatemala.10
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial ReportINDIGENOUS RIGHTS RADIO 
Cultural Survival’s Indigenous Rights Radio 
(IRR) Program, formerly known as the Free, 
Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) Initiative, 
produces and distributes radio programming 
that supports local dialogue and action in 
Indigenous communities. IRR strengthens 
Indigenous Peoples’ capacity to claim their 
legal rights by increasing awareness and 
understanding of international human 
rights mechanisms and how they can 
become actively involved in policy decisions 
that impact them. So informed in their 
Native languages, Indigenous listeners are 
empowered in areas related to Free, Prior 
and Informed Consent, climate change 
and environmental issues, women’s rights, 
education, language and culture, land rights, 
self-determination, and youth leadership 
development. Indigenous-produced 
programming content ranges from short 
public service announcements to investigative, 
documentary style podcasts.
Production and distribution of our programs 
is an ongoing process. As of December 2014, 
we have produced 80 radio programs in 
English and 87 programs in Spanish, as well 
as 230 translations covering 19 Indigenous 
languages.  We have built a database of over 1200 radio stations around the world, plus over 
200 related organizations, and have distributed 
six rounds of content to 928 stations and 158 
organizations.  The radio programming plus 
distribution via Facebook, Twitter, and colleague 
audio platforms (iTunes, Radioteca, IsumaTV) 
reaches an estimated 10 million listeners. 
These programs are incredibly important. Often, we want to 
express ourselves [on development issues] in our community 
but we aren’t listened to. This initiative is important and it will 
help us when we’re confronting a situation where [authorities] 
are doing whatever they feel like and are not listening to us. 
We should be lied to; so we must be informed, like mentions 
in the radio programs. Usually we have only realized projects 
are happening when they are already working. From what 
we’ve heard in these programs, it’s more than clear: this will 
help us, and we can help more people.”
COMMUNITY MEMBER IN SUMPANGO, GUATEMALA
Cesar Gomez interviews 2014 FIMI laureate Rosalina Tuyuc (Kak-
chiquel) for an Indigenous Rights Radio program.11
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial ReportIn fulfilling our objective of gathering information from high-level meetings and disseminating it to 
Indigenous communities in ways that are most accessible to them, Cultural Survival has become 
recognized as a leading producer of radio content on Indigenous Peoples’ issues and events. Cultural 
Survival reported via radio programs in English, Spanish and Indigenous languages at events that 
included the: 
May 2013 
May 2014  UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) ) in New York City, where our team 
interviewed Indigenous leaders from around the world, as well as members of the Permanent 
Forum, to gain insight into the challenges they face and their priorities, especially as related 
to international processes.  Supported by Cultural Survival, Maasai leader Ben Koissaba 
attended the 2014 UNPFII and later organized a series of talk shows based on our Free, Prior, 
and Informed Consent programs on Maasai radio Maiyan FM in Kenya;
June 2013 World Conference of Indigenous Peoples  in Alta, Norway (coverage was picked up and 
featured by Native Public Media, a major Native American media network);
Oct 2013  Second Continental Summit on Indigenous Communication of the Americas  in 
Oaxaca, Mexico, where we produced a series of interview programs and built our network of 
community radio stations;
World Conference of Indigenous Women in Lima, Peru, where as members of the official 
media team, we captured and disseminated Indigenous women’s perspectives on challenges 
to Indigenous Peoples and their ideas on how to move forward. Subsequently, we produced 
six radio programs, including an hour-long documentary in Spanish, on the effects of 40 
years of oil contamination on Amazonian Indigenous communities in the Pastaza river basin 
in Loreto, Peru;
Feb 2014 Site visit to Panama and Costa Rica, where we visited Kuna, Ngobe, Bribri, and Brunca 
Indigenous communities, held community radio workshops, distributed our radio programs, 
and gathered interviews that were made into 14 programs sharing ideas on land rights, 
ancestral leadership, women’s roles and challenges, freedom of expression, and other 
concerns shared by Indigenous communities worldwide;
Sept 2014  People’s Climate March in New York City attended by 400,000 people and 1,500 
organizations making it the largest climate march in history; and
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples  in New York City (where we were contracted by 
the Conference’s Global Coordinating Group, with some programming picked up by Native 
America Calling).
In addition to on-location and next-day event programming, coverage in general regularly included: live 
social media; website and Facebook updates; articles in Cultural Survival Quarterly; email blasts; and 
public service announcements.
Webinars, side events at international gatherings, and site visits to Indigenous communities brought 
awareness of the use of media to inform Indigenous people about their rights. 12
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial Report
BAZAARS
Participating in Cultural Survival’s Bazaars has helped us 
continue to generate our art, culture, and the knowledge of 
our ancestors. The benefits of the Bazaars have gone directly 
to the artisans that auto-generates their own economy, 
clothing, and nourishment.”
FELICIA HUARSAYA VILLASANTE, AYMARA WEAVER FROM PERU
The Cultural Survival Bazaars are a series 
of cultural festivals that provide Indigenous 
artists from around the world the chance 
to sell their work directly to the American 
public. Hundreds of artists, cooperatives, 
and their representatives sell traditional and 
contemporary crafts, artwork, clothing, jewelry, 
carpets, and accessories at the Bazaars. In 
addition, the Bazaars offer a wide assortment 
of cultural performances and presentations, 
which include live music, Native American 
storytelling, craft-making demonstrations, as 
well as the chance to speak with guest artisans 
and community advocates.
During 2013 Cultural Survival held ten Bazaars 
in New England and New York City.  The Pequot 
Nation celebrated the 15th Anniversary of 
their museum in Mashantucket, CT and they 
invited Cultural Survival to hold a Bazaar at the 
museum in August 2013.
In 2014 we held nine Bazaars in New England 
locations, including Amherst, Boston, 
Cambridge, Falmouth, and Tiverton.  Cultural 
Survival Bazaars were included in a list of the 
five best holiday markets in and around Boston 
by WBZ CBS News in December 2014.
In relation to program development, 
external relations building, and professional 
development, program staff traveled to 
Washington, DC in June 2014 to observe the 
Smithsonian Folklife Festival and to Santa 
Fe, NM in July 2014 to visit the Santa Fe 
International Folk Market. Through these 
travels we hope to find new vendors, artisans, 
potential partners, and learn about how other 
events operate.  
Top: FELICIA HUARSAYA VILLASANTE
Middle: A creation by Domingo Bernard.
Bottom:  Sidy Maiga and Afrimanding perform.13
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial Report
13 Cultural Survival //  2013-14 Biennial ReportTHANK YOU TO OUR SUPPORTERS!
Cultural Survival offers its sincere gratitude to the donors, supporters and volunteers who make 
possible our work to serve Indigenous Peoples. We thank you for your moral and financial support. 
For many years I have observed the astute advocacy and constructive actions of Cultural 
Survival and their Indigenous partners in building a network of community radio stations 
in Guatemala.  The collaborative strategy has been brilliant, the teamwork consistently 
remarkable, and the funding carefully directed and judiciously spent.  I am grateful for the 
opportunity to channel my commitment to Indigenous rights, dignity, and equal standing in the 
global community through Cultural Survival.”
        SUSANNA B. PLACE, MILTON, MA
LIST OF DONORS
Patrons ($500-$999)
Rosamond W. Allen and Paul 
Landry
Louise T. Ambler
Janet K. Amighi
Kelly Askew
Whitney Beals and Pamela Esty
Shirley and Tim Blancke
Louise M. Burkhart
Jerry S. and Barbara Buttrey
Robert C. and Ann Buxbaum
Joann Calve
Mary Ann Camp
Jim Campen and Phyllis Ewen
Nicholas Canfield
Fay M. and Alfred Chandler
Murray and Linley Chapman
Chickasaw Nation
Richard and Carolyn Clemmer-
Smith
Elizabeth Colson
David R. Conna
Jean D. Crandall Memorial Fund
Culver Family Foundation
Robert L. Deshotels
Christopher Donahue
William and Katy Durham
Earth Medicine Alliance
Kirk and Karen Endicott
Equal ExchangeNancy E. Fleischer
Anne Forsyth
Sara Frommer
Helen W. Gjessing
K. M. Harbinson
Michael and Cornelia Herzfeld
Michael J. Hirschhorn and 
Jimena P. Martinez
Michael H. Horn
Embry Howell
Jantz Management LLC
Ralph Jones
Sara A. Keller
Eric Michael Kelley
Willett Kempton
Imre and Lorna Kepes
Rita and Richard Dean Kipp
Sarah Knox
Marilyn Krysl
Dinah W. Larsen
Dana Lepofsky
Sherman L. and Alison Lewis
Mark and Helena Licalzi
David Lockard
Caitlin Lupton
Lorraine Lyman
Stephen P. Marks
Herbert A. Masters
Matson-Muth Charitable FundMarcella Mazzarelli
Janet U. McAlpin
Mariana M. McClanahan
Richard and Deyne Meadow
Rosemary Mudd
Gilbert G. Nichols
Sandy Noborikawa
Elaine Nonneman
Felicia Oldfather
W. Kevin Pape
Carmen Perez
Michael Perloff
Katharine M. Preston and John 
Bingham
Tina Ramme
Vivekanand Rau and Farzaneh Abhari
David Rosenstein
Sara Blair Winter Foundation
Maria Sauzier
Lou Scharpf
Jane M. Starkey
Kathryn S. Tholin
Florence Wagner
Gwen Wasicuna
Bertie J. Weddell
Thomas S. and Susan Weisner
Catherine M. Williams
Karen Yust
Steven Zuckerman and Paula Gorlitz14
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial Report
Benefactors ($1,000+)
A Better World Fund
Valerie Alia and Pete Steffens
AMB Foundation
Anonymous
The Bay and Paul Foundation
Susana Raquel Berger
Stephan Beyer
Boston Area Spanish Exchange
The Boston Foundation
The Boston Globe
Jerry D. Busch
Victoria J. Carter
Duane Champagne
The Christensen Fund
Martin and June Cobin
William E. and Francine 
Crawford
The Crawford Foundation
Bharat Das
Westy and Susan Egmont
Elliott Badgley Foundation
Wendy Emrich
Nicole B. Friederichs
John Fries
Full Circle Fund of RSF Social 
Finance
Sarah and William Fuller
The Funding Exchange
Grace Jones Richardson Trust
Laura R. Graham and T.M. 
Scruggs
William and Jeanie Graustein
Haymarket People’s Fund
Steven and Katherine Heim
Sue HiltonDonald Hindley
Karin Holser
James and June N. Howe
Institute of International 
Education
International Work Group for 
Indigenous Affairs (IWGIA)
Jean E. Jackson
James Ford Bell Foundation
Charles M. and Angeliki V. Keil
Thomas F. King
Louise Lamphere
Richard F. Leman and Donna 
L. Ching
Robert Lemelson
Frank Loveland
Patricia J. Lyon
Jesse W. Markow
George Martin
Mashantucket Pequot Tribal 
Nation
The Middle Passage 
Foundation
Mildred M. Simmons 
Charitable Lead Annuity Trust
Barbara D. Miller
Gerrish Milliken
P. Ranganath and Sandra 
Nayak
Thomas J. Nerger
Carol Newell
Next Step Living Inc.
Nancy S. Nordhoff
NoVo Foundation
Sandra J. Occhipinti
Pavan Restaurant GroupDenise Peine
Susanna B. Place
Samuel Plimpton and Wendy 
Shattuck
Quitiplas Foundation
The Rainforest Foundation
RCG Fund
Jerome C. and Janet Regier
Blythe Reis
Reis Foundation, Inc.
Edna Roberts
Martha S. Robes
Barbara Rogoff
Scola
Mats Sexton
Peter L. Sheldon
Michael J. Sheridan and Kristina L. 
Simmons
Chris Simpson
Teresa M. and Anthony Smith
Mary Gay Sprague and William T. 
Hassler
Nancy Stetson
Jessica E. Straus
Swift Foundation
Tamalpais Trust
The Cadmus Group Inc.
Theo Chocolate
Tides Foundation
Martha Claire Tompkins
Terry and Mary Vogt
Dan S. and Beth Whittemore
Whole Foods
Marvin Zelen 
Visiting Radio Ak’Kutan in the only 
Indigenous community radio station 
in the Toledo District of Belize.15
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial ReportBOARD OF DIRECTORS, STAFF AND INTERNS
Board of Directors
PRESIDENT AND CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD
Sarah Fuller 
VICE CHAIR (2013)
Vincent O. Nmehielle  (Ikwerre)
VICE CHAIR (2014)
Duane Champagne  (Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa)
TREASURER
Nicole Friederichs
CLERK (2013)
Jean Jackson 
CLERK (2014)
Lesley J. Kabotie  (Crow) Evelyn Arce
Alison Bernstein
Karmen Ramírez Boscán (Wayuu)
Laura R. Graham 
Steven Heim
James Howe
Edward John (Tl’azt’en) 
Cecilia Lenk
Les Malezer (Aboriginal Australian of the Gabi 
Gabi Community) 
Stephen Marks 
Pia Maybury-Lewis 
P. Ranganath Nayak 
Stella Tamang (Tamang)
Jeff Wallace
Che Wilson (Ngāti Rangi) 
StaffSuzanne Benally  (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa), Executive Director
Kaimana Barcarse (Native Hawaiian), Radio Producer
Mark Camp, Deputy Executive Director
Jessie Cherofsky , Indigenous Rights Radio Program Associate
Danielle DeLuca , Advocacy and Indigenous Rights Radio Program Manager
David Michael Favreau, Bazaar Program Manager
Sofia Flynn , Accounting & Office Manager
Cesar Gomez (Pocomam), Content Production & Training Coordinator, Community Media Program
María del Rosario ‘Rosy’ Sul  González (Kakchiquel Maya), Radio Producer
Jamie Malcolm-Brown , Communications & Information Technology Manager
Agnes Portalewska, Communications Manager
Angelica Rao, Executive Coordinator
Alberto ‘Tino’ Recinos  (Mam), Citizen Participation Coordinator, Community Media Program
Ingrid Sub Cuc (Kaqchikel/Q’eqchi), Community Media Program Assistant
Miranda Vitello , Development Associate
Ancelmo Xunic (Kachikel), Community Media Program Manager
Interns and Volunteers
2013Timothy Argetsinger
Sasha Benov
Lauren Bolles
Don Butler
Aileen Charleston
Jessie Cherofsky
Ryann Dear
Andrea Delgado
Nick DiMatteoHannah Ellman
Amy Ferguson
Laura Garbes
Madeline Hall
Terrance Hall
Megan Harris
Daniel Horgan
Nicole Huang
Pearl Jurist-SchoenDanielle Kaigler
Curtis Kline
Caitlin Lupton
Erin McArdle
Daniel Ng
Kelsey Parker von Jess
Mary Peters
Alyssa Phelps
Hannah ReeveHannah Reier
Johanna Rincon Fernandez
Colin Rosemont
Eliott Rousseau
Sara Schenkel
Holly Swanson
Melanie White
Kristen Williams 
2014 Omar Alcover
Bianca Annoscia
Ava Berinstein
Bridget Boyle
Don Butler
Kendall Crawford
Ryann Dear
Jordan Engel
Alex GlomsetStephanie Guthridge
Amadeus Kaelber
Leda Kennedy
Elie Kommel
Alicja Kowalczyk
Madeline McGill
Carley Minkler
Sophia MitrokostasEmily Moline
Johnny Motley
Katharine Norris
Julie O’Neill
Rebecca Quick
Nina Roth
Karen Sargent
Alison SchlossTracie Sullivan
Holly Swanson
Cecilia Tripoli
Penelope Turner
Chloe Walker
Rachel Ward
Kristen Williams
Jenna Winton 16
Cultural Survival // 2013-14 Biennial Report82%12%6%
Programs and Publications Fundraising General Administrative544,606 , 47%
148,810 , 
13%441,581 , 39%587 , 0%3,482 , 0%2,816 , 0%
5,767 , 1%Revenue FY 2013
Contributions and Subscriptions
Grant Revenue
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar
Income
Investment  Income
Realized and Unrealized Gain
(Loss) on Investments
Sales of Publications
Other incomeFINANCIAL REPORT
REVENUES FY 2014 FY 2013
Contributions and Subscriptions  692,126  544,606 
Grant Revenue  273,542  148,810 
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar Income  401,955  441,581 
Investment  Income  1,096  587 
Realized and Unrealized Gain 
(Loss) on Investments 174  3,482 
Sales of Publications  7,557  2,816 
Other income  2,562  5,767 
Total Revenues  1,379,012  1,147,649 
EXPENSES FY 2014 FY 2013
Programs and Publications  1,145,010  1,183,097 
Fundraising  137,418  166,359 
General Administrative  93,668  91,874 
Total Expenses  1,376,096  1,441,330 
82%12%6%
Programs and
Publications
Fundraising
General AdministrativeRevenue FY 2013
Expenses FY 2013544,606 , 47%
148,810 , 13%441,581 , 39%587 , 0%3,482 , 0% 2,816 , 0%
5,767 , 1%
Contributions and Subscriptions
Grant Revenue
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar Income
Investment  Income
Realized and Unrealized Gain
(Loss) on Investments
Sales of Publications
Other income692,126 
50%
273,542 
20%401,955 
29%1,096 
0%174 
0%7,557 
1% 2,562 
0%Revenue FY 2014
Contributions and Subscriptions
Grant Revenue
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar Income
Investment  Income
Realized and Unrealized Gain (Loss) on
Investments
Sales of Publications
Other incomeRevenue FY 2014
83%10%7%Expenses FY 2014
Programs and
Publications
Fundraising
General AdministrativeExpenses FY 2014
On air at Radio Ak’Kutan in the Toledo District of Belize.