1
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual Report
annual Report
2017 This report covers the period from January 1, 2017 
to December 31, 2017 and financial information for 
September 1, 2016 to August 31, 2017.
Copyright © 2017 Cultural Survival
Cultural Survival
Main Office:
PO Box 381569
Cambridge, MA 02238 USA
t: 617.441.5400
f: 617.441.5417
culturalsurvival@cs.org
www.cs.org
Facebook.com/CulturalSurvival
Twitter @CSORG
On cover: Radio Azacualpa in Intibucá, Honduras, with the 
support of Cultural Survival's Community Media Grants Project 
opened its doors in 2017.3
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual Report
OUR VISION
Cultural Survival envisions a future where all 
Indigenous Peoples live by their inherent rights 
deeply and richly interwoven in their aboriginal 
lands, native languages, spiritual traditions, and 
dynamic cultures; and whose Indigenous rights are 
honored through self-determination.OUR MISSION
Cultural Survival advocates for Indigenous 
Peoples’ rights and supports Indigenous 
communities’ self-determination, cultures 
and political resilience since 1972.
WHAT WE DO
From our headquarters in Cambridge, Massachusetts and satellite offices in Guatemala and 
New Mexico, Cultural Survival strengthens Indigenous Peoples’ ability to organize  
their communities and shape their futures in ways consistent with their traditions,  
languages, and cultures.
Cultural Survival supports Indigenous communities’ self-determination through the power of 
the media, access to information and resources, advocacy, capacity building, and networking. 
We provide a platform for Indigenous Peoples to effectively and proactively protect their lands, 
territories, resources, and cultures. 
Through Cultural Survival, Indigenous leaders and movements connect to international bodies 
and mechanisms that recognize Indigenous rights.  
Cultural Survival Indigenous Rights Radio Producer Rosy Gonzalez 
visiting grant partner Radio Xilotepek in Jalapa, Guatemala.4
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual ReportA MESSAGE FROM OUR 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Dear Friends:
As we look back at 2017, we at Cultural Survival are honored to support 
Indigenous Peoples and their communities in advocating for their rights 
and to share a few highlights of this year.
Through the Keepers of the Earth Fund, 14 Indigenous-led projects in 
ten countries supported community based grassroots projects focused 
on Free, Prior and Informed Consent and self-governing strategies. The 
demand we encountered for these small grants is a testament to the 
great need – and Indigenous Peoples’ drive to advocate for themselves.
And in Guatemala, Honduras, Kenya, Nepal, Nicaragua, Panama, and 
Peru, 18 Community Media Grants supported Indigenous-run radio 
stations to build their infrastructure, capacity, and rights-focused 
programs. 
Indigenous-run radio stations in 70+ countries received 150+ radio 
programs created by Cultural Survival’s Indigenous producers, 
spreading the word on topics such as repatriating sacred objects 
and human remains, the value of Indigenous science and traditional 
knowledge in the fight against climate change, and the struggle for 
Indigenous women’s rights.
Over 160 Indigenous women participated in Cultural Survival’s trainings, 
learning new skills in radio program production and journalism – 
allowing them to tell their stories in their own voices. We create 
pathways for Indigenous women’s leadership and gender equity 
through community radio.
Cultural Survival advocated for Indigenous human rights through 18 
reports responding to the United Nations’ Universal Periodic Review 
(UPR) process in Argentina, Bangladesh, Botswana, Cameroon, Gabon, 
Guatemala, Japan, Mali, Pakistan, Peru, Russia, and Ukraine.
Please join me in celebrating the significant progress made with our 
many, many Indigenous partners, donors, and other allies in defending 
Indigenous lands, cultures, spiritual traditions, artistic expressions, 
languages, and self-determination. 
With gratitude,
Suzanne Benally  (Santa Clara Tewa/ Navajo)
Executive Director
18
media projects funded
14
KOEF grants awarded
18
human rights  
reports submitted
167
Indigenous women 
trained in radio
155+
radio programs 
released
$393,000
raised through 
Cultural Survival 
Bazaars5
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual Report
Our Programs
Radio production training participants in 
Quetzaltenango, Guatemala.6
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual Report
“In my 12 years of doing community radio, I had never had the opportunity 
to produce my own radio pieces. This was a task delegated and assumed 
by men, and therefore I came to think it was something complicated. 
However, now with this workshop, I learned not only how to do radio 
production, but also realized that there is nothing that a woman cannot do, 
if approached with dedication.”
PETRONILA CH’UMILKAJ TAX (PICTURED BELOW ON LEFT), VRADIO LA NIÑA IN TOTONICAPÁN, 
GUATEMALA TRAINING PARTICIPANT
6COMMUNITY MEDIA PROGRAM
I always knew that I would make a 
great radio broadcaster, but I just 
didn’t have the skills or the training. 
Now I know that I can do it. I’ve 
already filled out an application at the 
[station] in my village, and once I’m 
done here I’ll go back and show them 
my diploma.” 
ASMITA GHISING TAMANG, NEPAL TRAINING 
PARTICIPANT
Community Media Grants Project:  As an offshoot of the Community Media program, the Community 
Media Grants Project provided financial resources to 18 Indigenous radio stations in Africa, Asia, Central 
America, and South America. (see page 9 for details). Guiding principles were women’s participation and 
gender equity, language revitalization, and protection of Mother Earth.  
Guatemala legal defense:  Guatemala continued to be ground zero for Cultural Survival’s policy and legal 
defense support for community media. In Guatemala, community radio stations are often declared illegal 
and subject to raids and shut downs. Our legal team conducted research in support of Bill 4087 that 
would legalize community radio and on four cases to defend radio station personnel who were detained 
in raids. Our April meeting with United Nations ambassadors in New York sought to increase pressure on 
Guatemala to legalize community radio. 
Central American Network of Indigenous Community 
Radios: From its base in Guatemala, the Community Media 
Program expanded regionally through the launch of the 
Central American Network of Indigenous Community 
Radios. Created by Cultural Survival and our Guatemalan 
sister organization, Asociación Sobrevivencia Cultural, the 
Network advances Indigenous Peoples’ right to freedom of 
expression and fights for the democratization of commu -
nication and increased social, cultural, and political justice. 
The Network’s third meeting in September in Managua, 
Nicaragua solidified the group’s strategic plan. 7
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual ReportAfter five years of waiting, the government of Guatemala accepted as admissible the 2012 petition (which 
we submitted with Asociación Sobrevivencia Cultural and Suffolk University Indigenous Peoples Law Clin -
ic) to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR). The petition sought to affirm the right 
to freedom of expression for Indigenous Peoples in Guatemala. Cultural Survival, along with the Suffolk 
University Law School Indigenous Peoples Law Clinic and Association of Mayan Lawyers, prepared and 
submitted a response to move forward the initiative.
In communities where many Indigenous women 
experience domestic violence and women’s political 
participation remains low, providing a platform for 
women to engage and speak is a powerful vehicle for 
gender equity.
Overall during 2017, through Cultural Survival’s 
trainings, 167 Indigenous women strengthened their 
capacity in radio production and radio journalism – 
and focused on gender perspectives and feminism 
from an Indigenous worldview and Western 
perspective. These workshops brought women 
together to build solidarity to lift their voices in local 
community radio and, by extension, around the world. 
Trainings included:
• In March, 21 women volunteers from community 
radios in six Central America countries gathered at 
Maya Women’s Organization MOLOJ in Guatemala 
City, Guatemala for a workshop in radio production 
with a focus on intercultural gender issues. The 
women built deep bonds in a short period as they 
shared their experiences of violence, discrimination, 
hardships and achievements. They wrote, produced, 
and edited 18 radio spots and vignettes on women’s 
rights that were broadcast on their local radio 
stations and on all Spanish-speaking radios in Cultural 
Survival’s vast network of community radio stations. 
• In September, 20 Indigenous women from six 
countries (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama) participated 
in two community radio journalism workshops WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT PROJECT: 
CENTRAL AMERICA AND NEPAL
7 Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual Report
In 2017, 167 Indigenous women from Central America and Nepal took part in trainings in radio 
production and radio journalism.Learning new audio editing software at a radio production training 
in Managua, Nicaragua.8
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual Reportin Quetzaltenango, Guatemala and in Managua, Nicaragua.  The trainings workshops 
focused on deepening the dialogue and learning on intercultural gender issues and 
practical production skills. 
• In Nepal, 21 Indigenous women journalists attended 
a 5-day intensive training promoting Indigenous 
women’s voices in community radio. Cultural Survival 
also supported several community radio stations to 
develop gender policies and to replace equipment 
damaged in the devastating 2015 earthquake.
BELIZE:
2017 marked the second year in a three-year  
initiative to train six Maya men and women to  
become radio producers and investigative  
journalists for Radio Ak’ Kutan in southern Belize. 
NICARAGUA:
Two workshops, one in Jinotega and one in Camoapa, 
respectively covered launching a community radio 
station and informative journalism.
PANAMA: 
With financial support from Cultural Survival, a local organization applied for legal radio 
frequencies for four stations in the communities of Aimee, Kankintu, Kusapin, and Sambu. 
In addition, women from each community were enrolled for a diploma in broadcasting 
and radio administration.Training in radio production and journalism in Punta Gorda, Belize.
8 Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual Report9
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual ReportGRANTMAKING 
The Community Media Grant Project’s (CMGP) primary goal is to increase 
the reach and impact of participating radio station leadership and fulfill 
their visions for community change.
In 2017, the CMGP funded 18 Indigenous radio projects totaling over 
$166,000 in Guatemala (6), Honduras (2), Nicaragua (1), Panama (2), Peru 
(1), Nepal (5) and Kenya (1). 
As a result of this support, broadcast infrastructure and systems grew 
stronger, community engagement and diverse partnerships were 
developed, and radio station staff and volunteers learned community 
journalism, broadcasting, audio editing, and technical skills. 
Several projects also supported Indigenous women’s organizations and 
radio stations, training Indigenous women in radio broadcasting, and 
developing gender policies for radio programming. 
Funded projects were selected based on their solid base of Indigenous 
leadership in communities with significant radio listenership, as well as 
the future potential for impact in Indigenous self-determination, cultural 
empowerment, and Indigenous rights.COMMUNITY MEDIA GRANTS PROJECT
GUATEMALA
6HONDURAS
2
NICARAGUA
1PANAMA
2
KENYA
1NEPAL
5
PERU
110
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual ReportThe Keepers of the Earth Fund (KOEF) provides 
small capacity building grants for Indigenous-led 
advocacy and self-determination projects.
Funded projects utilize traditional knowledge, 
governance structures, and decision-making 
processes to defend Indigenous rights from the 
encroachment of corporations and others on their 
lands and ways of life. 
The themes of the 2017 KOEF grants were Free, 
Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) and Self-
Governance.
In September, Cultural Survival announced 
14 grants—nine FPIC strategies and five Self- 
Governance strategies—totaling $64,142 in ten 
countries: Belize, Brazil, Cambodia, Ecuador, 
Honduras, Kenya, Mexico, Nepal, Panama, and 
the United States.  Grantees’ activities included 
community organizing, policy formulation, and 
enhancing Indigenous communities’ ability 
to dialogue with government or corporate 
authorities. KEEPERS OF THE EARTH FUNDFree, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) is a 
principle guaranteed by the United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples with basis in the International 
Labor Organization’s Convention 169. 
FPIC remains the primary mechanism 
for Indigenous Peoples to defend their 
political, economic, and cultural interests 
related to policies and development 
projects affecting Indigenous Peoples’ 
lands and territories. 
It is now incorporated under various 
international agreements and voluntary 
policies of many institutions – which 
means governments and corporations  
can no longer ignore these principles 
without repercussions.
“In plain terms, FPIC is knocking on 
somebody’s door and asking for  
permission before you come in,” explains 
Grand Chief Ed John, of the Tl’azt’en First 
Nation in Canada. 
1st Qtr 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr 4th QtrKOEF GRANTS BY GLOBAL REGION
Asia
7.7%
Central
America
30.8%
South
America
15.4%
Africa
7.7%North
America
38.5%
Keepers of the Earth Fund grant partner San Youth Network in Botswana.11
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual Report
On getting the good news, my organization members, including 
some of the Cherangany community members, are really very 
happy. Everyone now calling to confirm is complimenting by 
saying they now have hope. One said he has now seen a light at 
the end of the tunnel.” 
SOLOMON CHERONGOS, CHEMUDEP
FREE, PRIOR AND INFORMED 
CONSENT Grantees:
Associação Xavante Warã, Brazil
Cherangany Multipurpose Development 
Programme (CHEMUDEP), Kenya
Coordinadora Indígena del Poder Popular 
de Honduras (CInPH), Honduras
Federación Binacional del Pueblo Zápara del 
Ecuador y Perú (FEBPZEP), Ecuador
Federación Indígena Tawahka de Honduras, 
Honduras
Fundación de Santa Maria para la 
Promocion Indigena y Agroforestal, México
International Indian Treaty Council (IITC), 
United States
Organización de Mujeres Indígenas Unidas 
por la Biodiversidad de Panamá - OMIUBP, 
Panamá
Red Nacional de Mujeres Indígenas: 
Tejiendo Derechos por la Madre Tierra y 
Territorio- RENAMITT, México
Sunuwar Sewa Samaj, NepalSELF-GOVERNANCE Grantees:
Ka Kuxtal Much Meyaj A.C., México
Maya Leaders Alliance with Julian Cho 
Society and Toledo Alcaldes Association, 
Belize
Red Regional de Mujeres Siuamej 
Tayolchikauanij, México
Women of the Federación Binacional del Pueblo Zápara del 
Ecuador y Perú (FEBPZEP) in Ecuador, a KOEF grant partner.KEEPERS OF THE EARTH FUND GRANTEES12
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual ReportINDIGENOUS RIGHTS RADIO
Indigenous Rights Radio (IRR) uses the 
power of community radio to inform 
Indigenous communities of their 
rights.
Since 2013, IRR has produced 1,167 
radio programs in 35 languages, with 
50,000 plays and 10,000 downloads 
on our website. 
Over 1,400 Indigenous-run radio 
stations in 70+ countries broadcast 
IRR programs, ultimately reaching an 
estimated listener audience of up to 
11.5 million globally. 
During 2017, our most popular 
programs covered Indigenous human 
rights defenders, the Nicaragua 
Canal and its impacts on Indigenous 
Peoples, and Indigenous community 
radio.
We increased the number of timely, 
news-focused programs, such as: 
a special on Columbus Day and 
efforts to reframe it as “Indigenous 
Peoples’ Day” across the Americas; press releases on violence against 
Indigenous human rights defenders; and 
internationally-recognized days such as 
World Radio Day. 
Other topics covered included 
Indigenous women’s rights; land and 
resource rights; Indigenous responses to 
climate change and its impacts; extractive 
industries and Free, Prior and Informed 
Consent; Indigenous youth; and more.
What do the Indigenous radio stations like 
about IRR? Hear it from them:
“All of the educational programs”
“That you highlight marginalized 
communities”
“The value that is placed on the protection of 
Indigenous culture and territory”
“Positive messages that help our audience to 
reflect”
“The information about Indigenous Peoples 
at the global level, and...topics that relate to 
rights and knowledge of Indigenous Peoples”
“The advances that are being made towards 
raising awareness about our rights”
“Expert analysis, Indigenous rights, culture 
and art”
“Everything!”
Indigenous Rights Radio Producer Shaldon Ferris interviewing Michele Cook (Diné/
Navajo) at the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
Indigenous Rights Radio Producer Rosy Gonzalez gathering program content at 
UN Permanent Forum on Indigeous Issues.13
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual Report
Cultural Survival Indigenous Rights Radio
Scope of Distribution to Radio Stations Worldwide
Radio Stations
200+
101-200
51-100
11-51
1-10
13 Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual Report
It’s great to hear about the good 
and inspirational work you are 
doing, about Indigenous Peoples 
issues, especially rights and land 
issues.” 
LIKORO NICO MASHESHE (SAN), IRR PROGRAM
LISTENER IN NAMIBIA
14
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual ReportOver the past 3 years, 91 recommendations made by Cultural Survival regarding the 
implementation of the rights of Indigenous Peoples were accepted or noted by States. 
Universal Periodic Review Reports (UPR) submitted:
MARCH 2017: IN JUNE 2017: IN OCTOBER 2017:
• Peru
• Gabon
• Argentina
• Japan• Mali
• Botswana• Cameroon
• Bangladesh
• Russian FederationADVOCACY
Cultural Survival’s Advocacy Program supports grassroots Indigenous 
movements as they pressure governments and corporations to protect and 
respect the rights of their communities. 
The Advocacy Program links Indigenous leaders to international human 
rights entities such as the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous 
Issues (UNPFII). 
We also facilitate constructive conversation and negotiation between 
Indigenous Peoples and companies, governments, and international actors. 
Through investigative reports on human rights violations, radio program 
production, the Cultural Survival Quarterly magazine, and virtual outlets, the 
Advocacy Program informs, educates, and raises awareness on issues of 
importance to Indigenous Peoples. 
Well-researched shadow reports and stakeholders reports for United 
Nations treaty bodies and the Universal Periodic Review shine a light on UN 
member states’ human rights records. 
In 2017, Cultural Survival submitted 18 reports on Indigenous Peoples’ rights 
violations to the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) and UN Treaty Bodies 
including Argentina, Bangladesh, Botswana, Cameroon, Gabon, Guatemala, 
Japan, Mali, Pakistan, Peru, Russia, and Ukraine. 
Over the past three years, 91 of Cultural Survival’s recommendations to 
uphold Indigenous Peoples’ rights were accepted or noted by States.
• Ukraine
• Pakistan
• Guatemala, 
individual and joint 
reportsCultural Surival staff presented on Indig -
enous community radio at the UNFPII.
THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW
Established in 2006, the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) is a mechanism under the United Nations (UN) 
Human Rights Council that serves to review the human rights records of the 193 UN member States.  This 
process holds the States accountable for their obligations to respect, protect, and fulfill human rights. 
The UPR provides an opportunity for stakeholders, including nongovernmental organizations, civil society, 
and Indigenous Peoples to submit reports on their experiences of human rights violations and for member 
States to issue recommendations to other countries based on the perspectives of these stakeholders. 
2017 marked the start of the third cycle of reviews, and was an important point of retrospection on how 
recommendations made have or have not been implemented within each country.15
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual ReportADVOCACY EVENTS HOSTED BY CULTURAL SURVIVAL
THE FOLLOWING EVENTS WERE HOSTED BY CULTURAL 
SURVIVAL AT THE UN PERMANENT FORUM ON 
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES ISSUES, TAKING PLACE APRIL-
MAY 2017, NEW YORK, NY.
Universal Periodic Review: 3rd Cycle -- Realization 
of Human Rights in Indigenous Homelands
Participants learned about the 3rd cycle of the 
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process and how 
it can aid in advocacy efforts and put pressure on 
governments to respect Indigenous Peoples’ rights.
Organizer: Hawai’i Human Rights Institute, Cultural 
Survival
Indigenous Human Rights and Environmental 
Defenders: Issues and Strategies
Indigenous leaders and activists are increasingly facing 
violence and intimidation as a result of their work 
defending human rights and their lands. Participants 
heard from some defenders as they shared their 
experiences and strategies of resilience. 
Co-sponsors: Cultural Survival, Rainforest Foundation 
US, Maya Leaders Alliance. Panelists: Cristina Coc (Maya 
Q’eqchi, Belize), Laura George (Suriname) and Ronald 
Suarez (Shipibo, Peru).
Reporting Success: How Collaborative Grantmaking 
Makes an Impact
Participants learned about new grant opportunities for 
Indigenous communities at Cultural Survival and heard 
grant success stories from the Keepers of the Earth 
Fund and the Community Media Grants Project. 
Organizer: Cultural Survival
Cristina Coc of the Maya Leaders Alliance of Belize presenting about 
the Rising Voices event on climate change at the UNPFII.Submissions to Treaty Bodies on Violations to the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW):
Argentina, October 2017
Guatemala, September 2017
Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC)
Cameroon, June 2017
Mongolia, June 2017
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)
Bangladesh, March 2017
At the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues in April, Cultural Survival met with the Canadian, Swiss, Dutch, 
Estonian, Danish, and Norwegian embassies to promote our issues for the Guatemalan UPR report focusing on 
Freedom of Expression. 
We also facilitated conversations with these embassies for the Maya Leaders Alliance to discuss their land rights 
issues.16
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual ReportRISING VOICES: PATHWAYS FROM SCIENCE TO ACTION 
In April in Boulder, Colorado, over 140 Indigenous people, scientists, policy makers, 
students, educators, community leaders, and representatives of environmental 
and conservation organizations gathered for 2 ½ days to address climate change 
mitigation strategies integrating Indigenous science and Western science. 
Over 140 participants from around the globe met to address 
climate change from an Indigenous knowledge perspective at 
the Rising Voices event in Boulder, CO.
Indigenous people have drawn on Indigenous knowledge and science for 
millennia to understand and respond to climate and environmental changes.
This knowledge is deeply embedded in our worldviews and relationship with the 
natural world, as well in our cultural practices. What is different and challenging 
today is the rate of man-made climate change and our ability to respond…We 
must correct the path we are walking on and return to the special relationships, 
the teachings, the knowledge and practice that maintain respect, honor, and 
relationship with the natural world.” 
SUZANNE BENALLY (NAVAJO/SANTA CLARA TEWA), CULTURAL SURVIVAL EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR17
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual ReportThis dialogue was a rare opportunity to bring 
these diverse players together, especially for 
including Indigenous Peoples in the discussion 
about climate change.
The resulting policy recommendations will help 
to guide symposium participants as they move 
forward strategies to move from science to action 
for climate adaptation at the local, national, and 
international levels.
The event was a collaboration between Cultural 
Survival, the National Center for Atmospheric 
Research (NCAR), Livelihoods Knowledge 
Exchange Network (LiKEN), Inter-tribal Council on 
Utility Policy (ICOUP), Indigenous People’s Climate 
Change Working Group (IPCCWG), and the 
International Indian Treaty Council.
Our knowledge is based on not only on our own genealogical 
link to the environment, but also the environment as its own 
spiritual entity, with its own rights, and that needs to be 
respected. We look at a forest as a whole, as a whole living 
entity, in a holistic way.“ 
TUI SHORTLAND (MĀORI, PICTURED ABOVE) FROM NEW ZEALAND
18
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual ReportCULTURAL SURVIVAL BAZAARS
The Cultural Survival Bazaars are a 
series of cultural festivals that provide 
Indigenous artists, cooperatives, and their 
representatives the chance to sell their 
work directly to the American public – and 
to educate the public about Indigenous 
arts, music, and cultures. 
Each event features traditional and 
contemporary crafts, artwork, clothing, 
jewelry, home goods, and accessories 
from dozens of countries. In addition, 
the Bazaars offer cultural performances, 
including live music, storytelling, craft-
making demonstrations, and the unique 
chance to talk directly with artists and 
community advocates. 
Four Bazaars (three in Massachusetts and 
one in Rhode Island) generated $393,000 
in sales for Indigenous artisans and their 
communities. 
Four artists participated in Cultural 
Survival’s inaugural, week-long Indigenous 
Artisan Institute, expanding sales 
and marketing skills. Networking with 
Indigenous community members at Plimoth 
Plantation and the Mashpee Wampanoag 
Tribe fostered exchange of cultures and 
ideas.
We are grateful that an organization 
like Cultural Survival exists and are 
thankful for the opportunities we’ve 
had for over 20 years to share a 
little about our culture with others 
and still make an honest living at 
the same time. Thank you guys, 
seriously.”
BAZAAR VENDOR, WINTER 2017 
The Bazaar has direct benefits to 
artisans because the fund[s] directly 
[go] to their famil[ies]…The other 
weaver said that he is happy to buy 
enough inventory for his business 
and happy to engage women on 
his production of scar[ve]s, shawls 
etc. The jewelry artist said she got 
money for her child for school…
[Participating in the Bazaar] has 
huge effects on every artisan’s 
home.”
BAZAAR VENDOR, SUMMER 2017Cultural Survival Indigenous Artisan Institute participants. Showcasing intricate embriodery from Kazakhstan at the Plymouth, MA Bazaar.THANK YOU TO OUR DONORS!
($500-$999)
Anonymous
Leora Barish
Nathan Octavio Berger
Susana Raquel Berger
Stephan and Judy Beyer
Carolyn Brown
Louise M. Burkhart
Mary C. Carrigan
John Coley and Rebekah Levine 
Coley
Catherine Collier
Arthur R. Corbin
Asho Craine
Carol L. EllisE. Beebe Frazer
Janet O. Frost
Helen S. Halperin
Nance Hikes
Karin Holser
Michael H. Horn
Indigenous Collaboration, Inc.
Anderson Isaacs
James Ford Bell Foundation
Katharine Wendy Larsen
Jesse W. Markow
Stephen P. Marks
Randy Muth and Patricia 
MatsonCarol Newell
Sandra J. Occhipinti
W. Kevin Pape
Denise Peine
Sean Poynter
David Rosenstein
Jane Safer
Emily Siegel
Christopher Simpson
Martha Stampfer
Terry and Mary Vogt
Randall Wade
Bertie J. Weddell
($1,000+)
The Bay and Paul Foundations
Bruce and Judith Billings
Tom L. Bird
Nancy Bonvillain
Vikki and Michael Caldwell
Mary Ann Camp
Duane Champagne
Donna L. Ching and Richard F. 
Leman
The Christensen Fund
The Community Foundation 
Serving Boulder County
Wendy Emrich
John Fries
Full Circle Fund of RSF Social 
Finance
Sarah and William Fuller
Grace Jones Richardson Trust
Laura R. Graham and T.M. 
Scruggs
William and Jeanie Graustein
Steven and Katherine Heim
Hindenburg Systems
Donald Hindley
Jean E. Jackson
Jantz Management LLC
Lesley J. KabotieLouis Kampf
John J. King
Thomas F. King
Dinah W. Larsen
Caitlin Lupton
George Martin
Anthony Maybury-Lewis and 
Chikako Kuno
Rosemary Mudd
P. Ranganath and Sandra 
Nayak
Nancy S. Nordhoff
NoVo Foundation
Paul and Edith Babson 
Foundation
The Pentera Trust
Susanna B. Place and Scott 
Stoll
Quitiplas Foundation
Jerome C. and Janet Regier
R. Eric Reuss
Barbara Rogoff
Lou Scharpf
Teresa M. and Anthony Smith
Mary Gay Sprague and William 
T. Hassler
Nancy Stetson
19 Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual ReportJessica E. Straus
Tides Foundation
James H. Tull
P. Roy Vagelos
Dan S. and Beth Whittemore
Winky Foundation
Franklin Wyman
Karen Yust
Steven Zuckerman and Paula Gorlitz
Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim (Mbororo) speaking about 
climate change in Chad.20
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual ReportSTAFF AND BOARD
Cultural Survival Board of Directors 
Sarah Fuller, President and Chair
Duane Champagne (Turtle Mountain Band 
of Chippewa), President and Chair
Steven Heim, Vice Chair
Nicole B. Friederichs, Clerk 
Jason Campbell (Spokane), Treasurer
Kaimana Barcarse (Kanaka Hawai'i)
Evelyn Erickson (Muisca)
Laura R. Graham 
Jean Jackson 
Ajb’ee Jimenez (Maya Mam)
Lesley Kabotie (Crow)
John J. King II 
Stephen Marks
Joseph Mutangah
Tui Shortland (Māori)
Stella Tamang (Tamang)
StaffSuzanne Benally (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa) , Executive Director
Mark Camp, Deputy Executive Director
Melissa Stevens, Director of Philanthropic Partnerships
Maru Chávez Fonseca,  Indigenous Rights Radio Program Manager
Jessie Cherofsky, Bazaar Program Manager
Avexnim Cojti (Maya K’iche’), Community Media Grants Project Manager and Indigenous Rights 
Radio Producer
Danielle DeLuca,  Advocacy Program Manager
Shaldon Ferris (Khoisan), Indigenous Rights Radio Producer
Sofia Flynn, Accounting and Office Manager
Nati Garcia (Maya Mam), Indigenous Community Media Youth Fellowship Coordinator
Cesar Gomez Moscut (Pocomam), Community Media Program Coordinator
Rosario Sul González (Kaqchikel), Indigenous Rights Radio Producer
Dev Kumar Sunuwar (Kumar/Sunuwar),  Community Radio Grants Project Associate
Bia’ni Madsa’ Juárez López (Mixe/Zapotec), Program Associate, Community Media and 
Indigenous Rights Radio
Jamie Malcolm-Brown, Communications and IT Manager
Katharine Norris, Bazaar and Indigenous Rights Radio Program Assistant
Teresita Orozco Mendoza, Program Associate for Community Media and Indigenous Rights Radio
Diana Pastor (Maya K’iche’), Translator
Agnes Portalewska, Communications Manager
Angelica Rao, Executive Coordinator
Jacqueline Tiller (Tlingit), Keepers of the Earth Fund Project Manager
Miranda Vitello, Development Associate
Anselmo Xunic (Kaqchikel), Community Media Program Manager
Teresita Orozco Mendoza at the opening of Radio 
Azacualpa in Intibucá, Honduras.21
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual ReportInterns and Volunteers
Grace Archambeault
Chantelle Bacigalupo
Lauren Bond
Olivia Bradley
Don Butler
Marina Chafa
Elise CzuchnaMegan Davis
Renata Del Riego
Hadley DesMeules
Nasteha Feto
Rocio Granero
Nazifa Haque
Meghan HoskinsEkaterina Kupidonova
Tracy Lai
Alena Larsen
Bruna Luniere
Kim Maida
Gabriela McBee
Zoe RimbaAna Lucia Rodriguez
Laura Seelau
Ryan Seelau
Shaina Semiatin
Jeanette Wittstein
Cheng-Chun Yu
FINANCIALS
REVENUES FY 2017
Contributions and Subscriptions $919,116
Grant Revenue $625,713
Artisan Bazaar Sales & Grants $473,563
Investment Income $128
Realized and Unrealized Gain 
(Loss) on Investments$1,691
Sales of Publications $2,468
Other Income $0 
Total Revenues  $2,022,679
EXPENSES FY 2017
Programs and Publications $1,698,475
Fundraising $184,710
General Administrative $127,390
Total Expenses  $2,010,575Revenue FY 2017
Expenses FY 2017$919,116; 
46%
$625,613; 
31%$473,563; 
23%$128; 0%
$1,691; 0% $2,468; 0%$0; 0%
Column 1Contributions and
Subscriptions
Grant Revenue
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar
Income
Investment Income
Realized and Unrealized
Gain (Loss) on Investments
Sales of Publications
Other Income
$1,695,475
85%$184,710
9%$127,390
6%Column 1
Programs and
Publications
Fundraising
General
Administrative
Artisan Bazaar Sales & 
Grants
Cultural Survival Executive Director Suzanne Benally at the Native Nations March 
in Washington, D.C. to protest the Dakota Access Pipeline. $1,698,475 $625,71322
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual ReportAdvocacy (KOEF) 
$113,730; 7%
Environmental 
Convenings
$98,293; 5%
Community Media 
$341,683; 20%
Indigenous Rights Radio 
$181,453; 10%Artisan Bazaar 
$556,343; 31%Special Projects 
$37,889; 2 %Publications , 
Communications, and 
Public Education 
$280,710; 10%Column1
Advocacy (KOEF)
Environmental Convenings
Community Media
Indigenous Rights Radio
Artisan Bazaar
Special Projects
Publications, Communications, and
Public EducationPROGRAM EXPENSES:
Thirty women from 11 different Indigenous communities convened for a radio journalism training in 
Kathmandu, Nepal, led by Cultural Survival, Radio Namobuddha, and Indigenous Media Foundation.$385,983; 23%
$ 225,527; 13%6%7%
16%
2%
33%23
Cultural Survival //  2017 Annual Report
IN MEMORIAM:
Enjoying a summer afternoon with the families of Cultural Survival Bazaar artists (L-R): Lisa Henries, Veronica Domingo (Shona), 
Sarah Fuller, Bernard Domingo (Shona), Wendy Larsen. Bottom row: Danae Laura, Cultural Survival Bazaar program manager. 
With great sadness, we mourn the loss of Sarah 
W. Fuller, Chair of Cultural Survival’s Board of 
Directors who passed away on October 29, 
2017. 
Since joining Cultural Survival’s Board in 
1997, Sarah was a stalwart champion and a 
generous benefactor. She spoke often of her 
deep commitment to Cultural Survival and of 
her admiration for our co-founders’ work with 
Indigenous Peoples.
Sarah’s passing is felt both professionally and 
personally by Cultural Survival’s Board and staff 
who benefitted from her leadership.
“Sarah was a great visionary and leader. Her 
dedication to Cultural Survival was reflected 
throughout her service on our Board and in her 
philanthropic generosity. It was my honor to work 
with Sarah and I will miss her presence. Sarah is beautifully woven into the tapestry of Cultural 
Survival, the fabric that give us strength and 
resilience. In Navajo, Ahéhee’ (with appreciation),”  
said Suzanne Benally, Cultural Survival’s 
Executive Director.
“Sarah became a board member a few months 
before I joined the staff,” recalled Mark Camp, 
Cultural Survival’s Deputy Executive Director, 
“She was a key partner in growing Cultural Survival. 
In 20 years, we went from five staff members in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, to 20 staff in seven 
countries. She will be deeply missed. It is a huge loss 
for our community.”
Sarah was a pioneer and inspiration for women 
in business and led an impressive career in the 
health care data research field. 
Our hearts and prayers go out to her husband 
and family.24
Cultural Survival // 2017 Annual Report
$166,000 in Community Media Grants awarded for2017 IN NUMBERS 
COMMUNITY MEDIA PROGRAM: 
18projects in Guatemala, Honduras, Kenya, Nepal, Nicaragua, 
Panama, and Peru
167 Indigenous women gained skills in radio production and journalism
INDIGENOUS 
RIGHTS RADIO:
 155155 radio programs produced 
KEEPERS 
OF THE 
EARTH 
FUND: 
14grants awarded totaling 
$64,142for Free, Prior and Informed 
Consent strategies and for Self-
Governance strategies
ADVOCACY:
18reports submitted to the United Nations Universal Periodic Review and 
Treaty Bodies documenting violations of Indigenous Peoples’ rights 
91recommendations accepted or noted by governments regarding 
implementation of the rights of Indigenous Peoples within their 
countries over the past three years