Promoting the Rights, Voices, and Visions of the World’s Indigenous PeoplesCultural     SurvivalANNUAL REPORT 2007or Cultural Survival, 2007 was a year of fulfilled dreams, ground-breaking new 
ventures, challenging confrontations, and heartfelt loss.
Fulfilled Dreams
For 25 years, Cultural Survival labored to win United Nations adoption of the Declarationon the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. On September 13, 2007, the hopes and dreams ofindigenous peoples worldwide became a reality when the UN General Assembly adopteda visionary text that sets the global standard for how governments must treat indigenouspeoples.
The declaration pronounces that indigenous peoples have rights to keep their tradition-
al lands and resources; to give their free, prior, and informed consent before govern-ments take actions that negatively affect them; to be free from genocide and forcedrelocation; and to keep their languages, cultures, and spiritual beliefs. As CulturalSurvival board member Les Malezer (Native Australian of the Gabi Gabi community) stat-ed after the vote, "The declaration gives indigenous peoples the platform for addressingthe continuing abuses of human rights against indigenous peoples and for shaping afuture where it can be realized that all peoples are truly equal." While the declarationreceived overwhelming support from the member states of the United Nations, fourcountries voted against it: Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the United States.United Nations human rights bodies have since called upon these countries, which havehuge indigenous populations, to recognize and conform their conduct to the declaration.One of Cultural Survival's challenges in the coming years will be to keep the pressure onthem to do so.
Ground-breaking New Ventures
In the spring of 2007, Cultural Survival inaugerated a campaign to revitalize over 100critically endangered Native American languages before they are lost forever. As CulturalSurvival board member Richard Grounds (Euchee) puts it, "The loss of Native Americanlanguages is the most critical issue facing Indian Country today." To address this problem,Cultural Survival and Native American partners forged a coalition to educate tribal gov-ernments, foundations, and corporations and businesses that employ or serve NativeAmericans about the problem and to enlist their support. Our shared goal is to providefinancial support and technical assistance to Native American language immersionschools and other language-learning programs. As an initial campaign activity, we dedi-cated an issue of the Cultural Survival Quarterly to language revitalization. In addition,
Cultural Survival took part in Native American-led efforts to persuade the US Congress tofund legislation that would provide federal support for Native American language immer-sion programs. We also submitted testimony to the Senate on how Native American chil-dren who are immersed in their languages out-perform their peers in school.
CULTURAL SURVIVALMessage From The Executive Director
FANNUAL REPORT2007
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2-3 M ESSAGE FROM THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
4-7 P ROGRAMS & ACTIVITIES
8-9 P UBLICATIONS & M EMBERSHIP
10 B AZAARS
11 I NTERN PROGRAM
12-13 B OARD OF DIRECTORS
14-15 P ROGRAM COUNCIL
16 S TAFF
17 S UPPORTERS
18 F INANCIAL REPORT
19 I NDIGENOUS RIGHTS IN ACTION
PHOTOS
Cover: Jeanice Brown with granddaughter
Shawbawba during a Euchee language class inOklahoma.  © Mark CherringtonPage 4 : © Jamie BrownPage 5 : © Matt EnglishPage 6 : © Mark CherringtonPage 7 : © Mark Cherrington
Page 10 : © Agnes Portalewska
Page 11 : © Evelyn SandersPage 15 : © Jamie BrownPage 19 : © Jamie Brown 
This report covers the period from 
September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007.
Copyright © 2008 Cultural Survival, Inc
www.cs.org
In December 2007, we hired Jennifer Weston (Lakota), a language advocate with a strong media background, to serve
as campaign coordinator for the coalition, which is gearing up for a host of educational, public relations, and fundraising activities in 2008—the United Nations' International Year of the World's Languages.
Challenging Confrontations 
In the fall of 2007, Cultural Survival became involved in another new effort: helping to protect the rights of the Ngobepeople of western Panama, whose lands, communities, and way of life are threatened by a government-sponsoredhydroelectric dam. The dam, which is being constructed by an affiliate of the Virginia-based energy giant AESCorporation, will inundate four Ngobe villages and the farmlands of thousands of other Ngobe, but the Ngobe were notincluded in the decision-making process. Instead, in an effort build the dam quickly, Panamanian officials sidesteppedlegal requirements, and the company used coersion, bribes, and harassment to trick individual Ngobe into relinquish-ing community-owned lands. In affiliation with the Alliance for Conservation and Development, a Panama-based NGO,Cultural Survival has been monitoring the situation; sent delegations to meet with the Ngobe and educate them abouttheir rights; launched letter-writing and fund-raising drives; attempted to engage the government through Panama'scourts and the company through its corporate headquarters; and submitted a petition to the Inter-AmericanCommission on Human Rights. 
Heartfelt Loss
In November, Cultural Survival lost our inspirational and charismatic co-founder, David Maybury-Lewis. David and hiswife, Pia Maybury-Lewis, launched Cultural Survival in 1972 in response to the dire effects of development on theindigenous inhabitants of Amazonian and South African hinterlands. From the beginning, Cultural Survival's mission wasto protect indigenous peoples from violations of their human rights and enable them to maintain their cultures, lands,and capacities to make choices about the impact development would have upon them. David's vision has withstood thetest of time. Over the decades, while our indigenous partners and strategies have shifted in response to changing cir-cumstances, the core mission has remained the same. David Maybury-Lewis was highly regarded among anthropolo-gists and on the Harvard campus where he taught for more than 30 years as a scholar, teacher, and mentor. But he wasmost esteemed for his commitment to making a positive difference in the lives of indigenous peoples. As BretGustafson, a former student and now anthropology professor at Washington University put it: "David went beyond juststudying people to actually doing something to change the conditions in which they lived. Anyone who had basic humandecency working in Brazil [in the 1960s] would have realized the incredible injustices that were going on toward nativepeoples, but a lot of people in his position would not have acted. David went beyond what most other academics weredoing at the time—far beyond." 
The Path Ahead
Cultural Survival is David Maybury-Lewis' legacy. As we forge ahead on behalf of the Ngobe, the Native American com-munities whose languages are on the verge of being lost, our Guatemala Radio partners, and with our efforts to edu-cate everyone—from grassroots indigenous organizations to the reading public to senior government officials workingat the United Nations—about the rights and concerns of the world's 350 million indigenous peoples, we hold David inour hearts, and draw on his courage to persevere. 
Ellen L. Lutz, Executive Director
ANNUAL REPORT 20073
Guatemala Radio Project Accomplishments in 2007
Content production: In March, we hired Cesar Gomez Moscut, a bilingual (Pokomam Mayan and Spanish) student in
communications at the University of San Carlos as the Content Coordinator, . This year we produced and aired 80episodes of educational programming— Coffee Talk, Salud y Vida, and Aura Marina —on 140 stations reaching 1.14 mil-
lion people. To listen to the programs go to www.culturalsurvival.org/programs/grp/media.cfm. 
Training Volunteers :Funded by the New England Biolabs Foundation, the Radio Drama Master Course trained 36 com-
munity radio volunteers to conceptualize and realize solid, professional programming to air on local community radiostations. These volunteers are now applying their learning and are collectively creating a new radio drama from theground up to be aired on all 140 community radio stations.
WI-FI : We started to implement the second stage of our wireless network experiment, which will eventually allow all
140 community radio stations to share information and program content electronically (it now has to be hand-carriedon a disk). In the first stage of the experiment, Program Director Mark Camp and Rosendo Pablo Ramirez, director ofRadio Qman Txun in Todos Santos Cuchumatan, installed Meraki broadband wireless antennas on the roof of an inter-net café located in the center of town and at the community radio station half a kilometer away. According to the plandesigned by Nathan Felde and the Cultural Survival Technology Committee, Rosendo will install Meraki antennas atthree additional stations to further test the viability of the plan. If it 
succeeds at that scale, it will be rolled out to
all the stations.PROMOTING INDIGENOUS VOICES IN GUATEMALA
The Guatemala Community Radio Project is predicat-ed on a bold idea: Indigenous peoples do not have tobe assimilated in order to better their situation.Theycan retain their culture andfully participate in the
nation state. Local radio stations promote indigenousmusic, language, and culture, and provide indigenouspeoples with information about their rights and obli-gations in their own languages. Cultural Survival isworking with a consortium of 140 community radiostations in Guatemala. We help them become finan-cially self-sufficient, improve and share their broad-cast content, and provide technical expertise. 
4CULTURAL SURVIVALPROGRAMS
Radio San Pedro volunteer Hugo Diego Tuch doing a field 
interview in San Pedro la Laguna, Guatemala.5ANNUAL REPORT 2007Monitoring and Evaluating Results: A pilot survey
of 11 stations was performed in August 2007. Surveyteams consisted of one volunteer from a communi-ty radio station, one Guatemalan communicationsstudent or professional, and one internationalobserver. Teams collected information about eachstation's broadcast schedule, income, expenses,volunteer skill levels, and equipment. A completesurvey of all stations will be conducted in January2008.
Underwriting: The programs being developed by
the project that provide essential information toindigenous listeners are made possible by under-writing. Dean's Beans Organic Coffee of Orange,Massachusetts, sponsors the program "Coffee Talk."This show tells indigenous audiences how to groworganic coffee and how to most effectively partici-pate in the fair trade system. It provides an under-standing of the local and international price of cof-fee, the influence of coffee production on the localcommunity, the organization of coffee productioninto local co-ops or associations, and the commer-cialization of coffee. 
Thanks to support from the Sociedad San Martin de
Porres of Houston, Texas, we are broadcasting med-ical interviews on the program "Life and Health" aswell as health-related episodes of the radionovela
“Aura Marina." A community radio volunteer for LaNiña FM says, "[The audience] loves the [health]programming. It puts health into the hands of thepeople." Many Guatemalans do not have othermeans of obtaining medical information and advice.The program has already covered a range of locallyrelevant subjects, including ear infections, aller-gies, gallstones, and varicose veins and blood circu-lation.
“Our parents taught us that the man isdominant at home, but working at theradio doing a program on humanrights, I learned that everyone isequal. People would call to thank mefor saying this. It’s something that wedon’t hear or learn elsewhere, but it’strue. Men and women both have thesame rights. The lack of gender equal-ity is an important issue here and theradio is helping to change people’sattitudes. It changed my family. 
—Jorge Luis Subuyaj, Radio Ixchel volunteer,Sumpango
Rosendo Pablo Ramirez (second from right)with Radio Qman
Txum volunteers in Todos Santos Cuchumatan, Guatemala. In 2007, Cultural Survival forged a coalition of Native American-led organizations to raise awareness about the
critical need to stem the rapid loss of Native American languages over the next decade. In June, we convened anational gathering of Native American leaders, public-relations specialists, tribal—language practitioners, andfoundation officers on the Sac and Fox reservation in Stroud, Oklahoma, to coordinate campaign activities. Inaddition, we produced a special issue of Cultural Survival Quarterly that addresses the need to revitalize endan-
gered Native American languages. This issue, titled "The Last Word," received rave reviews throughout IndianCountry and has proved to be a critical initial tool in the coalition's awareness-raising efforts. 
At Senate hearings on the reauthorization of No Child Left Behind legislation, Cultural Survival submitted writ-
ten testimony appealing for federal funds to support native language learning opportunities—in particular,immersion programs—and distributed copies of "The Last Word." The National Indian Education Association (NIEA)and the National Alliance to Save Native Languages emphasized in their own testimony that the legislation hasindeed left Native American children behind, and urged the Senate to incorporate a much-expanded version ofthe Esther Martinez Native American Languages Preservation Act into the reauthorization. Under the leadershipof the Alliance and NIEA, Cultural Survival pressed hard for a $4 million appropriation for the Esther Martinez Actto be included in the Labor, Health, Human Services and Education budget. After a presidential veto of the budg-et in December, NIEA, the Alliance, the National Congress of American Indians, and Cultural Survival jointly senta letter and a copy of "The Last Word" to members of Congress, thanking them for their past support and appeal-ing for their support in the next round of budgeting. 
Finally, after a national search, Cultural Survival hired Jennifer Weston to be campaign coordinator for the pro-
gram. Weston, a Lakota, will serve as a liaison with partners, spearhead collaborative public relations andfundraising efforts, and implement plans for a campaign website that will serve the long-term communicationand curricular needs of language revitalization instructors and advocates. PROGRAMS
6CULTURAL SURVIVALENDANGERED NATIVEAMERICAN LANGUAGE CAMPAIGN
“The reality is that our tribal languages have become like
the handful of speakers that carry them: old and frail.Without decisive action they will not be with us muchlonger. The loss to a tribal community and to the worldwhen a language dies is beyond measure. Entire systemsof thought, belief, and practice become permanentlyremoved from the storehouse of human knowledge.”
—Jacob Manatowa-Bailey, director of the Sauk Language Program, OK
MOWA Choctaw Students at the Boykin
School Elementary School in McIntosh, OKLobbying for the Passage of UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: For 25 years, Cultural Survival
has pressed for UN adoption of this important international human rights instrument. This year marked the "endgame" of the process, and we were as active as ever. Cultural Survival Board and Program Council member LesMalezer led the global indigenous lobbying effort for the declaration's adoption and Cultural Survival backed hisefforts by preparing a special issue of our newsletter Voices , in four languages, for widespread dissemination to
UN delegations in New York and Geneva, regional and national lobbying campaigns, and grassroots initiatives. Weconducted letter-writing campaigns, lobbied country representatives to the UN, and manufactured the tee-shirtthat became the identifying trademark for the campaign. 
Universal Periodic Review: The United Nation's newly constituted Human Rights Council is evaluating the human
rights performance of every country in the world on a periodic basis. To be sure that indigenous rights areaddressed in these evaluations, Cultural Survival began producing reports on the human rights practices ofcountries under review. In the spring of 2007, Executive Director Ellen Lutz and Program Council memberTheodore Macdonald devoted time to training Harvard College Student Advocates for Human Rights on how toproduce reports for the Human Rights Council. Using the benchmark created by the newly adopted UNDeclaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the students gather information from indigenous colleagues andpartners in selected countries scheduled for review and prepare reports on how well the government isprotecting indigenous peoples' human rights. Each report recommends steps the government needs to take toensure that indigenous peoples' rights are respected. So far, we have produced reports on Ecuador, Morocco,South Africa, Guatemala, and Japan.
Totem Peoples Project: The Totem Peoples Project's long-term lobbying efforts paid off in a new government
program to support the Dukha reindeer herders in Mongolia. The Program to Improve the Life Standards of theReindeer Herding Citizens and Reindeer Farming is a three-year,$300,000 commitment that will provide veterinary support for theDukha's reindeer herds, veterinary training for the Dukha, and financialand technical aid for reindeer husbandry. The Dukha will also receivedirect access to medical checkups and to medical education. Theprogram will also fund education in the Tyvan language and will supportthe Dukha in developing craft trading and cultural tourism. 
The program is the direct result of the Totem Project's four-year
lobbying effort, which involved project director Dan Plumleycoordinating delegations of Dukha from their remote territory to thecapital to meet with government ministers. The Dukha sent the four-person delegations twice a year, to keep the issues in front ofpoliticians. The delegations explained their people’s circumstances anddemanded that the government provide them with the same kinds ofsupport that other Mongolians enjoy. Their consistent pressure was thekey to the establishment of the new program.
7ANNUAL REPORT 2007
OTHERCULTURAL SURVIVAL ACTIVITIES AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Dukha family with their reindeer herd in
Mongolia. 8CULTURAL SURVIVALCultural Survival Quarterly 
The winter issue of the Cultural Survival Quarterly , which focused on indigenous lands and
resources across Latin America, inspired the Ngobe and Naso people of Panama to take action toprotest hydroelectric dams being built on their territory. When Cultural Survival Executive DirectorEllen Lutz showed them the issue, they learned that indigenous communities throughout thehemisphere had stood up to threats when their lands were threatened. This gave them the courageto confront their own government through dialogue and peaceful protest, and to take legal actionin Panama's Supreme Court and before the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights.
The spring issue of the Cultural Survival Quarterly focused on the UN Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, which was facing massive challenges in the UN General Assembly. The issuelaid out all the reasons why the declaration was essential to indigenous people and why it oughtto be supported. The publication's thematic contents were compiled in a separate booklet thatwas distributed to General Assembly member states and was the principal lobbying tool for theIndigenous Peoples’ Caucus. With the help of that publication, the caucus successfully lobbied fora near-unanimous adoption of the declaration in September.
The summer issue of the Cultural Survival Quarterly , which focused on critically endangered
Native American languages, represented the foundational document of Cultural Survival'sEndangered Native American Languages Program. It was distributed to tribes, supporters, andpotential funders, as well as members of Congress and will serve as an important campaign toolin the coming years. 
The fall issue of the Cultural Survival Quarterly focused on reparations for indigenous peoples.The
destructive effects of racism extend for generations, even centuries. To stop discrimination in itstracks, those individuals and governments with the highest moral authority must consistentlyrecognize it, condemn it, create mechanisms for redress, and affirm the supreme importance ofmulti-ethnic, multicultural, multilingual societies that respect the rights of indigenous peoples. PUBLICATIONS
Cultural    Surviva
World Report on the Rights, Voices and Visions of Indigenous PeopQ  U   A R  T E  R L Y
VOLUME 31 I SSUE1 US $5/CAN $Cultural    Surviva
In 2007, Cultural Survival Quarterly magazine was
nominated for the 19th annual Utne Independent PressAwards in the International Coverage category. Othernominees included Colors, Foreign Policy, Middle East
Report, NACLA Report on the Americas, NewInternationalist, Peace Review, andProspect. ANNUAL REPORT 20079MEMBERSHIP
Cultural Survival's members continued to be the organization's greatest single source of support, pro-
viding more than half of our annual income. This year, 935 new members joined Cultural Survival, anumber that almost equaled the combined total of the previous two years. Three hundred of thesemembers signed up at Cultural Survival Bazaars. As in past years, our members come from many coun-tries and a vast variety of backgrounds, but they share a passion for the rights of indigenous peoples. Cultural Survival Voices
The spring issue of Cultural Survival Voices , our
semiannual newspaper for indigenous readers, echoedthe Cultural Survival Quarterly by focusing on the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, andwas a key tool in indigenous peoples' lobbying effort toget the United Nations to adopt the declaration. Forthe summer issue, we switched from our traditionalpaper format to an online version, which let us reachfar more indigenous communities. In addition, wetailored the content of each of the four languageeditions (English, Spanish, French, and Russian) to theregion where that language is most widely spoken.
Cultural Survival Website
The publications team also tackled a major overhaulof the Cultural Survival website. Through the summerand into the fall, the team analyzed the site's visitorand use statistics, looking for ways to improve itseffectiveness as an advocacy and fund-raising tool.The fruits of that work will appear in a completelyrestructured and redesigned website in 2008.
Indigenous logo used as an advocacy tool to 
persuade governments to adopt the UN Declarationon the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 10In 2007, the Cultural Survival Bazaar program celebrated its 29th year of bringing indigenous arts and crafts,
music, and food to the New England public. Over those 29 years, the bazaars have funded indigenous artisansand fair trade in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. Money raised from previous bazaars has supported a wide vari-ety of important nonprofit work worldwide, including education and microfinance in Uganda, literacy projectsin Mexico, land and forest conservation in several countries, language training and economic development forTibetan refugees, and the building of a school in northern Ersari region of Afghanistan that strongly encouragesfemale attendance free of tuition. 
In 2007, Cultural Survival held seven bazaars, in Amherst, Stockbridge, Provincetown, Cambridge, and Boston,
Massachusetts, and in Tiverton, Rhode Island, and Portland, Maine. The bazaars raised over $348,000 for indige-nous artisans and fair traders who work with indigenous peoples, and brought in a net income of $46,859 toCultural Survival for operating support. The bazaars also attracted 334 new members to Cultural Survival andgenerated significant publicity for indigenous peoples and Cultural Survival. Television crews covered thebazaars for local stations, and radio stations promoted the events through public service announcements. CULTURAL SURVIVAL BAZAARS
Visiting artist Paula Sanchez from Oaxaca, Mexico, Navajo/Maori Duo Indigie Femme performing in Tiverton,
Rhode Island, jewelry from Tibet.  
CULTURAL SURVIVALANNUAL REPORT 200711"Volunteering at Cultural Survival allowed
me to be much more involved in theorganization than other internships wouldhave. I was able to work in Boston all sum-mer and then traveled to Guatemala tovisit community radio stations. The experi-ence inspired my senior thesis.” 
—Evelyn Sanders, Cultural Survival intern, summer 2007
Cultural Survival's work could not be accomplished with-
out our interns. Interns are involved in all areas of theorganization's work and play a vital role in day-to-dayoperations at Cultural Survival. This year we hosted 21interns from universities in the Boston area and aroundthe country.
Guatemala Radio Project: Interns assisted in evaluating espisodes of all radio programs, helped
write quarterly newsletters and reports, set up speaking engagements about the project, and coor-dinated logistics for our monitoring and evaluation survey. 
Fundraising and Events : Interns contributed to the success of our expanded bazaars program by edu-
cating the public about indigenous issues and fair trade, setting up and breaking down the bazaars,maintaining security, encouraging attendees to join Cultural Survival, assisting vendors and perform-ers, selling rugs and crafts, handing out flyers, and directing traffic. Fundraising interns also con-ducted research and helped write grant proposals and reports to donors.
Publications and Research: Interns wrote or contributed to articles that were published in the
Cultural Survival Quarterly and wrote features and urgent appeals for the website. 
“My experiences with Cultural Survival have opened my eyes to the struggles faced by indige-
nous groups around the world, and the understanding and dedication it takes to fight the injus-tices. I was touched and impressed by the devoted people I had the opportunity to work with.In today's society, it is easy to be swept away by the superficial satisfaction of consumerism,so I consider myself lucky to have had the chance to share experiences with an organizationwith a conscious."
—Amanda Kajen, Cultural Survival intern, summer 2007INTERN PROGRAM
Evelyn Sanders (far left) with radio volunteers conducting a
pilot monitoring survey at Radio Juventud, Guatemala. Cultural Survival is governed by a board of directors that serves as the organization's legal
accountability mechanism and bears all the responsibilities of boards of directors in the United Statesand in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The board works through committees, including anExecutive Committee, Finance Committee, Fundraising Committee, and Nominating Committee.
A unique feature of our board is our Program Council, a board committee predominantly made up of
indigenous board members who possess the knowledge, experience, and skills to assist the organizationto evaluate current programs, set policy on complex program-related issues, and identify potential newprograms and opportunities for growth.GOVERNANCE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
PRESIDENT AND CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARDP. Ranganath Nayak is the chief executive officer of Cytel Software. He has more than 24 years of senior-level man-
agement experience in technology and management consulting, and holds a doctorate in mechanical engineeringfrom the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
FOUNDING PRESIDENT
David Maybury-Lewis , a retired professor of anthropology at Harvard University, co-founded Cultural Survival in 1972
with his wife, Pia. He received his doctorate in anthropology from Oxford University.
TREASURER
Sarah Fuller is the president of Decision Resources, Inc., an international publishing and consulting firm. She previ-
ously served as vice president of Arthur D. Little, Inc., and president of Arthur D. Little Decision Resources. 
CLERK
Lester J. Fagen is a partner in the Boston-based law firm Goulston and Storrs, PC. He advises both nonprofits and
for profit businesses and has served on the boards of several cultural organizations. He received his law degree fromColumbia University.
ASSISTANT CLERK
Jean Jackson chairs the Department of Anthropology at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Her books, articles,
and teaching focus on medical anthropology, social and ethnic identity, gender issues, and indigenous mobilizationin Colombia. She received her doctorate in anthropology from Stanford University.
12CULTURAL SURVIVALBOARD OF DIRECTORS (continued)
Elizabeth Cabot has taught English literature and composition at Boston University, Stonehill College, and the
University of Massachusetts-Boston. She currently teaches English as a second language to adults. She holds aPh.D. from Boston University. 
Westy A. Egmont was the president of the International Institute of Boston for nine years. He previously served
as the director of the Greater Boston Food Bank and hosted and produced a public television program. He holds a doctorate of divinity from Andover Newton Theological School.
Richard Grounds , Euchee, directs the Euchee Language Project, in which Euchee-speaking elders teach Euchee
to community leaders and youth, and is an internationally-recognized advocate for endangered NativeAmerican language revitalization. He received his doctorate in theology from Princeton University.
James Howe is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A specialist on the
Kuna of Panama, his research focuses on political and historical anthropology, indigenous-state relations, andthe impact of missionaries. He received his doctorate in anthropology from the University of Pennsylvania.
Cecilia Lenk is vice president of information technology for Decision Resources. She has developed numerous
national and international Internet initiatives in the areas of science, health, and science education. Shereceived her doctorate in biology at Harvard University.
Pia Maybury-Lewis is a co-founder of Cultural Survival. She served on the staff and managed the intern and
bazaar programs until her retirement in 2006.
Les Malezer , Native Australian of the Gabi Gabi Community, is the general manager for the Foundation for
Aboriginal and Islander Research Action (FAIRA) based in Woolloongabba, Australia. He serves as chairpersonfor the international Indigenous Peoples’ Caucus and was instrumental in lobbying governments to support theUnited Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Sally Engle Merry is a professor of anthropology and law at New York University. Her work explores the role of
law in urban life in the United States, in the colonizing process, and in contemporary transnationalism. Shereceived her doctorate in anthropology from Brandeis University.
Vincent O. Nmehielle , Ikwerre from the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, is an associate professor of law at the
University of Witwatersrand School of Law, Johannesburg, South Africa. In 2007 he was on leave while servingas the principal defender of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. He holds a doctorate in international and com-parative law from George Washington University.
ANNUAL REPORT 200713
BOARD OF DIRECTORS (continued)
Ramona Peters (Nosapocket of the Bear Clan), Mashpee Wampanoag; is an internationally known artist who has
revived her tribes traditional pottery-making techniques. She is a visual historian of her culture, fulfilling this rolethrough various undertakings as a teacher, spokesperson, curator, interpreter, consultant, and indigenous rightsactivist. 
Dinah Shelton holds the Manatt/Ahn Professorship in International Law at George Washington University Law
School. She previously at the University of Notre Dame Law School. She also serves as a legal consultant to theUnited Nations Environment Programme, UNITAR, World Health Organization, European Union, Council of Europe,and Organization of American States. 
Stella Tamang , Tamang from Nepal, was chair of the International Indigenous Womens Caucus at the third session
of the U.N. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, is the chair of the South Asia Indigenous Womens Forum, and isan advisor of Nepal Tamang Women Ghedung. She founded Bikalpa Gyan Kendra in Nepal to contribute to students’education and livelihood by combining academic learning with practical training.
Victoria Tauli-Corpuz , Kankana-ey Igorot from the Cordillera region of the Philippines, is executive director of the
Tebtebba Foundation. She is the chairperson of the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, chair-person-rapporteur of the Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations, convener of the Asian Indigenous Women’sNetwork, and commissioner for the International Labor Organization World Commission on the Social Dimension ofGlobalization
Martha Claire Tompkins serves as the principal of a personal investment management and acquisitions fund in
Houston, Texas. She has a degree from Sarah Lawrence College and studied with David Maybury-Lewis at HarvardUniversity.
Jeff Wallace is founder of North Star Management, a firm that manages and develops commercial buildings in
Boston. He holds a degree from Huxley College of Environmental Studies in Bellingham, WA. Before founding hiscompany he worked for a venture capital firm and for an architect/developer. 
Chris Walter is the founder and president of Yayla Tribal Rugs, Inc., and the founder of Barakat, Inc., a nonprofit
corporation that benefits weaving communities and environmental protection in Asia. He is the founder and coor-dinator of Cultural Survival’s Ersari Project, which builds schools in the Northern Ersari region of Afghanistan. 
Rosita Worl , Tlingit, is a member of the Thunderbird Clan and House Lowered from the Sun of Klukwan, Alaska,
and a Child of the Sockeye Clan. She currently holds a joint appointment as an assistant professor of anthropologyat the University of Alaska Southeast and president of the Sealaska Heritage Institute. She earned a master of sci-ence degree and a doctoral degree in anthropology from Harvard University. She is an elected member of the boardof the Sealaska Corporation.
14CULTURAL SURVIVALRichard Grounds 
James Howe Jean JacksonLes Malezer Vincent O. Nmehielle Ramona Peters Stella TamangVictoria Tauli-Corpuz Rosita Worl 
Theodore Macdonald, Jr., Cultural Survival’s former program director, teach-
es anthropology and human rights at Harvard University. He specializes inindigenous peoples of the Andes and Central America, and on human rights,development, and local responses to induced social and environmental changeand ethnic conflict. He holds a doctorate in anthropology from the Universityof Illinois.
Mirian Masaquiza , a Kichwa from Salasaca, Ecuador, is a member of the
Confederacion Nacional de Organizaciones Campesinas, Indígenas, y Negras(Confederation of Indigenous Peoples, Afro-Ecuadorians and RuralOrganizations, FENOCIN). She is the associate social affairs officer for theSecretariat of the U.N. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. 
15ANNUAL REPORT 2007
PROGRAM COUNCIL
Members of Cultural
Survival’s ProgramCouncil (from left toright): RichardGrounds, RamonaPeters, Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, Les Malezer,Stella Tamang,Vincent Nmehielle
16CULTURAL SURVIVALJamie Brown, Graphic Design and IT Specialist
Mark Camp, Director of OperationsMark Cherrington, Director of PublicationsCesar Gomez Moscut (Pocomam), Guatemala Radio Project CoordinatorDavid Michael Favreau, Event and Membership AssociateSofia Flynn, Financial OfficerEllen L. Lutz, Executive DirectorAgnes Portalewska, Program OfficerJennifer Weston (Lakota), Endangered Languages Campaign Coordinator STAFFFoundations, Corporations, and
Organizations
Ameriprise Financial
AnonymousThe Bay and Paul FoundationThe Boston FoundationBoston Properties, LPThe Christensen FundCottonwood FoundationDean's Beans Organic Coffee Co.First Nations Development InstituteThe Ford FoundationGoulston and Storrs, PC.Grace Jones Richardson TrustGrotto FoundationHeadwaters Fund (Charlotte 
Forsythe Fund)
Institute of International 
Education
Joseph Rosen FoundationThe Merrill Family Charitable 
Trust
Mildred M. Simmons Charitable  
Trust
The New England Biolabs 
Foundation
Paul and Virginia Cabot Charitable  
Trust
Penguin WindowsLa Sociedad de San Martin De PorresWinky FoundationWorldiscBenefactors*
Rosamond W. Allen
Loren AmelangGary BaileyTom BirdLisa D. BrooksElizabeth CabotMark CampJohn J. CarverAsho CraineWilliam H. CrockerWilliam E. CrawfordDean E. CyconChris DonahueWesty EgmontElizabeth EndicottEstate of Margaret E. MulacLester J. FagenBarbara FelittiDean and Sheryl FosterLouis FoxSarah FullerWilliam and Jeanie GrausteinWalter W. HainesKarin HolserJames HoweJean E. JacksonThomas F . KingLouise LamphereRobert M. LaughlinRichard F . LemanCecilia LenkPia Maybury-LewisMatthew LindholmEllen L. LutzPatricia J. LyonJesse Markow
Kerry C. McgrathBruce P . MerrillAnn MerrittSally E. MerryP . Ranganath NayakJill E. NewhouseNancy S. NordhoffJohn W. PhillipsSusanna B. PlaceJerome RegierBarbara RogoffDavid RosensteinJohn RuessmannTom SargentMaria SauzierDan ScheibThayer ScudderPeter L. SheldonWilliam SkinnerKristina L. Simmons and 
Michael Sheridan
Teresa M. SmithMary Gay SpragueCynthia H. SunderlandChangmo SungMartha Claire TompkinsCharles VerharenKirsten WaerstadJohn WalkerJeff WallaceChristopher WalterPhilip D. YoungSuzan Zacharski
SUPPORTERS
* Donors who gave $500+
ANNUAL REPORT 20071718CULTURAL SURVIVALProgram
EducationFund RaisingGeneral AdministrationPublications
Total$604,833
$15,419
$108,640
$82,762
$376,300
$1,187,95451%
1%9%7%
32%FISCALYEAR2007
Expenses
Education1%
Fund Raising
9%
General
Administration7%
Program
51%
Publications
32%
AuditedGeneral Contributions 
and Subscriptions
Assets Released from
Restrictions
Assets Released from
Restrictions in Prior Year
Interest and Other IncomeGrant RevenueBazaars and Events (net)Publishing
Total$652,336
$14,089
$263,510
$63,321$82,801$85,430$17,946
$1,179,43356%
1%
22%
5%7%7%2%FINANCIAL REPORT
FISCALYEAR2007
Income
Interest & Other Income 5%Assets Released from
Restrictions in Prior Year22%
Publishing 
2%General Contributions 
& Subscriptions56%
Bazaars & Events (net)
7%
Audited (Modified)Grant Revenue7%Assets Released from
Restrictions 1%ANNUAL REPORT 200719From Maasailand, Kenya, to New England: In
November 2006, Cultural Survival once againhosted SIMOO (SIMBA MAASAI OUTREACHORGANIZATION) for a regional educational tour.Jane Naserian Kamuasi and John Lemeloi OleSakuda visited schools and universities inAmherst, Brockton, Charlemont, Dorchester,Duxbury, Methuen, Newton, Roxbury, Topsfield,Walpole, Wellesley, and Worcester,Massachusetts. They taught students from firstgrade through graduate school about Maasaiculture, traditions, rites of passage, and ways toresolve conflicts. Their presentation on peacebuilding held special meaning for Boston Dayand Evening Academy students—inner city youthwho struggle with poverty, homelessness, andthe juvenile justice system. SIMOO broughthome $16,000 from speaking fees to build watertanks and pipelines, pay for scholarships, andfund the Maa Civil Society Forum's work forMaasai land rights in Kenya. INDIGENOUS RIGHTS IN ACTION
Jane Naserian Kamuasi and John Lemeloi Ole Sakuda performing a
traditional Maasai songCultural Survival
215 Prospect Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 USAPhone: (617) 441-5400Fax: (617) 441-5417culturalsurvival@cs.orgwww.cs.org
Cultural Survival is a 501(c)(3)federal tax-exempt organization.