1
Equal Justice 
Initiative
Annual Report
20182
Steve Schapiro/Getty Images
Cover: Human Pictures3The Equal Justice Initiative is a private,
nonproﬁt law organization that has pro-vided legal services to the poor, incar-cerated, and condemned for nearly 30 years. From our office in Montgomery, Alabama, we have challenged mass incarceration, excessive punishment, and the abuse of children, people with disabilities, and the indigent in Amer-ica’s criminal justice system. We have made eliminating racial bias and dis-crimination against the poor a central feature of our work and have won major legal reforms and secured relief, release, or reduced sentences for over 140 con-demned people on death row. Our ad-vocacy and litigation to ban mandatory life-imprisonment-without-parole sen-tences for children resulted in landmark rulings by the United States Supreme Court that have impacted thousands of cases.
Over the last sever al years, we have 
engaged in new work to challenge the history of racial injustice in America with research, reports, community education 
efforts, advocacy, and public markers. Y our support makes 
our work possible.
This year we opened two new national 
institutions that have drawn internation-al praise. The Legacy Museum: From 
Enslavement to Mass Incarceration  
and the National Memorial for Peace 
and Justice  represent years of work by 
EJI to create new narrative spaces in the United States that document our nation’s history of racial inequality. The sites have already attracted tens of thousands of visitors. The opening of our sites in April 2018 was accompanied by three days of events, talks, lectures, and performances that brought together an amazing array of voices and continue to have a great impact on the national discourse about race, poverty, and criminal justice reform.
EJI’s staff and work have grown dramati-
cally in the last year. Our work is the pro-duct of thousands of people like you who support us, donate to us, encourage us, and stand with us as we try to create a just nation more committed to fairness and equality. We are grateful for your sup-port and thrilled to share this year’s report.
Bryan Stevenson, Director4The Legacy 
Museum: 
From Enslavement to 
Mass IncarcerationThis year, EJI created and opened a new 
national institution. The Legacy Muse-um: From Enslavement to Mass Incar-ceration is an 11,000-square-foot space located on the site of a warehouse that once conﬁned enslaved black people awaiting sale. A physical site and an outreach program, the museum is de-signed as an engine for education about the legacy of racial inequality. Exhibits feature narrative content and videogra-
5phy, the nation’s most comprehensive 
collection of data on lynching, coura-geous testimonies from former and cur-rent EJI clients, and new technology that brings to life previously unseen archival information about the domestic slave trade. Together, these materials and the visitors who engage with them trans-form the site from a space of historical trauma to one of truth and healing.
We believe that telling the truth about the slave trade, racial terror and lynch-ing, Jim Crow segregation, and mass in-carceration is critical to overcoming the division and conﬂict that have grown from centuries of denial and avoidance. EJI is committed to engaging commu-nities in honest reﬂection that can help our nation respond more effectively to our history of racial inequality.  Human Pictures6The National 
Memorial for Peace and JusticeThe National Memorial for Peace and 
Justice is the nation’s ﬁrst comprehen-sive memorial dedicated to thousands of African American victims of racial terror lynchings between 1877 and 1950. The National Memorial opened in April 2018 in Montgomery, Alabama.
The National Memorial is dedicated to 
educating visitors about how two cen-turies of enslavement of black people 
7evolved into decades of terror and vio-
lence following the collapse of Recon-struction. It details the violence and terror that forced millions of African Americans to ﬂee the South and the continuing legacy of that terror through the 20th century until today. 
Using investigative research, sculp-
ture, art, design, literature, and poetry, EJI created the National Memorial as 
One of the most 
powerful and effective new memorials created in a generation. 
—The Washington Post
There is nothing like it in the country.
—The New York Times
The single greatest work of American architecture of the 21st century.
—The Dallas Morning News
a space for everyone to confront our 
nation’s history of racial inequality with hope that a future of peace and justice can be achieved. The National Memorial is a beginning—an opportunity for com-munities across the country to claim their monuments, to confront the past with courage, and to begin a hopeful future in which truth leads to repair, restoration, and reconciliation.©Alan Karchmer for EJI8Death PenaltyEJI continues to provide direct legal rep-
resentation to over 100 condemned men and women on Alabama’s death row. We also provide assistance, consulting, and case management to dozens more death row prisoners in the state. This year, we persuaded the United States Supreme Court to review an important constitu-tional issue concerning the execution of people with dementia. In Madison v. 
Alabama , EJI won a stay of execution 
for a man suffering from dementia after 33 years on Alabama’s death row. EJI is committed to protecting people who are severely disabled or incompetent from the cruelty of an execution.
9We are one of the nation’s primary
resources for education, training, andinnovation in the death penalty area andin 2018 we produced a new capital de-fense manual for lawyers representingpeople accused of capital crimes. EJI’sAlabama Capital Defense Trial Manualcontains nearly 500 pages of instruction,guidance, and analysis to assist defenselawyers handling death penalty cases.EJI also provides dozens of sample mo-tions and pleadings for capital defenselawyers. EJI staff routinely present attraining conferences and convenings oncapital representation.
Our public education work also reachednew levels in 2018 with the release of EJI
Community Educator and former deathrow prisoner Anthony Ray Hinton’s newbook, The Sun Does Shine . The book
documents Mr. Hinton’s 30 years on Ala-bama’s death row for a crime he did notcommit. His account of his ordeal andEJI’s effort to win his freedom has drawnnational attention and became a NewYork Times Best Seller in June after itwas selected by Oprah Winfrey’s BookClub. Ms. Winfrey described the bookas one of the most moving memoirsshe has ever read. Mr. Hinton has spo-ken all over the country and addressedthousands of people at EJI as part of ourcommunity education efforts.
He is a remarkable 
storyteller. You will be swept away into this unbelievable, dramatic true story.
—Oprah Winfrey
CBS This Morning
Associated PressChildren 
Prosecuted as Adults
1011In 2018, EJI actively provided legal 
representation to scores of people who were condemned to die in prison for crimes they committed when they were children. In Pennsy lvania, we won a 
reduced sentence for Trina Garnett, who was 14 when she sentenced to die in prison for a felony murder. Ms. Garnett has been incarcerated for 42 years. In Nebraska, we won a reduced sentence for Darren McCracken, who was also sentenced to life imprisonment without parole when he was 14.
In Alabama, we have now won reduced 
sentences for 40 juveniles originally sentenced to life imprisonment without parole. In Louisiana, during the last year, we secured the release of three more people who had been condemned to die in prison.
Joe Sullivan was sentenced to life impri-
sonment without parole for a nonho-micide crime at age 13 that we do not believe he committed. Joe’s case was the ﬁrst case we took to the United States Supreme Court, which resulted in a 2010 ban on life-without-parole sentences for all children convicted of nonhomicide offenses. This year, Joe was released from a Florida prison after 25 years of conﬁnement.Robert Caston (left) and August Williams were sentenced 
to die in prison in Louisiana as teenagers. Mr. Caston was one of the ﬁrst clients to win release after the Supreme Court’s decision in Graham v. Florida . EJI won Mr. Wil-
liams’s release in 2017 after 49 years in prison.
Borlis Wilson was sentenced to die in prison for a juvenile nonhomicide crime. EJI won his release in 2017 after over 35 years at Louisiana’s notorious Angola prison.
Willie Leason spent over 50 years at Angola prison after being convicted of a nonhomicide offense when he was 17. He celebrated the two-year anniversary of his release this summer.12Criminal Justice 
Reform
EJI is actively pursuing relief from Amer-
ica’s tragic over-incarceration, whichhas made us the most punitive nationon Earth. EJI works to obtain parolefor people who have been incarceratedfor decades. We educate policymakersabout best practices and the need forsentencing reform and alternatives toincarceration. We advise courts and oth-
Orange is the New Black  author Piper Kerman with Anthony Ray Hinton, who spent 30 years on death 
row for a crime he did not commit, and Steve Bright, President of the Southern Center for Human Rights, discussing criminal justice reform  at the Peace and Justice Summit in April.er decision-makers on ways to reduce
reliance on jails and prisons. We litigateon behalf of individuals to challenge ex-cessive punishment and harsh sentenc-es. We believe that there are thousandsof people currently incarcerated who arenot a threat to public safety and shouldbe released.
Bryan Stevenson and John Legend speak at a community meeting in Los Angeles about the need for
criminal justice reform. Hadas for Into Action/Los Angeles Review of Books13Re-Entry 
Services
EJI provides re-entry services to clients 
coming out of prison by providing a range of support. Job training, educa-tion, housing, transportation assistance, support services to obtain beneﬁts, life skills coaching, counseling, and therapy are among the services we provide to clients who become part of our Post-Re-lease Education and Preparation pro-gram. PREP has served scores of former-ly incarcerated people over the last 12 years and has a near-perfect record of preventing clients from re-offending.
EJI provides a range of services to formerly incarcera ted clients, including residential assistance, em-
ployment, job training, mental health services, life skills education, beneﬁts assistance, transportation, 
medical assistance, and rigorous c ounseling and support services.
Joe Sullivan was 13 when he was wrongly accused of a 
sexual assault in Florida. He was sentenced to life im-prisonment without parole, becoming one of the young-est children condemned to die in prison in America. In 2009, EJI took Joe’s case to the United States Supreme Court and ultimately won a ban on sentencing children convicted of nonhomicide offenses to life without parole. This year, after 25 years of incarceration, Joe Sullivan was released and admitted into EJI’s re-entry program, which provides intensive assistance to people coming out of jail or prison who are especially vulnerable.14Prison 
Conditions
15With over two million people in jails and 
prisons in America, conditions of con-ﬁnement in many states have become abusive, violent, dangerous, and uncon-stitutional. EJI challenges inhumane prison conditions and abusive treatment of incarcerated people through educa-tion, litigation, and advocacy. This past year, we settled a class action lawsuit against one of Alabama’s most dan-gerous prisons, which has one of the 
highest homicide rates in the nation. We have ﬁled dozens of complaints with the Justice Department and state and local officials documenting abuse, violence, and unconstitutional conditions. A 2018 documentary EJI prepared about condi-tions of conﬁnement has been seen by thousands of visitors to our new Legacy Museum and has become a powerful tool for educating people about the need to improve prison conditions.
Prison overcrowding in some states is 
near 200 percent capacity, which has resulted in increased violence, suicide, and corruption. Getty/Los Angeles Times16
Peace and 
Justice Opening
April 26—27, 2018
Montgomery, AlabamaIn April, we celebrated the opening of
EJI’s new Legacy Museum and NationalMemorial. Over 25,000 people came toMontgomery to participate in two days ofexciting talks, lectures, performances, anda rousing ﬁnal concert at the MontgomeryRiverwalk, featuring performances from TheRoots, Dave Matthews, Usher, Kirk Frank-lin, Brittany Howard, Common, Jon Batiste,Kirk Franklin, and an unforgettable ﬁnaleby Stevie Wonder. Before the concert,thousands of people packed the Mont-gomery Performing Arts Center to hearfrom Michelle Alexander, Sherrilyn Iﬁll,
Mamie Kirkland, a 109-year-old survivor of a lynching in Mississippi is honored.From Left  Jacqueline Woodson, Common, Senator Cory Booker, Brittany Packnett
 John Legend
Patti LaBelle17
Jelani Cobb, Rev. Dr. William Barber, Gloria
Steinem, Marian Wright Edelman, MichelMartin, Ava DuVernay, Elizabeth Alexander,Anna Deavere Smith, Former Vice Presi-dent Al Gore, Piper Kerman, Steve Bright,Anthony Ray Hinton, Senator Cory Booker,Brittany Packnett, Dr. Howard Stevenson,Dr. Margaret Beale Spencer, Dr. WalterGilliam, Catherine Flowers, JacquelineWoodson, and Common.
The pre-opening featured remarks from
Darren Walker, Kim Taylor-Thompson,Laurene Powell Jobs, and Michel Martinand performances by John Legend, Andra
Day, Brandie Sutton, and BeBe Winans.Over 10,000 people attended our openingceremony, where Congressman John Lewisspoke and we honored civil rights pioneers,including Fred Gray, Mamie Kirkland, Clau-dette Colvin, Ruby Sales, Dr. C.T. Vivian,Elizabeth Eckford, Rev. Jesse Jackson, Con-gressman John Lewis, Mary Louise Ware,Bernard Lafayette, Dr. Regina Benjamin,and Elaine Jones. The ceremony includedperformances by Sweet Honey in the Rock,Ailey II, and Patti LaBelle.
Photos by Gary Hunter, unless otherwise noted
Rev. Dr. William BarberAndra Day
The Roots and entire line-up joined Stevie Wonde r for the ﬁnale at the Peace and Justice Concert. Taylor HillFrom Left  Elizabeth Alexander, Anna Deavere Smith, Ava DuVernay 
Alfre Woodard18Community 
Remembrance Project
EJI has continued to erect markers at 
lynching sites across the country during the last year. In several new states, EJI staff worked with community leaders to honor African Americans who were victims of racial terror lynching. Our community remembrance efforts have increased dramatically since the opening 
of the new memorial. We have already heard from close to 300 counties about collecting their monuments as part of our ongoing effort to engage commu-nities in important conversations about our nation’s history of racial inequality.
EJI has organized dozens of events where community member s honor victims of racial terror lynching by collecting soil from 
lynching sites and erecting marker s that document the history of lynching. Opposite Kiara Boone from EJI unveils a marker in 
Selma, Alabama, with civil rights legend Dr. Bernard Lafayette, who worked with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. on the 1968 Poor 
People’s Campaign.19
Public 
Education
21In the last year, EJI has increased its 
public education work dramatically. 
Staff have done hundreds of presen-
tations for schools, faith communities, 
and policymakers about the need for 
criminal justice reform. We also have 
been very actively educating commu-nities and the nation about the need 
to confront our nation’s history of ra-
cial inequality. Our reports on slavery, 
lynching, and segregation have been 
distributed to thousands. We have two 
new websites on lynching and segrega-
tion that present unique information to 
users all over the world and we created 
a curriculum for teachers and educa-
tors to use in the classroom. Our new 
museum and memorial have attracted 
over 200,000 visitors in the ﬁrst four 
months of operation. We have received 
extremely favorable coverage of both 
sites worldwide since our opening, 
including powerful reviews in The New 
York Times, The Washington Post, CNN, 
CBS’s “60 Minutes,” and TIME Mag-
azine. We are committed to changing 
the narrative in America about over-in-
carceration, excessive punishment, and 
racial and economic injustice.
Thousands gathered for the opening of EJI’s National 
Memorial for Peace and Justice. A faith dedication was held 
at the site on April 26, 2018. Human Pictures22
Segregation in America  is a new report 
and companion website that docu-
ments how millions of white Americans 
joined a mass movement of committed, 
unwavering, and often violent opposi-
tion to the Civil Rights Movement. EJI 
believes that understanding this mass 
opposition to racial equality, integration, 
and civil rights is central to confront-
ing the continuing challenges of racial inequality today.Getty/Corbis Premium Historical
Opposite  EJI’s new memorial and museum staff gather for 
training and preparation to open our new sites in April 2018.23
24EJI Staff
Executive Director Bryan Stevenson and Deputy Director Randy Susskind meet with staff. DiAnna Paulk for EJI
EJI’s staff has grown dramatically in the 
last year. The addition of over 40 new 
museum and memorial staff and the ex-pansion of EJI’s legal work has brought 
a group of extremely talented and 
dedicated people to our team. Our law 
fellowships, justice fellowships, racial 
justice internships, social work fellow-
ships, and a range of other programs 
have attracted hundreds of applicants 
to help continue EJI’s important work.
From Left  Senior Attorney Jennifer Taylor with EJI staff 
Gabri e lle Daniels, Kiara Boone, and Jonathan Kubakun-
dimana25Community Educator Anthony Ray Hinton and Deputy Director Tera DuVernay
EJI’s new Gift Shop opened at 121 Coosa Street, next to the 
Legacy Museum.
Law Fellow Evan Milligan
 Senior Attorney Sia Sanneh
Site Manager Josh Cannon
From Left  EJI staff Jonathan Kubakundimana and Elliot 
Spillers (Florian Koenigsberger)26
In April 2018, EJI was featured on “60 Minutes” in a segment hosted by Oprah Winfrey, who posed with staff. Keith Walker
Clockwise from Left  EJI staff Menna Elsayed, Kari Nelson, Elliot Spillers, Chris 
Keough, Eugene Harris, and Miriam Ashley-Smoke
2018 student interns
27EJI has an ambitious plan to add to our 
renowned museum and memorial a new 
Center for Peace and Justice, which we 
plan to open in 2019. We hope to raise 
$10 million in campaign revenue for the 
new spaces and sites and expect to have 
an operational budget of $13 million in 
the coming ﬁscal year. We are grateful 
for the support of so many people and 
are proud that the overwhelming ma-
jority of our support comes from indi-
vidual donors. EJI devotes 89 percent of revenue to program services, with the 
remaining support going to administra-
tion and development. EJI is a top rated 
human and civil rights charity by Charity 
Navigator, earning a perfect score for Financial Health and Accountability & 
Transparency.
We are a nonproﬁt 501(c)(3) organiza-
tion. All donations are tax deductible. 
We greatly appreciate your support and 
contributions to our work.28© 2018 by Equal Justice Initiative. All right s reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, modiﬁed, or distributed in any form or by any electronic or me-
chanical means without express prior written permission of Equal Justice Initiative.