  By Sridevi Nambiar  
On November 28, 2014, the United 
Nations Committee Against Torture 
released a 15 -page report reviewing 
the United States’ compliance with 
the UN Convention Against Torture 
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or De-
grading Treatment or Punishment 
(CAT). The report cites the excessive 
use of solitary confinement in U.S. 
prisons and jails as a violation of 
CAT, and recommends a set of dra-
matic reforms.  
The report is a follow -up to the Com-
mittee’s meeting with United States 
government officials on November 12 
and 13 in Geneva. As a state party to 
CAT, the United States is expected to 
submit a “Periodic Report” detailing 
its adherence to the Convention, as 
well as respond to any questions, ob-
servations, and recommendations for 
change issued by the Committee. 
Over the two days, the United States 
delegation presented its latest period-
ic report for a ten -member Committee 
to review.  
The U.S. government’s periodic re-
port discusses some 55 separate is-
sues of concern to the Committee 
Against Torture ranging from the 
treatment of immigrants in deten-
tion, the death penalty, police brutali-
ty, and sexual abuse of people in pris-
on to the rendition and secret deten-
tion of terror suspects and their con-
tinued presence at Guantanamo Bay. 
In all cases, the United States insists 
that it is in compliance with CAT, 
even as several human rights and 
civil liberties organizations submitted 
shadow reports telling otherwise.  
The U.S. periodic report also at-
tempts to dismiss the Committee Against Torture’s concerns on soli-
tary confinement —which the UN 
Special Rapporteur on Torture de-
fines as “physical and social isolation 
of individuals who are confined to 
their cells for 22 to 24 hours a day,” 
and to which some 80,000 people are 
being subjected to every day in the 
United States. The U.S. report claims 
there is “no systemic use of solitary 
confinement in the United States.”  
However, in Geneva, members of the 
Committee Against Torture raised 
multiple questions and concerns 
about solitary confinement in U.S. 
prisons and jails. The Committee 
Vice -Chairperson questioned the 
American delegation about measures 
taken to limit the use of solitary con-
finement, especially on children and 
other vulnerable individuals. Another 
Committee member asked about pro-
longed solitary confinement such as 
is being used in Louisiana, where in-
dividuals have been isolated for 40 
years, and noted that such treatment 
caused “anxiety, depression and hal-
lucinations until their personality is 
completely destroyed.”  
Both in its periodic report and during 
the hearings, the United States gov-
ernment sought to assure the Com-
mittee Against Torture that sufficient 
restrictions on the imposition of soli-
tary confinement are already in 
place. At the hearings, the Deputy 
Assistant Attorney General at the 
Department of Justice maintained 
that “U.S. courts have interpreted the 
Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments 
of the U.S. Constitution as prohibit-
ing the use of solitary confinement 
under certain circumstances.” The 
U.S. periodic report further claims 
that The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973 limit the use of solitary 
confinement against persons with 
mental illnesses and other disabili-
ties, while the Prison Rape Elimina-
tion Act offers protection from the 
same for children.  
But in its “Concluding Observations” 
released last week, the UN Commit-
tee reaffirms that “it remains con-
cerned about reports of extensive use 
of solitary confinement and other 
forms of isolation in US prisons, jails 
and other detention centres for pur-
pose of punishment, discipline and 
protection, as well as for health -
related reasons.”  
The Committee lays forth several rec-
ommendations for the United States 
to ensure its policies on solitary con-
finement are in better compliance 
with CAT. It asks the U.S. govern-
ment to restrict the use of solitary 
confinement “as a measure of last 
resort, for as short a time as possible, 
under strict supervision and with the 
possibility of judicial review.” Further 
it reasserts the need to ban the impo-
sition of solitary confinement on 
“juveniles, persons with intellectual 
or psychosocial disabilities, pregnant 
women, women with infants and 
breastfeeding mothers in prison.” It 
also stresses that “regimes of solitary 
confinement such as those in super -
maximum security detention facili-
ties” need to be banned. Finally, the 
Committee once again brings atten-
tion to the lack of detailed infor-
mation on the use of solitary confine-
ment. It asks the United States to 
“compile and regularly publish com-
prehensive data on the use of solitary 
confinement, including related sui-
cide attempts and self -harm.”  
2 
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008                                   Email: solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attor-
neys, legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in 
prison —with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting 
on solitary confinement in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly 
incarcerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive future cop-
ies, please send a request to the address or email above.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people 
who have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address above, and 
tell us whether you would like us to use your name or would prefer to remain anonymous.  
Note: We regret that we cannot  offer legal assistance or advice and cannot respond to requests for this type of 
help. Legal materials sent to us cannot be returned to the sender. We also cannot forward mail to others. Thank 
you for your cooperation.  By Jean Casella  
In a wide -ranging  speech  on October 
23, 2014, Pope Francis revealed him-
self as a passionate criminal justice 
reformer. His words also suggest 
that he is familiar with the contro-
versies surrounding solitary confine-
ment and supermax prisons, and 
strongly opposes their use.  
Speaking at the Vatican to repre-
sentatives of the International Asso-
ciation of Penal  Law,  the Pope said: 
“All Christians and people of good 
will are called today to fight not only 
for the abolition of the death penal-
ty, be it legal or illegal, in all of its 
forms, but also for the improvement 
of prison conditions in respect for the 
human dignity of those who have 
been deprived of liberty.”  
Previous popes, including John Paul 
II, have been outspoken opponents of 
capital punishment. But Francis 
took his discourse a step further, 
denouncing sentences of life in pris-
on, and saying that “a life sentence 
is a hidden death sentence.”  
The Pope called for a ban on all crim-
inal detention of children and for “special treatment” for elderly people 
in prison. More broadly, he de-
nounced “the deplorable conditions 
of detention that take place in differ-
ent parts of the world,”  which he 
called an “arbitrary and merciless 
exercise of power over persons who 
have been deprived of freedom.”  
Francis specifically turned his atten-
tion to supermax prisons. His term 
was carceri di massima sicurezza , 
which more literally translates to 
“maximum -security prisons” —but 
from his emphasis on extreme isola-
tion and its consequences, it is clear 
that he was referring to the use of 
solitary confinement.  
“One form of torture is sometimes 
applied  by imprisonment in maxi-
mum security prisons,” the Pope 
said. With the motive of provid-
ing greater security to the communi-
ty or special treatment for certain 
categories of prisoners, its main fea-
ture is none other than isolation. As 
demonstrated by studies carried out 
by different human rights bodies, the 
lack of sensory stimuli , the complete 
lack of communication, and the lack 
of contact with other human beings causes physical and emotional suf-
fering such as paranoia, anxiety, de-
pression, and weight loss, and signif-
icantly increases the chances 
of suicide.”  
The Pope also warned against seeing 
prison  as a cure for all of society’s 
ills, “as if for different diseases one 
could prescribe the same medicine.” 
He advised  that “caution in the ap-
plication of punishment  should be 
the governing principle of all crimi-
nal justice systems,” and that gov-
ernments should not, for any pur-
pose, subvert “respect for the dignity 
of the human person.”  
Pope Francis previously  made head-
lines  during his first Holy Week by 
washing the feet of twelve youth 
held at a juvenile detention center in 
Rome while celebrating  the mass of 
the Last Supper, when Jesus washed 
the feet of his disciples.  
In a papal mass just a few days be-
fore his speech on criminal justice, 
Francis  told an assembly of Catholic 
bishops: “God is not afraid of new 
things. That is why he is continuous-
ly surprising us, opening our hearts 
and guiding us in unexpected ways.”  
3  The following account is by a young 
woman named Nicole who is cur-
rently being held in the segregation 
unit at Illinois’s Logan Correctional 
Facility, about three hours  south of 
Chicago. Logan was repurposed from 
a men’s prison to imprison women 
from the shuttered Dwight and Lin-
coln Correctional Centers. The pris-
on, which has a  rated capacity of 
1,106, currently holds  1,950 people. 
A December 2014  report  by the  John 
Howard Association  described the 
d i s m a l  c o n d i t i o n s  a t  t h e 
“overcrowded [and] underresourced” 
prison. Shortly after Nicole’s arrival 
in segregation, a woman in the ad-
joining cell committed suicide. 
Her account, shows that even a few 
weeks or months in solitary confine-
ment can have dire consequences on 
people’s physical and mental well -
being. Nicole turned twenty -one 
while behind bars, and will celebrate 
her twenty -second birthday in soli-
tary this year. —Victoria Law  
My name is Nicole. I am currently 
housed in segregation at Logan Cor-
rectional Facility in Illinois. Here at 
this fine institution, we are locked 
down 24 hours a day. We shower 
every four days  maybe. If we act up, 
they sometimes refuse to shower 
you, although that’s against regula-
tions. I’ve gone 12 days without a 
shower. Now that we have a new 
warden, the rules have changed. Be-
fore she started working here, for 
example, you would not be segregat-
ed for an unauthorized movement. 
Now, you must do two months in 
this miserable place. You would 
think segregation is supposed to be 
for violent offenders? No, now every-
one comes to segregation. My cell-
mate, Gina, was feeling homicidal 
and asked for a mental health evalu-
ation. Instead, they threw her in 
segregation and said she refused 
housing. When you refuse housing, 
they give you three months segrega-
tion. Gina has been in segregation 
for nine days and still has no sheets 
or blankets because they lost some of 
her property. She sleeps on the cold, 
plastic mattress. I share one of my blankets. All these non -violent 
“offenses” and people are doing 
a very long  time in segregation. Gina 
has also never, not once, gotten into 
trouble in the four years she’s been 
incarcerated! You want to know 
what violent offenses carry? They 
carry the  least  amount of time in 
segregation. If you get into a fight, 
you’ll do 15 days in seg. If you as-
sault someone, you’ll do 30 
days.  Everything  non-violent carries 
more than 30 days in seg!  
You can’t even ask for mental help 
because they’ll throw you in segrega-
tion. I am in here because I had a 
seizure and was handcuffed and 
thrown into a wall by a lieutenant. I 
was not supposed to be handcuffed 
because I just had a seizure. I 
flipped out, panicked and spit on 
him. I’ve been in segregation six 
months. I should’ve went home De-
cember 3, 2014, but they are keeping 
me here until August 3, 2015. I have 
to be in segregation the whole time. 
The past six months have been hell. 
I’ve seen my friend commit suicide 
next door to me. While the police 
were waiting for her body to be 
transferred, they made jokes about 
how now there’s more bed space. My 
friend —RIP Shortybang —shouldn’t 
have even been in segregation. The 
police ignored her cries for help. 
They still ignore people when people say they are suicidal or homicidal. 
They don’t see us as someone’s 
daughter, mother, or sister…They 
see us as a number, as bed space, as 
criminals. I’ve talked to many wom-
en in this prison and I haven’t met 
one yet who hasn’t been abused, 
raped, etc., in their life. I’ve heard 
the worst stories. I don’t know about 
other women, but when I’m in segre-
gation, alone, locked in this six foot 
by ten foot cell for 24 hours per day, 
I start thinking about my life. I have 
a very messed -up past. Mainly when 
I was younger, but that wasn’t that 
long ago.  
I will turn twenty -two in seg on 
April 6th. Long periods of solitary 
confinement are not healthy, espe-
cially for women like me who have 
severe PTSD and depression. I’ve 
attempted suicide so many times I 
lost count! Now what makes anyone 
think it’s okay to put me alone in a 
cell for over a year? You might think 
I’m being treated by a psychiatrist? 
Yes, but she  refuses  to put me on the 
correct medications. I see the psychi-
atrist through a TV once every two 
months, maybe, and she refuses to 
look at my records and see that I 
need certain medications. So, if I’m 
having severe issues just trying to 
survive day by day, I know others 
are as well. That’s why so many peo-
ple are yelling constantly that 
they’re suicidal. This is a very de-
pressing place. Another serious is-
sue, medical…I have been begging to 
see the doctor for six months since I 
got in segregation. I wrote grievanc-
es about health care in segregation.  
I hope and pray that things will 
change back here. Even something 
as simple as how officers treat us 
would change a lot. I’ll do whatever I 
can from the inside and hope people 
listen to what I have to say. Just 
because I made one mistake in life 
doesn’t mean I deserve this suffer-
ing. I am somebody’s daughter. I 
have a great family. I should be 
home. I want to stop this from hap-
pening to others.  
 
4 ARIZONA —In December, the Arizo-
na Department of Corrections (ADC) 
opened a new facility with 500 su-
permax prison beds in the Rast Unit 
at the Arizona State Prison Complex 
(ASPC Lewis) in  Buckeye, Arizona.  
The American Civil Liberties Union 
of Arizona and the American 
Friends Service Committee of Arizo-
na have called the new solitary con-
finement beds unnecessary, urging 
the ADC to focus instead on rehabili-
tation programs. Critics  of the in-
crease in supermax beds also assert 
that, based on corrections documen-
tation, the ADC is not filling the ex-
isting isolation beds it has, making 
the newly constructed prison facility 
a waste of taxpayers’ dollars.  
NEW YORK —In January, the New 
York City Board of Corrections 
adopted a set of rules to limit the 
use of punitive segregation at Rikers 
Island, the city’s main jail complex.  
 The new rule excludes from solitary 
confinement people between the ag-
es of 18 and 21 as well as those un-
der 18, and individuals with mental 
disabilities. It also places a time lim-
it on punitive segregation of 30 con-
secutive days and a maximum of 60 
days during a six -month period.  
At the same time, however, the City 
plans to create an “Enhanced Super-
vision Housing Unit” on Rikers to 
hold individuals deemed a threat to 
safety in long -term solitary, similar 
to what other jurisdictions call ad-
ministrative segregation.  
NORTH CAROLINA —In December, 
corrections chief David Guice re-
quested that the state’s upcoming 
budget include funding for improv-
ing the treatment of people with 
mental illnesses in the state’s pris-
ons, including hiring more than 300 
additional mental health care staff. 
Guice requested more than $20 mil-
lion to provide adequate care for 
4600 people requiring mental health 
services in the state’s prisons.  
The request comes following several 
reports indicating the state’s Divi-
sion of Prison’s failure to protect prisoners with psychiatric disabili-
ties from neglect and abuse, includ-
ing inadequate health care and the 
extensive use of solitary confine-
ment. One such individual, Michael 
Anthony Kerr, died of dehydration 
after being in solitary confinement 
for 35 days. Recent reports have also 
highlighted the severe shortage of 
mental health personnel in the 
state’s prison system.  
TEXAS —In February, the American 
Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) of Tex-
as and the Texas Civil Rights Pro-
ject  (TCRP) released a report argu-
ing that “solitary confinement is 
dangerous, expensive and makes 
Texas less safe.”  A Solitary Failure: 
The Waste, Cost and Harm of Soli-
tary Confinement  draws on surveys, 
in-person interviews, and corrobora-
tive research conducted over an 
eight -month period. The ACLU and 
TCRP found that the Texas Depart-
ment of Criminal Justice is trapped 
in “the outdated and expensive 
mindset of using solitary confine-
ment as a routine correctional prac-
tice,” leading to inhumane, ineffi-
cient, and archaic conditions that 
permanently damage people held in 
prison and threaten public safety —
all at the taxpayers’ expense.  
NATIONAL —In March, during a 
hearing before Congress on the Su-
preme Court’s budget, Justice An-
thony Kennedy criticized the prison 
system in general, and solitary con-
finement in particular. “I think that 
the corrections system is one of the 
most overlooked, misunderstood in-
stitutions that we have in our entire 
government…Nobody looks at it,” 
Kennedy said. “And this idea of total 
incarceration just isn’t working –and 
it’s not humane. The federal govern-
ment built...supermax prisons, with 
isolation cells. The prisoner  we had 
come before our court a few weeks 
ago…had been in an isolation cell 
according to the attorney...for 25 
years. Solitary confinement literally 
drives men mad.”  Kennedy compared U.S. supermax 
prisons with the more humane alter-
natives used in Europe, and conclud-
ed: “We haven’t given nearly enough 
study, nearly enough thought, near-
ly enough investigative resources to 
looking at our corrections system. In 
many respects, I think it’s broken.”  
NATIONAL —In January, a coalition 
of civil and human rights advocates, 
faith -based and other organizations 
sent a letter to U.S. Attorney Gen-
eral Eric Holder expressing concern 
over the opening of a new federal 
prison in Thomson, Illinois, that will 
significantly increase the federal 
government’s capacity to house indi-
viduals in long -term isolation.  
Sources indicate that the Thomson 
Correctional Center, projected to be 
activated by 2016, is intended to be 
a supermax prison, with 400 
“Administrative Maximum” cells for 
extreme solitary confinement, and 
1500 more “Special Management 
Unit” cells, where people will be held 
in 23 -hour -a-day lockdown alone or 
with one other person.  
The letter criticized the Bureau of 
Prisons (BOP) for planning to acti-
vate Thomson as a supermax prison 
while also claiming to be reducing 
the use of solitary confinement and 
other forms of isolation in the feder-
al system. It also urges the Depart-
ment of Justice to delay Thomson’s 
activation until the completion of a 
year-long audit on the use of ex-
treme isolation across the BOP.  
CANADA —In February, advocacy 
groups filed two separate lawsuits 
alleging that solitary confinement as 
practiced north of the border consti-
tutes cruel and unusual punish-
ment, in violation of the Canadian 
Constitution. The lawsuits were 
sparked after the government re-
fused to act on a series of recommen-
dations made following the death of 
Ashley Smith. Smith, who was 18 
years old and suffered from mental 
illness, died in a solitary confine-
ment unit of self -strangulation while 
officers stood by and watched. Her 
death was ruled a homicide.  
