  By Jean Casella  
Citing the “devastating, lasting psycho-
logical consequences ” of solitary confine-
ment, President Barack Obama an-
nounced a set of policy changes de-
signed to significantly reduce the use of 
prison isolation. The changes, which ap-
ply only to the federal prison system, will 
have a limited initial impact on the total 
number of people held in solitary, but 
they set a powerful precedent for further 
reforms  across the country.  
In a commentary published on January 
25 in the  Washington Post , Obama be-
gins by referencing  the case of Kalief 
Browder, the young man  who committed 
suicide after spending two years in pre -
trial solitary confinement as a teenager 
on New York ’s Rikers Island. Such 
“heartbreaking results, ” the President 
writes, are the reason “why my admin-
istration is taking steps to address this 
problem. ” 
These steps include “banning solitary 
confinement for juveniles and as a re-
sponse to low -level infractions, expand-
ing treatment for the mentally ill and in-
creasing the amount of time inmates in 
solitary can spend outside of their cells ” 
within the federal prison system.  
Mentioning his belief in “second chances ” 
and “redemption ” as well as “public safe-
ty,” Obama makes a powerful argument 
against  solitary on both practical and 
moral grounds. “How can we subject pris-
oners to unnecessary solitary confine-
ment, knowing its effects, and then ex-
pect them to return to our communities as 
whole people?, ” he asks. “It doesn ’t make 
us safer. It ’s an affront to our common 
humanity. ” 
In his reference to “unnecessary ” solitary, 
however, the President clearly leaves the 
door open for some use of  prison isola-
tion. He acknowledges  that “there are circumstances when solitary is a neces-
sary tool, such as when certain prisoners 
must be isolated for their own protection 
or in order to protect staff and other in-
mates. In those cases, the practice 
should be limited, applied with constraints 
and used only as a measure of last re-
sort.” 
The reforms announced by the Presi-
dent draw on a set of policy changes rec-
ommended by the Department of Justice. 
These resulted from a review of federal 
solitary confinement by a DOJ “Working 
Group ” that included representatives of 
the federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP), Civil 
Rights Division, and various other bod-
ies. Obama directed Attorney General 
Loretta Lynch to conduct the review last 
summer, when he first denounced soli-
tary in a speech on criminal justice before 
the NAACP.  
The Justice Department subsequently 
released the full report, which includes an 
overview of the use of “restrictive hous-
ing” in the federal system, followed by a 
set of 50 “guiding principles ” and finally a 
series of “policy recommendations, ” 
which are what Obama is codifying 
through executive action.  
A close reading of the  123-page re-
port reveals just how far these policy 
changes will go in reducing and reforming 
the use of solitary confinement, in the 
federal system and beyond.  
Adding Up the Numbers  
Obama ’s op-ed is remarkable simply for 
its frank use of the term “solitary confine-
ment. ” Recently retired BOP Director 
Charles Samuels had  repeatedly testi-
fied before Congress that restrictive 
housing in the federal system did not, in 
fact, constitute solitary confinement. 
(Samuels also, famously,  had no idea of 
the size  of a federal isolation cell.) In ad-
dition, in his reference to the “10,000 fed-eral prisoners held in solitary confine-
ment, ” the President clearly included indi-
viduals in 23 -hour-a-day lockdown in 
double cells in federal Special Housing 
Units (SHUs) and Special Management 
Units (SMUs).  
To be precise, the review found that as of 
December 2015, the Bureau of Prisons 
held 9,914 people in solitary confinement, 
or “restrictive housing, ” in BOP -run pris-
ons, and an additional 924 in private con-
tract prisons. This is slightly less than 6 
percent of the total population of about 
185,000 in all facilities. An unspecified 
additional number are held in isolation by 
the U.S. Marshals Service.  
For a few specific categories of people, 
Obama ’s policy changes will bring a near
-complete ban on the use of solitary con-
finement by the BOP. This includes juve-
niles under the age of 18.  In fact, howev-
er, very few children are held in federal 
custody —just 26 in December 2015, for 
example. Also virtually banned from soli-
tary are women  “who are pregnant, are 
postpartum, recently had a miscarriage, 
or recently had a terminated pregnancy. ” 
The policy recommendations also  ban 
the use of Disciplinary Segregation for 
“low-level” disciplinary offenses, which 
include “Malingering/Feigning Illness, ” 
“Abusive/Obscene Language, ” and 
“Violating Visiting Regulations, ” among 
others, as well as for first instances of 
“moderate -level” offenses. More signifi-
cant are dramatic cuts in the  length of 
time individuals can be placed in solitary 
in Disciplinary Segregation for  more seri-
ous offenses, ranging from “Tattooing or 
Self Mutilation ” to “Engaging in a Sex 
Act” to fighting, weapons possession, and 
assault.  For example, the policy recom-
mendations reduce the maximum 
amount of time in solitary for a first high -
level offense from 365 days to 60 days.  
 
2 Time cuts are also recommended for 
the men in the SMUs, mostly gang 
members going through a four -phase 
program meant to “correct inmates ’ 
disruptive and violent behaviors. ” 
The policy recommendations call for 
something close to an eventual ban on 
the isolation of individuals with mental 
illness. Any people in solitary with 
“Serious Mental Illness ” (SMI)  are 
meant, under the new policies, to be 
rehoused in “Secure Mental Health 
Units. ” To make this happen, the ca-
pacity of these units, which already 
exist, will need to be increased,  and as 
the report notes, “Any expansion of 
these programs is contingent on in-
creased funding. ” The President ’s 
2017 budget includes a request  for 
$24 million to support these efforts. ” 
However, a relatively small number of 
people held by the BOP are consid-
ered to have SMI, suggesting that fed-
eral prisoners are being under -
diagnosed.  
The policy changes also affect people 
in solitary for “Protective Custody, ” 
which includes significant numbers of 
LGBT individuals, people convicted of 
sex offenses, and former gang mem-
bers, among others. The new policy 
ies call for most of these people to be 
moved to Reintegration Housing Units 
—again, pending the expansion of 
these units, and the funds to pay for 
the expansion.  
In one of its final policy recommenda-
tions, the report states: “Wardens at all 
BOP facilities will be directed to devel-
op institution -specific plans for in-
creasing the number of hours restric-
tive housing inmates spend outside  of 
their cell, and allowing greater oppor-
tunities for rehabilitation and reentry 
services. ” 
The report further states that the DOJ 
“believes that reducing the total num-
ber of restrictive housing inmates will 
lessen the intense demands currently 
placed on officers assigned to SHU 
and SMU units, freeing up staff to pro-
vide additional programming and ser-
vices for the remaining inmates in re-strictive housing. ” Nowhere, however, 
do the new rules set any minimum for 
out-of-cell time.  
If all of the President ’s directives are 
followed, and if they remain in place 
under a new president (since some 
will take years to implement), they 
stand to reduce the federal solitary 
population significantly. By the very 
roughest of estimates, they should 
eventually cut the number of people 
held in solitary by the BOP by perhaps 
a third. But as with all prison reforms, 
only implementation will tell the real 
story and yield the final numbers.  
Reading Between the Lines  
Opponents of solitary confinement 
have much to celebrate in Obama ’s 
actions. The very fact that a sitting 
president chose to take on an issue 
that was all but invisible only five years 
ago is remarkable in itself.  Advocates 
who have been working on the issue 
for years can be encouraged by the 
eloquence of the President ’s denunci-
ation, and by the spirit as well as the 
letter of the policy changes laid out by 
the DOJ.  
The reforms Obama announced put 
the federal government at least in line 
with states like New York and Califor-
nia, which recently announced their 
own plans to reduce the use of soli-
tary. But those states had their hands 
forced by lawsuits, whereas at the fed-
eral level change came as a result of 
Obama ’s leadership. And if, as the 
President hopes,  the reforms also 
“serve as a model for state and local 
corrections systems, ” most of whom 
have still done little or nothing to re-
duce solitary, the impact on the ap-
proximately 100,000 individuals in iso-
lation  nationwide could be greater.  
Yet if one accepts —as Obama himself 
seems to —that long -term solitary is at 
best inhumane  and damaging, and at 
worst torture, then there are troubling 
aspects to these (and most other) soli-
tary reforms.  
For one thing, the changes leave 
much  to the good faith of wardens and other prison staff —a group not famous 
for its opposition to solitary confine-
ment. For example, the lack of specific 
minimums for out -of-cell time, or other 
enforceable minimum standards for 
the treatment of individuals held in 
isolation, mean that the thousands of 
people who will remain in solitary con-
finement after the reductions take ef-
fect may experience no change what-
soever as a result of the President ’s 
reforms.  
This is because, by relying on an in-
cremental approach, the reforms 
threaten to create two classes of peo-
ple in prison. On one side are those 
who do not need or deserve to be in 
solitary and must be released: chil-
dren, people with mental illness, other 
vulnerable populations, and individuals 
who committed only low -level viola-
tions of prison rules. On the other side 
are the rest, who, by implica-
tion, belong where they are.  
The latter group tends to be left out of 
solitary reforms altogether. Yet  in reali-
ty, those deemed least “deserving ” of 
relief from the torments of solitary are 
often among the very people who 
need it most, because they have been 
in solitary the longest and in the most 
extreme conditions of isolation and 
sensory deprivation.  In the federal 
prison system, 400 men live in such 
conditions in ADX federal supermax in 
Florence, Colorado, and Obama ’s re-
forms seem to have little to offer them.  
This is not to say that the President ’s 
reforms are insignificant —only that 
they are incomplete. If Obama wishes 
to show further leadership on this is-
sue, he will insist on humane condi-
tions —and perhaps even “second 
chances ”—for all people held in feder-
al custody. In the meantime, the dan-
ger is that the public and policymakers 
will think that the work on this issue is 
done. Most advocates, on the other 
hand, know there is still a long road 
ahead, as do the tens of thousands of 
people who remain in solitary confine-
ment in American prisons at this mo-
ment.  3  By Judith Vazquez  
There are things that people experi-
ence every day and take for granted. 
Things such as nature. Who would 
ever think that to be denied nature 
would be such a big deal? I had no 
open window in my solitary cell. My 
window was about four inches wide 
and maybe three feet tall. My view 
consisted of just bricks and barbed 
wire. If I could see maybe a dime -
sized piece of the sky, it was a lot. As 
time went by, I noticed a little plant 
growing from between the bricks. I 
would look at that plant every day. It 
was the only view of nature I had. Oh 
boy, did I love that plant. It was my 
buddy, my pal. I would watch the 
breeze blow it from side to side and I 
would close my eyes and pretend that 
wind was blowing across my face. I 
never thought I would crave nature so 
badly.  
As time passed, I started to resent the 
plant. I wanted to be the one feeling 
that breeze. One day I couldn ’t take it 
anymore, so I grabbed a plastic gar-
bage bag and sealed it around the 
window, covering it completely. I re-
fused to look at the plant enjoying the breeze I craved. Months went by and 
the cell was dark all day long.  
One day, I decided I had to tear down 
the plastic bag. I felt I had to find a 
way to get air! So I began to scrape 
the rubber seal that held the window  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the frame. I used by fingernails to 
scrape and scrape for days, weeks, 
and months. It got to the point that my 
fingernails began to bleed. They hurt 
so bad that I would cry. But I needed 
some air. I believe it took about six 
months of scraping and bleeding be-
fore I finally made a tiny little hole. 
Wow ... wait. ... Sorry, I had to stop 
writing, my tears started to come down 
as I remember what I went through in 
that room. At times, I feel it is just past 
and forgotten, but I guess not.  
The hole wasn ’t big enough so that I could feel a breeze come in, but it was 
big enough for me to hold my nose 
against it and inhale. Upon seeing this 
little opening, I acted savagely. I only 
had room to put one nostril at a time 
against the hole, and I would breathe 
in so hard. It gave me a sense of be-
ing human again. I had a secret in that 
room that the officers did not know 
about. It was my secret air supply, 
which was what kept me alive. I no 
longer felt jealous of the plant. If any-
thing I sort of made the plant my friend 
again; it was all I had for company.  
Thinking back about being in that cell 
brings tears to my eyes. Three years 
in a cell might not sound like so long 
to a civilian who has never been to 
jail. But I can tell you, those three 
years felt like a lifetime. It changes 
people. It turns you into someone you 
never thought you would be. Your life 
is just never the same. It ’s like when a 
soldier goes to war; there are things 
that will stay with that soldier forever, 
and he finds it hard to speak of, and 
he ends up having to live with PTSD. 
Well, being locked in a room for three 
years is just the same. It plays with 
your mind, with your emotions, with 
your life.  
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008                                   Email: info@.com  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based watchdog project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of 
the shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attor-
neys, legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in pris-
on—with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting on solitary 
confinement in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly incar-
cerated people, to prisoners ’ families and advocates. To receive future copies, please send a request to the address or 
email above.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people 
who have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary ” at the address above, and tell 
us whether you would like us to use your name or would prefer to remain anonymous.  
Note: We regret that we cannot  offer legal assistance or advice and cannot respond to requests for this type of 
help. Legal materials sent to us cannot be returned to the sender. We also cannot forward mail to others. 
Thank you for your cooperation.  
4 LOUISIANA  — In February, after 
spending 43 years in solitary confine-
ment, Albert Woodfox of the “Angola 
3” was released from prison at age 69. 
Woodfox ’s 1972 conviction for the 
murder of a prison guard was over-
turned three separate times for a vari-
ety of constitutional violations. In 2015, 
a federal judge ordered Woodfox ’s 
immediate release and barred his be-
ing tried again, but this decision was 
appealed by the state. Though he con-
tinues to maintain his innocence, con-
cerns about his health and advancing 
age caused Woodfox to accept an 
agreement to plead “no contest ” to 
lesser charges in order to ensure a 
speedy release.  
ILLINOIS  — In January, a major class 
action settlement was reached that 
promises to improve mental health 
care for people held in Illinois prisons. 
In the settlement, the Illinois Depart-
ment of Corrections agreed to hire 300 
new mental health workers, build new 
mental health care facilities, create 50 
new hospital beds for individuals 
whose mental illness requires hospital-
ization, and to give 20 hours of out-of-
cell time each week to persons with 
mental illness who are being kept in 
solitary confinement. The settlement 
will also release individuals with men-
tal illness from solitary confinement if 
they were in solitary for minor reasons 
or as a result of behavior brought on 
by their mental illness. The lawsuit 
brought by the Uptown People ’s Law 
Center stemmed from allegations of 
widespread mistreatment and under -
treatment of mentally ill prisoners, in-
cluding locking them in solitary instead 
of giving them proper care.  
NEW YORK — A settlement reached 
in December promises incremental 
reforms to the use of solitary confine-
ment in New York state prisons. The 
settlement between the New York Civil 
Liberties Union and the Department of 
Corrections reduced the number of 
violations punishable with solitary by 
more than half, and imposed a three - 
month maximum sentence of solitary 
confinement for most first -time offens-es, and a 30 -day maximum sentence 
for almost all non -violent offenses. The 
proposed changes will bring a major 
shift to a state known for keeping peo-
ple in solitary for long periods of time 
as punishment for minor infractions. 
The settlement will not affect those 
held in administrative segregation, 
whose presence in the general prison 
population is deemed to pose a risk. 
Those held in ad -seg include some 
individuals who have spent multiple 
decades in solitary, without breaking a 
single prison rule.  
CALIFORNIA  — The effects of the 
September 15th Pelican Bay settle-
ment that promised to significantly 
curtail the use of solitary confinement 
in California prisons are beginning to 
be felt. The settlement ended indefi-
nite solitary confinement, streamlined 
the process for getting out of solitary, 
and stopped the use of alleged associ-
ations with prison gangs as cause for 
putting an individual in solitary confine-
ment. The settlement ’s changes are 
poised to save California $28 million in 
tax dollars. Since October, a third of 
those held in solitary have had their 
status reviewed, with a significant ma-
jority of them subsequently being 
cleared for release to the general pop-
ulation. However, not all recent chang-
es in California prisons are positive. 
Since August, Pelican Bay prison has 
been doing “suicide checks ” through-
out the night on the men still held in 
solitary confinement, causing extreme 
sleep deprivation that prisoners ’ rights 
activists say amounts to torture.  
INDIANA  — In February, a settlement 
was reached in a class -action lawsuit 
regarding the solitary confinement of 
individuals with mental illness in Indi-
ana’s prisons. With some exceptions, 
the settlement prohibits solitary con-
finement for people with serious men-
tal illness in Indiana state prisons, and 
requires a much more comprehensive 
mental health treatment plan for indi-
viduals  who have been diagnosed. This settlement agreement comes af-
ter a 2012 ruling that found the condi-
tions and treatment provided for indi-
viduals with serious mental illness in 
Indiana state prisons to be in violation 
of the Eighth Amendment. Previously, 
the only regular assessments of incar-
cerated individuals by mental health 
professionals were conversations 
yelled back and forth through their 
closed, windowless cell doors.  
OREGON  — Choosing to forgo the 
costly litigation that other states have 
undergone, in January, the Oregon 
Department of Corrections agreed to 
reduce the use of solitary confinement 
of people with mental illness. The 
agreement includes requirements of 
20 hours of out -of-cell time each week, 
significant improvements in mental 
health treatment, and more. These 
changes came after a damning May 
2015 report issued by the Disability 
Rights Organization about the condi-
tions of the units where mentally ill 
prisoners were held. Among other alle-
gations, the report detailed a lack of 
mental health services and a “a culture 
that promotes unnecessary violence 
and retaliation by correctional staff. ”  
NEBRASKA  — In January, the Ameri-
can Civil Liberties Union of Nebraska 
released a report that found frequent 
use of solitary confinement in the 
state ’s juvenile detention facilities. 
Youths have apparently been sent to 
solitary for infractions as minor as note
-passing. The report noted uneven 
policies regarding the isolation of juve-
niles in the nine detention facilities 
throughout the state. Some facilities 
frequently utilized solitary but would 
fail to document their use of the psy-
chologically harmful practice. The re-
port advocated for a ban on the use of 
solitary confinement with children, as 
well as increased transparency around 
the use of solitary confinement. Since 
the release of the report, lawmakers in 
Omaha have held hearings on juvenile 
solitary and introduced legislation to 
track and limit its use.  
News Briefs by Jack Denton  
 