  By James Ridgeway and Jean Casella  
Millions of Americans have been 
haunted by the spectre of Guantanamo 
and Abu Ghraib, where isolation and 
deprivation have been raised to the 
level of torture. Yet every day, here in 
the United States, tens of thousands of 
prisoners languish in ―the hole.‖  
A few of them are prison murderers or 
rapists. Far more have committed mi-
nor disciplinary infractions within pris-
on or otherwise run afoul of correc-
tions staff. Many of them suffer from 
mental illness, and are isolated for 
want of needed treatment; others are 
children, segregated for their own 
―protection‖; a growing number are 
elderly and have spent half their lives 
or more in utter solitude.  
No one knows for sure what their true 
numbers are. Many states, as well as 
the federal government, flatly declare 
that solitary confinement does not exist 
in their prison systems. As for their 
euphemistically named ―Secure Hous-
ing Units‖ or ―Special Management 
Units,‖ most states do not report occu-
pancy data.  
By common estimate, at least 20,000 
inmates are held in supermax prisons, 
which by definition isolate their in-
mates. Perhaps 50,000 to 80,000 
more are in solitary confinement on 
any given day in other prisons and 
jails, many of them within sight of 
communities where Americans go 
about their everyday lives.  
Over the past 30 years, their numbers 
have increased even faster than the nation’s explosive incarceration rate; 
between 1995 and 2000, the growth 
rate for prisoners housed in isolation 
was 40 per cent, as compared to 28 per 
cent for the prison population in gen-
eral, according to Human Rights 
Watch.  
Likewise, no one can state with any 
consistency what these prisoners have 
done to warrant being placed in soli-
tary confinement, or what their isola-
tion is supposed to accomplish.  
As it stands, prisoners can be thrown 
into the hole for rule violations that 
range from attacking a guard or a fel-
low inmate to having banned reading 
materials or too many postage stamps. 
In doling out months or even years in 
solitary, the warden and prison staff 
usually serve as prosecutor, judge and 
jury, and unsurprisingly they often 
abuse that power. The cases are shock-
ing, and they abound.  
At the all -solitary Colorado State Peni-
tentiary, Troy Anderson has spent the 
last 10 years in isolation, never seeing 
the sun or the surrounding mountains, 
due to acting out on the symptoms of 
untreated mental illness. Anderson has 
been diagnosed with ADHD, bipolar 
disorder, intermittent explosive disor-
der, antisocial personality disorder, 
cognitive disorders, a seizure disorder, 
and polysubstance dependence, and he 
has attempted suicide many times, 
starting at the age of 10.  
Anderson’s mental health treatment in 
prison has consisted largely of inter-
mittent and inappropriate medications and scant therapy, most of it conducted 
through a slot in his solid steel cell 
door. By Colorado's own estimate, 37 
per cent of the prisoners in its isolation 
units are mentally ill.   
Steve Bright of the Southern Center for 
Human Rights described the case of a 
15-year -old boy named JP —accused, 
but not yet tried or convicted, of mur-
der —who stands to spend up to two 
years in isolation in a Tennessee jail 
because his family is too poor to afford 
his bond, set at $500,000. Although he 
had previously attempted suicide and 
been treated for mental illness, JP has 
spent his time behind bars ―with no 
physical contact from a member of his 
family and no schooling.‖  
JP’s mother is allowed to ―visit‖  him by 
seeing him twice a week for 30 minutes 
on a TV monitor. She has not touched 
her son in more than year. ―The child 
has gone for over a year with no physi-
cal contact other than a correctional 
officer holding his arms when they 
move him,‖ says Bright. This story is 
far from rare: Children in adult prisons 
often end up in solitary because there 
is simply nowhere else to put them to 
prevent them being victimized.   
Prisoner Michelle Ortiz was first ad-
monished, then shackled and sent to 
solitary confinement as punishment for 
reporting her molestation and subse-
quent rape by a male guard at the Ohio 
Reformatory for Women.  When Ortiz 
reported her first assault to prison offi-
cials, they told her that the male guard  
(continued on page 4)  
Cruel and Usual: Solitary Confinement in U.S. Prisons  News from a Nation in Lockdown  
www.solitarywatch.com  
Print Edition, Spring 2011  2 About Solitary Watch  
Solitary Watch is an innovative web site aimed at bringing this issue out of the shadows and into the light of the public 
square.  
The mission of Solitary Watch is to provide the public —as well as practicing attorneys, legal scholars, law enforcement 
and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and prisoners –with the first comprehensive source of in-
formation on solitary confinement in the United States.  
Combining a data bank compiled through state -by-state research with background, analysis, breaking news, and ―Voices 
from Solitary,‖ the site will serve as an information clearinghouse and educational resource.  
Solitary Watch is on the web at  www.solitarywatch.com . 
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly, and includes a small selection of pieces from the site. It is 
available free of charge to current and former prisoners, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organi-
zations. To receive a copy, send a request to the address or email below.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by inmates in 
isolation. Please send contributions to ―Voices from Solitary‖ at the address below.  
PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008  
 solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  
Recipe for Madness in Prisons  
By Dr. Terry Kupers  
The recipe for creating madness in our prisons is easy enough to explicate; one merely needs to identify the steps that 
were taken to reach the current state of affairs. Here is the recipe:    
Begin by over -crowding the prisons with unprecedented numbers of drug -users and petty offenders, and make sentenc-
es longer across the board.    
Dismantle many of the rehabilitation and education programs so prisoners are relatively idle.    
Add to the mix a large number of prisoners suffering from serious mental illness.    
Obstruct and restrict visiting, thus cutting prisoners off even more from the outside world.    
Respond to the enlarging violence and psychosis by segregating a growing proportion of prisoners in isolative settings 
such as supermaximum security units.    
Ignore the many traumas in the pre -incarceration histories of prisoners as well as traumas such as prison rape that take 
place inside the prisons.    
Discount many cases of mental disorder as ―malingering.‖    
Label out -of-control prisoners ―psychopaths.‖    
Deny the ―malingerers‖ and ―psychopaths‖ mental health treatment and leave them warehoused in cells within super-
maximum security units.    
Watch the recidivism rate rise and proclaim the rise a reflection of a new breed of incorrigible criminals and 
―superpredators.‖ • 
Dr. Terry Kupers is a psychiatrist and a leading expert on the psychological affects of solitary confinement. This piece 
is an   excerpt from a longer article titled “How to Create Madness in Prisons,” which appeared in  the book Humane 
Prisons , edited by David Jones (Oxford: Radcliffe Publishing, 2006).  3  By Daniel Goldman  
Most of the presentations at April 5’s 
congressional briefing on the effects of 
long -term solitary confinement pro-
vided a simple overview of what Soli-
tary Watch’s readers know well: pro-
longed, isolated confinement causes 
serious psychological damage, and 
most courts and legislatures have been 
unwilling to find harsh practices un-
constitutional or to change this na-
tion’s current trajectory.  The briefing, 
held in a packed room at the Rayburn 
House Office Building, was co -
sponsored by Congressmen John Co-
nyers (D -MI), Robert C. ―Bobby‖ Scott 
(D-VA) and Cedric Richmond (D -LA).  
The panelists explained some of the 
problems with solitary and provid-
ed  insights that could guide reform at 
the national level, such as isolation 
time limits, better data collection, 
more mental health screening and 
care, and reductions in overcrowding 
and overall incarceration rates.  
David Fathi, Director of the ACLU’s 
National Prison Project, was the first 
speaker and cited statistics that some 
20,000 inmates live in isolation condi-
tions in U.S. supermax prisons. Fathi 
went on to explain how disparate la-
beling practices across correctional 
systems make it difficult to accurately 
count those in isolation, and that the 
numbers are therefore certainly much 
higher. Virtually all prisons and most 
jails have some form of solitary con-
finement, but few if any systems keep 
or disclose data on how many are kept 
in isolation or for how long.  
Laura Rovner provided some ideas for 
gathering more accurate data about 
the numbers of people held in solitary 
and the length of their stays, based on 
her work with inmates at ADX, the 
federal supermax in Florence, Colora-
do. At her University of Denver Civil Rights Clinic, Rovner and her students 
wrote letters to 133 ADX inmates and 
asked them to report on their condi-
tions of confinement and lengths of 
stay. Of the 61 who responded, 33 had 
been in isolation for more than eight 
years. Once an inmate is transferred to 
ADX, it takes a minimum of three 
years for him to earn enough credit to 
be moved to another institution, and 
only five percent actually leave in three 
years. Reports described mental health 
interviews of ADX inmates taking 
place through the cuffports of the 
nearly soundproof doors and averag-
ing less than five minutes.  
Rovner pointed out that these ex-
tremely harsh conditions —many of 
which are in clear violation of interna-
tional human rights laws —have given 
the European courts reason to block 
the transfer of terror suspects to the 
U.S. on the basis that they would likely 
end up at ADX.  
The only panelist from the corrections 
community was  Michael Randle, a for-
mer  administrator in the Illinois 
and Ohio Departments of Corrections. 
Randle  described the reforms that took 
place during his time in those state 
systems, ―unfortunately as a result of 
litigation.‖ The five reforms he saw as 
crucial to improving conditions in soli-
tary were:  
 Establishing a centralized process 
in each system that places prison-
ers in disciplinary solitary only 
after independently reviewed hear-
ings that take place outside the 
prisons and that follow specific 
criteria that are disclosed in pris-
oner handbooks.  
 Allowing inmate participation in 
disciplinary hearings.  
 Creating an appeal process by 
which challenges go to administra-tor with access to the director of 
the system.  
 Informing inmates of how long 
they will be in solitary and what 
they can do to increase or decrease 
that time.  
 Reducing isolation by using out -of
-cell time and a system of progres-
sive housing for transferring out of 
solitary and back into general pop-
ulation.  
Most of the ideas Randle described are 
already in place in some states, but no 
prison system has created a policy by 
which all inmates are humanely and 
safely treated.  
One panelist had himself spent 29 
years in solitary confinement: Robert 
King, the only member of the so -called 
Angola 3 now living in the free world. 
Their case was depicted in the docu-
mentary film In the Land of the Free , 
which was screened following the pan-
el discussion.  
There is a long way to go before soli-
tary practices in the U.S. reach inter-
national human rights standards, and 
there is seemingly very little momen-
tum for getting us there. Nevertheless, 
a briefing on Capitol Hill  raises some 
hope that at least a small group of con-
gressmen —motivated in part by the 
successes of the civil rights move-
ment —has decided that solitary con-
finement is an issue worth pursuing at 
the national level. Gathering data and 
reporting on widespread abuses can 
provide some ammunition for the po-
litical fight that will surely follow the 
introduction of any legislation to limit 
solitary confinement. • 
Daniel Goldman is a 2011 graduate of 
Washington and Lee University 
School of Law and a reporter and re-
searcher for Solitary Watch.  Solitary Confinement Comes to Capitol Hill  4  Cruel and Usual  
(continued from page 1)  
was being transferred to another facili-
ty and was ―just a dirty old man.‖ That 
same evening, the guard raped her.  
Ortiz was sent to solitary, reportedly, 
so that she could not tell other prison-
ers what had happened to her. Victims 
of prison rape, like children, are often 
isolated ―for their own protection,‖ or 
given a choice between solitary and 
continued sexual assault.   
Timothy Muise, a prisoner at the Mas-
sachusetts Correctional Institute at 
Norfolk, protested to prison authori-
ties about a sex -for-information racket 
being run by guards, in which certain 
prisoners were permitted to have sex 
in return for snitching on others.  
Muise was thrown into solitary for two
-and-a-half months, brought up on 
disciplinary charges for ―engaging in 
or inciting a group demonstration,‖ 
and shipped out to another prison. It 
is far from unusual for prison whistle-
blowers to be silenced through the use 
of solitary confinement.  
Maine prisoner Deane Brown, serving 
a lengthy sentence for burglary and 
robbery in the lockdown unit of Maine 
State Prison, began sending reports by 
letter then by phone to a community 
radio station; he called his reports 
―Live from the Hole.‖  
Brown was reprimanded by the war-
den, who said he was "disclosing confi-
dential information through the me-
dia.‖ Then Brown was suddenly 
whisked away to a series of maximum 
security prisons in Maryland, and end-
ed up in a particularly brutal solitary 
confinement unit in New Jersey. Cases 
of jailhouse journalists being punished 
with isolation have surfaced in other 
states, as well.   
At the Louisiana State Penitentiary at 
Angola, Herman Wallace and Albert Woodfox were placed in solitary con-
finement following the murder of a 
prison guard. They maintain that they 
were targeted for the crime because of 
their membership in a prison chapter 
of the Black Panthers.  
More than 38 years later they are still 
in solitary. Both men are now in their 
60s, but the warden maintains they 
must be kept in isolation because they 
are ―still trying to practice Black Pan-
therism‖ and he does not  want to 
―have the blacks chasing after them.‖  
What conditions await these prisoners 
consigned to solitary for months, years 
or decades? A typical supermax cell 
runs about  6 x 9 feet  and contains a 
toilet and sink, a slab of poured con-
crete for a bed and another slab for a 
desk.  
Occupants may get a brief shower a 
couple of times a week and a chance to 
exercise in what looks like the run of a 
dog kennel three days a week. Food is 
shoved through a slot in the door. 
They get perhaps one phone call a 
month and an occasional visit, through 
a barrier, with an approved list of fam-
ily and friends. They can select a book 
every so often from an approved list. 
On occasion, a TV inside or outside the 
cell blares programming at them, often 
of a religious nature.  
If they are deemed to have misbehaved 
in some way they may be deprived of 
exercise, books or visits; if deemed a 
suicide risk, they can have their blan-
kets and even their clothing removed. 
In one Louisiana parish prison last 
year, suicidal inmates were found be-
ing locked, alone and often naked, in 
so-called ―squirrel cages‖ measuring  3 
x 3 feet —one-fourth of the locally 
mandated size for caged dogs.   
Wilbert Rideau, a renowned prison 
journalist (and now a free man), de-
scribes in his memoir In the Place of 
Justice the ―bone -cold loneliness‖ of 
life in solitary confinement on Ango-
la's death row. He describes solitary as being: ―Removed from family or any-
thing resembling a friend, and just 
being there, with no purpose or mean-
ing to my life, cramped in a cage small-
er than an American bathroom. The 
lonesomeness was only increased by 
the constant cacophony of men in ad-
jacent cells hurling shouted insults, 
curses, and arguments —not to men-
tion the occasional urine or faeces con-
coction. Deprivation of both physical 
exercise and meaningful social interac-
tion were so severe ... that some men 
went mad while others feigned lunacy 
in order to get transferred to the hos-
pital for the criminally insane.‖ On 
occasion, prisoners facing the possibil-
ity of a lifetime in solitary have asked 
judges to sentence them to death in-
stead.  
In Europe, solitary confinement has 
largely been abandoned, and it is wide-
ly viewed as a form of cruel, inhuman 
and degrading treatment, in violation 
of international human rights conven-
tions. But American courts  and politi-
cians have, for the most part, failed to 
take a strong stand against solitary 
confinement. There are signs, howev-
er, that the consensus may be shifting.  
Legislation to limit solitary confine-
ment has been introduced in Colorado, 
New Mexico, and Maine, among other 
states. At the same time, cases have 
been brought  before federal courts 
challenging on constitutional grounds 
the decades -long solitary confinement 
of several of the nation's most isolated 
prisoners.   
The ACLU's  David Fathi believes that a 
combination of legislation and litiga-
tion, grassroots activism and investi-
gative journalism are producing ―a 
breakthrough in public awareness.‖ If 
this is true, it may at least bring this 
form of ―no -touch torture‖ out of the 
shadows of the prison walls and into 
public view. • 
James Ridgeway and Jean Casella 
are the editors of Solitary Watch.  