  By Susan Greene  
Editors’ Note: For the first time, we are 
devoting our entire print edition to a sin-
gle article —Susan Greene’s “The Gray 
Box: An Investigative Look at Solitary 
Confinement.” Greene is a Denver -based 
journalist who specializes in investigat-
ing social justice issues. She worked in 
newspapers for twenty years, most re-
cently as a metro columnist for The Den-
ver Post. The following is a long excerpt 
from an even longer article published in 
February by the Dart Society, an organi-
zation dedicated to connecting and sup-
porting journalists worldwide who ad-
vance the compassionate and ethical cov-
erage of trauma, conflict and social in-
justice (www.dartsociety.org).  Our 
thanks to Susan Greene and the Dart 
Society for permitting us to reprint it.  
* * * 
A few weeks ago, on the 15th anniversary 
of his first day in prison, Osiel Rodriguez 
set about cleaning the 87 square feet he 
inhabits at ADX, a federal mass isolation 
facility in Colorado.  
“I got it in my head to destroy all my pho-
tographs,” he writes in a letter to me. “I 
spent some five hours ripping each one to 
pieces. No one was safe. I did not save one 
of my mother, father, sisters. Who are 
those people anyway?”  
Such is the logic of the gray box, of sitting 
year after year in solitude.  
Whether Rodriguez had psychological 
problems when he robbed a bank, bur-
glarized a pawn shop and stole some guns 
at age 22, or whether mental illness set in 
during the eight years he has spent in se-
clusion since trying to walk out of a feder-
al penitentiary in Florida – it’s academic. 
What’s true now is that he’s sick, literally, 
of being alone, as are scores of other pris-
oners in extreme isolation.  
Among the misperceptions about solitary 
confinement is that it’s used only on the 
most violent inmates, and only for a few 
weeks or months. In fact, an estimated 
80,000 Americans — many with no rec-
ord of violence either inside or outside prison — are living in seclusion. They stay 
there for years, even decades. What this 
means, generally, is 23 hours a day in a 
cell the size of two queen -sized mattress-
es, with a single hour in an exercise cage, 
also alone. Some prisoners aren’t allowed 
visits or phone calls. Some have no TV or 
radio. Some never lay eyes on each other. 
And some go years without fresh air or 
sunlight.  
Solitary is a place where the slightest de-
tails can mean the world. Things like 
whether you can see a patch of grass or 
only sky outside your window – if you’re 
lucky enough to have a window. Or 
whether the guy who occupies cells before 
you in rotation has a habit of smearing 
feces on the wall. Are the lights on 24/7? 
Is there a clock or calendar to mark time? 
If you scream, could anyone hear you?  
In the warp of time and space where Ro-
driguez lives, the system not only has 
stripped him of any real human contact, 
but also made it unbearable to be remind-
ed of a reality that has become all too un-
real. It’s ripping him apart.  
“Looking at photos of the free world 
caused me so much pain that I just could-
n’t do it any more,” writes Rodriguez, 36. 
“Time and these conditions are breaking 
me down.”  
This is what our prisons are doing to peo-
ple in the name of safety. This is how 
deeply we’re burying them...  
* * * 
Plenty of corrections officers might tell 
you that offenders doing time in solitary 
don’t deserve the roofs over their heads or 
the meals shoved through their food slots. 
To be sure, many of these prisoners have 
done heinous, unforgivable things for 
which we lock them up tightly. Just how 
tightly is no small question. Yet, as a mat-
ter of public policy, the question hardly 
comes up. Compared to how much we as 
a nation have debated capital punish-
ment, a sentence served by a small frac-
tion of the incarcerated, we barely discuss 
how severely we’re willing to punish near-
ly everyone else.  “When the door is locked against the pris-
oner, we do not think about what is be-
hind it,” Supreme Court Associate Justice 
Anthony Kennedy once said.  
Solitary confinement started in the U.S. as 
a morally progressive social experiment in 
the 1820s by Quakers, who wanted law-
makers to replace mutilations, amputa-
tions and the death penalty with rehabili-
tation. The hope was that long periods of 
introspection would help criminals re-
pent.  
After touring a Pennsylvania prison in the 
1840s, Charles Dickens described pro-
longed isolation as a “slow and daily tam-
pering with the mysteries of the brain 
immeasurably worse than any torture of 
the body.” He also wrote, “There is a 
depth of terrible endurance in it which 
none but the sufferers themselves can 
fathom.”  
Some of his contemporaries shared that 
view. “It devours the victims incessantly 
and unmercifully,” Alexis de Tocqueville 
reported from a prison in New York in the 
1820s. “It does not reform, it kills.”  
Most prisons suspended the practice in 
the mid - to late -1800s once it became 
clear the theory didn’t work. The U.S. Su-
preme Court punctuated that point in 
1890 when it freed a Colorado man, rec-
ognizing the psychological harm isolation 
had caused him. “This matter of solitary 
confinement is not … a mere unimportant 
regulation as to the safe -keeping of the 
prisoner,” the court ruled in the case of 
James Medley. “A considerable number 
of the prisoners fell, after even a short 
confinement, into a semi -fatuous condi-
tion, from which it was next to impossible 
to arouse them, while those who stood the 
ordeal better were not generally re-
formed, and in most cases did not recover 
sufficient mental activity to be of any sub-
sequent service to the community.”  
Solitary confinement was largely unused 
for about a century until October 1983 
when, in separate incidents, inmates 
killed two guards in one day at the U.S. 
Penitentiary in Marion, Ill., which had 
replaced Alcatraz as home to the most 
The Gray Box  News from a Nation in Lockdown  
www.solitarywatch.com  
Print Edition, Spring 2012  2  dangerous federal convicts. The prison 
went into lockdown for the next 23 
years, setting the model for dozens of 
state and federal supermaxes – prisons 
designed specifically for mass isolation 
— that since have been built in the 
name of officer safety. “Never again,” 
promised Reagan -era shock doctrinari-
ans who set out at great cost to crack 
down on prison violence...  
Administered by corrections officials, 
not judges, solitary confinement is a 
punishment beyond incarceration, re-
moving prisoners not only from the rest 
of society, but also from each other and 
staff. It’s now practiced routinely in 
federal penitentiaries, state prisons and 
local jails under a number of bureau-
cratic labels: “lockdown,” “protective 
custody,” “strip cells,” “control units,” 
“security housing units,” “special man-
agement units” and “administrative 
segregation.” Federal justice officials 
say the different classifications prevent 
them from keeping track of how many 
people are being isolated. What is 
acknowledged even in official records is 
that the vast majority are men and that 
rates of pre -existing mental illness ex-
ceed the higher -than -average levels in 
general prison populations...  
Meantime, an analysis of prison budg-
ets by the Urban Institute shows that 
taxpayers are shelling out about 
$75,000 a year to house a single pris-
oner in solitary confinement – more 
than twice as much as spent housing 
prisoners in general population. Staff-
ing is more expensive because two or 
more officers usually are required to 
escort prisoners any time they leave 
their cells, and because the cooking and 
cleaning work, which in other prisons 
would be performed by inmates, must 
be done by paid staff. As a rule, prison-
ers in isolation aren’t allowed to work.  
For reasons of prison safety, short peri-
ods of confinement may make sense for 
the most violent inmates. Yet the so -
called “worst of the worst” are, by defi-
nition, the exception rather than the 
rule. States vastly overestimated the 
need for supermax space to contain 
high -risk offenders, and have filled it 
with relatively low -risk prisoners, many 
of whom pose no apparent risk or have 
no record of violence. Anyone even 
loosely labeled to have ties with terror-
ists gets put into isolation as a matter of 
course. Juveniles are secluded for what 
is officially deemed to be their own pro-tection. Mentally ill prisoners who are 
prone to rage or agitation are isolated 
for convenience. And, all too often, hav-
ing a gang affiliation, writing grievances 
or cussing out a guard can land you in 
solitary for the long haul. Bad behavior 
– or merely a corrections officer’s alle-
gation of it – can add years to your time 
in isolation. Some prisoners have spent 
a decade or two asking why they’re still 
there, without getting an official an-
swer.  
“These are extraordinary, I believe of-
ten needless and indefensible, risks to 
take with the human psyche and spirit,” 
writes Craig Haney, a psychology pro-
fessor at the University of California at 
Santa Cruz.  
Anthony Gay had a low -level assault 
charge in Illinois for punching another 
kid, stealing a dollar from him and 
swiping his hat. A parole violation on 
his seven -year suspended sentence ulti-
mately landed him in a state supermax 
where he has cut himself hundreds of 
times with shards of glass and metal, 
and eats his own flesh. He has racked 
up a 97 -year sentence for throwing 
urine and feces out his food slot – be-
havior that’s fairly typical for severely 
mentally ill prisoners in solitary.  
Gay passes his time at the Tamms Cor-
rectional Center writing anyone who 
will receive his letters.  
“I’ve been trapped for approximately 
nine years. The trap, like a fly on sticky 
paper, aggravates and agitates me,” he 
writes. “America, can you hear me? I 
love you America, but if you love me, 
please speak out and stand up against 
solitary confinement.”  
* * *  
In months of trading letters with pris-
oners, and in a few dozen interviews 
with men who’ve gotten out, I hear the 
same descriptions of solitary: that it’s 
starkly sterile, unremittingly monoto-
nous and numbingly idle.  
“Ninety percent of the time you hear 
nothing but the sound of air from the 
ventilation. The silence can drive you 
crazy. Makes you feel as if the world has 
ended but you somehow survived and 
are tripped,” Jeremy Pinson writes 
from ADX, the crown jewel of the feder-
al system once described by its warden 
as a “clean version of hell.”  “The world outside is like another plan-
et,” writes Jack Powers, also from ADX. 
“I feel like I am trapped within a dis-
ease.”  
Prisoners pace their cells like caged 
felines at a zoo. “I walked and walked 
and walked some more,” says Darrell 
Cannon, who did nine years in solitary 
in Illinois. “I’d walk in circles – always 
to the left, for some reason – for six, 
maybe seven hours a day.”  
Almost everyone in isolation spends at 
least some time counting. They count 
the steps they take, the cinder blocks on 
the walls, the tiles on the ceiling, their 
sneezes and coughs, and how many 
times the furnace kicks in or the plumb-
ing sloshes.  
“If I remember correctly, there are 412 
holes in (the cell door). I would count 
them daily,” Joe Sorrentino, now serv-
ing time in a general population prison, 
recalls of his cell at Tamms. “At the 
back of the cell, close to the ceiling 
there’s a window approx. 30 inches 
long and 10 inches high with a square 
bar going through the middle … My 
window faced the tunnel, so my view 
for my first seven years there were of a 
blue wall. For years, I wondered what 
other guys could see out their win-
dows.”  
Some prisoners pass their time praying, 
meditating or talking to themselves. 
Some read voraciously, though often 
they’re limited to only a few books a 
month. Some take whatever enrich-
ment classes are broadcast over their 
TVs…Out of limited supplies, prisoners 
create art. They lodge bits of sponges 
into ballpoint cartridges to make paint-
brushes. For paint, they mix water with 
Nescafe grinds or dye from candy they 
can buy from the commissary. M&Ms – 
plain, not peanut – work best. For deep 
reds, they fold red dye in with ground 
powder from vitamins. Navy blue takes 
a three -step process mixing royal blue 
candy coating with blue and black ink 
from pens. The color purple is best 
achieved from Skittles.  
Prisoners strike up relationships with 
the critters that crawl in through their 
air vents. One man used his own hairs 
to try to repair a moth’s injured wing in 
hopes of facilitating its escape. Moham-
med Saleh — convicted of having co -
conspired in the 1993 World Trade 
Center bombing — lost his daily hour of 3  outdoor recreation for three months at 
ADX because he saved bread crumbs to 
feed blackbirds in his exercise pen.  
Defiance can kill time in solitary. Some 
prisoners kick the walls or bang their 
cups against their doors. Some flood 
their cells by clogging their toilets with 
toilet paper, or break light bulbs and set 
their mattresses on fire. Some write up 
their grievances; some sue over them; 
and some sue some more on behalf of 
guys on their units. Those feeling espe-
cially resistant stop eating or drinking. 
Brian Nelson starved himself regularly 
at Tamms, where he spent 12 years in 
seclusion. He once refused food and 
water for 40 days, he says, to try to 
prod the prison to treat a guy on his 
unit for cancer...  
A hunger strike by 5,000 prisoners last 
fall shed light on solitary confinement 
conditions at California’s Pelican Bay 
State Prison. The strike ended when the 
state agreed to consider letting prison-
ers make phone calls and buy calen-
dars. Months later, no substantive 
changes have been made on those mod-
est demands. There have been reports 
that strike leaders have faced discipli-
nary action and that three strikers have 
committed suicide.  
* * *  
The human brain needs social contact 
like our lungs need air. Social needs are 
so basic that they drive family struc-
tures, religions, urban design, govern-
ments, economies and legal systems 
worldwide. We honor these needs even 
with pets and zoo animals, generally 
acknowledging the inhumanity of cag-
ing them for long periods of time alone 
or in tight spaces. New federal guide-
lines on the use of laboratory animals 
require relatively more space, sensory 
stimulation and environmental enrich-
ment than we afford people in confine-
ment. The revised rules put forth by the 
National Academy of Sciences call for 
significantly more square footage to 
house a head of cattle, for example, 
than prisons provide in solitary.  
Convicts in the U.S. are not afforded 
such concern. We push some of them 
into seclusion with little to no program-
matic support, basically giving up on 
them.  
“Anyone who spends more than three 
years in a place like this is ruined for 
life,” Powers writes. “Two or three hun-
dred years from now people will look back on this lockdown mania like we 
look back on the burning of witches.”  
In 2006, a bipartisan national task 
force convened by the Vera Institute for 
Justice called for ending solitary con-
finement beyond periods of about ten 
days. The report by the Commission on 
Safety and Abuse in American Prisons 
found practically no benefits from su-
permax conditions either for prisoners 
or the public. It cited studies showing 
that solitary confinement impairs brain 
function and can cause psychosis and 
serious depression. It also cited a num-
ber of reports showing that long -term 
isolation doesn’t curb prison violence 
and makes it highly likely that prisoners 
will commit more crimes when re-
leased.  
The United Nations Special Rapporteur 
on Torture, Juan Mendez, is calling to 
end the use of isolation on juveniles and 
the mentally ill. For everyone else, he is 
pushing a worldwide limit of 15 days. 
Mendez personally endured three days 
in solitary under the rule of a junta in 
Argentina – an experience he describes 
as “the darkest days of my life.” So far, 
he has been unable to gain access to 
investigate state and federal prisons in 
the U.S. “Let’s just say it has been a 
challenge,” he says.  
U.S. courts have rejected most 8th 
Amendment claims against isolation, 
ruling that some psychological harm to 
certain prisoners doesn’t make the en-
tire practice cruel or unusual. In many 
cases, corrections officials have per-
suaded judges that isolation is a misno-
mer because prisoners glean brief inter-
actions with guards – exchanges that 
are at best perfunctory and at worst 
hostile, degrading and cruel. They’ll 
also argue that prisoners shouting to 
each other between cellblocks, across 
exercise cages or down drainpipes con-
stitute meaningful forms of social inter-
action.  
* * *  
For every hunger striker, jailhouse law-
yer and cellblock arsonist, there are 
many more people in solitary who’ve 
folded up quietly into themselves.  
“I became increasingly withdrawn at 
ADX to the point where the only people 
I interacted with were the television 
characters on ‘Seinfeld.’ I watched 
‘Seinfeld’ four times a day. Jerry, 
Elaine, George and Kramer became my 
best friends. I felt like part of their fam-ily. They were the only friends I had,” 
Anthony McBayne wrote in a legal dec-
laration.  
Some prisoners say they forget what 
day, month or year it is, partly because 
keeping track can be too painful. “Time 
is the enemy, a constant reminder that 
your life is being wasted and there is no 
redemptive solution. Paying close at-
tention to time will in short order drive 
you to misery and despair at what 
you’ve lost,” Jeremy Pinson writes.  
Concentration wanes, revenge fantasies 
fester and voices echo in people’s 
heads. Idiosyncrasies grow into obses-
sions about the tiniest details of physi-
cal space. Prisoner after prisoner writes 
of becoming enraged by slight noises or 
tweaks in their routines.  
Some describe losing their senses of 
self, physically and emotionally. Mir-
rors, if available, are stainless steel 
plates that reflect only blurs. You can go 
years without an accurate picture of 
your own aging. Basic biographical facts 
– your age, your birthday – can get lost 
in a fog.  
“This is difficult to explain, but my 
memories were no longer mine,” Mark 
Jordan writes of his years at ADX. “I 
questioned whether or not I really had a 
past or history at all, whether the mem-
ories were real or false. … It was as 
though none of it was real. I was born 
into this life of isolation and the memo-
ries not memories at all. Confabula-
tions.”  
We in the free world know who we are 
by interacting with each other. We 
make sense of ourselves largely through 
our relationships. Legal sociologist 
Joan Martel described the loss of iden-
tity in isolation. “To be,” she writes, 
“one has to be somewhere.” Without 
normal grounding in space or time, iso-
lated prisoners lose their understanding 
of themselves and their own histories.  
“After 14 years, those people are 
strangers to me; as I must be to them,” 
Osiel Rodriguez wrote about the family 
members whose portraits he destroyed. 
“My parents will be dust if/when I ever 
get out of prison. My three sisters will 
be in their mid -70’s to late 60’s. So 
what was I doing holding on to photos 
of moments I was not a part of, or know 
nothing about?”  
* * *  
Letters from isolation are always hand-4 written (supermaxes don’t provide ac-
cess to computers, which some long -
timers have never even used). They ar-
rive paper in government -issue white 
envelopes, often quilted with 1 -cent and 
5-cent postage stamps bartered some-
how between cells.  
Some – especially those from prisons 
allowing showers only once a week — 
come smelling like confinement.  
Certain prisoners struggle with their 
writing...Others write so well that it 
hurts.  
“I miss being around people. I miss be-
ing able to run on the track or walk on 
grass or feel the sun on my face,” reads 
one of Jack Powers’ letters. “One time I 
kept a single green leaf alive for a few 
weeks. And one time I had grasshopper 
for a pet. And one time I made a dwarf 
tree out of yarn from a green winter 
hat, paper and dried tea bags. I made a 
guitar out of milk cartons, and it played 
quite well. I invented a perfect family – 
mom, dad and sister – so that we could 
interact and love one another. One time 
I wanted to take a bath, so I got into a 
garbage bag and put water in it and sat 
there. For a while I made vases out of 
toilet paper and soap and ink from a 
pen. I have done a thousand and one 
things to replicate ordinary life, but 
these too are now gone.”...  
Some letters are angry rants. Others are 
full of longing. A prisoner...in Illinois 
wrote a regretful 22 -page essay about 
the man he had killed half a lifetime 
ago, imagining what might have hap-
pened to them each if he hadn’t pulled 
the trigger...  A man who tried to hang himself in his 
cell asked for my help reimbursing the 
state of Illinois $56 for a torn bed sheet. 
Attempted suicide in solitary often is 
treated as a disciplinary problem.  
“When I’m put on a suicide watch, I’m 
all alone and stripped naked and may 
see a mental health staff for 3 -4 
minutes a day. So I wonder dam how is 
this pose to help me. It don’t,” Bobby 
Boyd writes from Tamms.  
Some prisoners recognize their mental 
health problems. Others write around 
them.  
More often than I’ll ever know, my let-
ters haven’t reached the men I’ve 
mailed them to. Some have come back 
to me marked that they were rejected 
by prisoners I’m sure didn’t reject 
them. Even more often, their letters to 
me don’t make it past the mailroom.  
Between the lines of the ones that do, 
most letters from solitary say the same 
thing: That we’re all higher than the 
lowest things we’ve ever done. For most 
of the so -called “worst of the worst” 
who bother writing, there seems to be 
at least some capacity for redemption.  
* * *  
Some words are uncomfortable to 
write. “Trauma” is one of them, espe-
cially when used about people who have 
traumatized others. “Torture” is anoth-
er. In the moral balance of crime and 
punishment, the word risks discounting 
the suffering convicts have brought 
their own victims.  Nothing is black and white in a gray 
box. Lines can blur between the good 
guys and the bad ones. It’s far easier to 
label the secret police in some foreign 
dictatorship as torturers than to lob the 
word at prison guards in the next coun-
ty. 
It isn’t news that solitary confinement 
hurts people. Dickens, de Tocqueville 
and the Supreme Court — they all knew 
it generations ago. But our memory is 
disturbingly short. What’s considered 
cruel and unusual under the 8th 
Amendment pivots on the “evolving 
standards of decency that mark the pro-
gress of a maturing society.” Our con-
tinuing reliance on solitary confine-
ment as a default for difficult prisoners 
raises the question of how much, if at 
all, we as a society have progressed.  
Jack Powers, now in his 11th year at 
ADX, mentions in almost all his letters 
that every day is a struggle not to lose 
what’s left of his free will.  
“I could lie back, watch TV, eat chips 
and jack off all day and say to hell with 
it. But I cannot because there is some 
force of principle in my mind that will 
not allow me to do so,” he writes. “I am 
a voice crying out in a place where no 
one can hear me. I am saying, ‘Wait! 
We have it all wrong! We can do better 
than this!’ But maybe we cannot. May-
be we are just stuck with what it is. 
Maybe I am afraid of the world and of 
being human and of lacking love. May-
be we all are. Maybe this is all we are 
capable of.  
“I hope not. But maybe it is.”   
 
About Solitary Watch  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attorneys, legal 
scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and prisoners –with the first cen-
tralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting on solitary confinement in the 
United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to current and former prisoners, to  
prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive a copy, send a request to the address or 
email below.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by inmates who 
have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address below.  
PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008 / solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  