  By Jean Casella and James Ridgeway  
Molly J said of her time in solitary con-
finement: “[I felt] doomed, like I was be-
ing banished…Like you have the plague 
or that you are the worst thing on earth. 
Like you are set apart from everything 
else. I guess [I wanted to] feel like I was 
part of the human race —not like some 
animal.”  
Molly was just 16 years old when she was 
placed in isolation in an adult jail in 
Michigan. She described her cell as “a 
box”: “There was a bed —the slab. It was 
concrete…There was a stainless steel toi-
let/sink combo…The door was solid, 
without a food slot or window…There was 
no window at all.” Molly remained in soli-
tary for several months, locked down 
alone in her cell for at least 22 hours a 
day. 
No other nation in the developed world 
routinely tortures its children in this 
manner. And torture is indeed the word 
brought to mind by a shocking report 
released by Human Rights Watch and the 
American Civil Liberties Union. Growing 
Up Locked Down documents, for the first 
time, the widespread use of solitary con-
finement on youth under the age of 18 in 
prisons and jails across the country.  
Ian Kysel, author of the 141 -page report, 
interviewed or corresponded with more 
than 125 young people who had spent 
time in solitary as children in 19 states. To 
cope with endless hours of extreme isola-
tion, sensory deprivation and crippling 
loneliness, Kysel learned that some chil-
dren made up imaginary friends or 
played games in their heads. Some hid 
under the covers and tried to sleep as 
much as possible, while others found they 
could not sleep at all.  
“Being in isolation to me felt like I was on 
an island all alone dying a slow death 
from the inside out,” a California teen 
wrote in a letter to Human Rights Watch.  
One young woman, who spent three 
months in solitary in Florida when she 
was 15, described becoming a “cutter” 
while in isolation: “I like to take staples 
and carve letters and stuff in my arm… each letter means something to me. It is 
something I had lost.” She started by 
carving into her arm the first letter of her 
mother’s name. Another girl who cut her-
self in solitary said she did it, “because it 
was the only release of my pain.”  
In fact, solitary confinement has been 
shown to cause severe pain and psycho-
logical damage to the tens of thousands of 
adults who endure it every day in Ameri-
can prisons. On children, the report 
states, the practice has a “distinct and 
particularly profound impact.” Because of 
“the special vulnerability and needs of 
adolescents, solitary confinement can be 
a particularly cruel and harmful practice 
when applied to them.” This is all the 
more true because for many of these kids, 
“developmental immaturity is com-
pounded by mental disabilities and histo-
ries of trauma, abuse, and neglect.”  
Yet prisons and jails commonly use isola-
tion to punish kids for violating prison 
rules, including both violent and nonvio-
lent infractions. One boy who entered a 
Colorado jail at age 15 said the guards 
doled out stints in solitary for crimes that 
would, in any other setting, be deemed 
normal adolescent behavior: “15 days for 
not making the bed; 15 days for not keep-
ing the cell door open; 20 or 25 days for 
being in someone else’s cell.”  
On Rikers Island in New York City, more 
than 14 percent of adolescents between 
the ages of 16 and 18 spent some period 
in “disciplinary segregation.” This is de-
spite the fact that nearly half of all adoles-
cents on Rikers have been found to have a 
“diagnosed mental disorder.”  
Other kids are isolated as a form of 
“protective custody,” because they are 
vulnerable to physical or sexual abuse. 
Still other children are placed in solitary 
confinement for “treatment” purposes, 
especially after threatening or attempting 
suicide —even though isolation has been 
shown to sharply increase the risk that 
prisoners will take their own lives.  
“There is nothing to do so you start talk-
ing to yourself and getting lost in your 
own little world. It is crushing,” said Paul K, who spent 60 days in solitary when he 
was 14. “You get depressed and wonder if 
it is even worth living.”  
No one knows precisely how many chil-
dren live in these conditions, since many 
state and local correctional systems do 
not keep such data. But the overall rate of 
solitary confinement in American prisons 
is thought to be about 5 percent, and an-
ecdotal evidence suggests that, in some 
systems, children may be isolated at even 
higher rates than adults. Given that near-
ly 100,000 youth under the age of 18 pass 
through adult prisons and jails annually, 
there exists the staggering possibility that 
thousands of children are spending time 
in solitary confinement each year.  
Ian Kysel said in an interview: “I think 
one of the greatest impediments to 
change is trying to unravel the policy is-
sue that is at the root of this problem: a 
criminal justice system that treats kids as 
if they’re adults without providing re-
sources or guidelines for their care.”  
For this reason, Human Rights Watch 
and the ACLU recommend that state and 
the federal governments “prohibit the 
housing of adolescents with adults, or in 
jails and prisons designed to house 
adults.” However, “regardless of how they 
are charged and held,” Kysel says une-
quivocally, “we need to ban the solitary 
confinement of young people across the 
board. There is simply no reason that a 
child or adolescent ever needs to be held 
in a cell, alone, for 22, let alone 24, hours 
at a stretch.”  
For this to happen, however, the Ameri-
can public will need to accept what nu-
merous international bodies have already 
concluded —that solitary confinement is 
cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment, 
and clearly rises to the level of torture 
when levied against vulnerable popula-
tions, including children.  
“If my story can stop another kid from 
coming” to solitary confinement, one 
Florida teen wrote, then, “Hopefully my 
pain serves some purpose.”  
This article was originally published in 
The Guardian on October 10, 2012.  
Kids in Solitary Confinement: America’s Official Child Abuse  News from a Nation in Lockdown  
www.solitarywatch.com  
Print Edition, Spring 2013  2 By Jesse Wilson  
Editor’s Note: The author is impris-
oned at United States Penitentiary, 
Administrative Maximum (ADX) in 
Florence, Colorado, the most secure 
supermax prison in the nation. Initial-
ly sentenced to five years in prison 
when he was 17 for grand larceny, he 
was given a life sentence for the mur-
der of a death row prisoner in Missis-
sippi’s Unit 32. He has been in solitary 
confinement for eight of the last 
twelve years. Wilson describes his 
time in solitary as consisting of walk-
ing around in circles and losing his 
social skills. A collateral consequence 
of his time in solitary, he’s written, is 
having families members “watch you 
get older and crazier.” —Sal Rodriguez  
I refuse to embrace the solitude. This 
is not normal. I’m not a monster and 
do not deserve to live in a concrete 
box. I am a man who has made mis-
takes, true. But I do not deserve to 
spend the rest of my life locked in a 
cage —what purpose does that serve? 
Why even waste the money to feed 
me? If I’m a monster who must live 
alone in a cage why not just kill me?  
Our country has thousands of its peo-
ple confined to concrete cages. Years 
pass, lives pass. The suffering does 
not. Our families suffer most, watch-
ing us grow old and go crazy in a cage. 
This is my biggest pain, knowing my 
mother and sister suffer with me. I can 
not see how this is helpful to society. 
Most men will spend years in a cage alone and be released back into society 
filled with hate and rage. It is an ugly 
truth. We as a country are blind to the 
reality of our prison system.  
It has become normal. And we the in-
mates are voiceless. Our voices are not 
heard. If they are heard, they are 
thought of as lies. I heard the head of 
the BOP in Congress (on radio) saying 
they do not have insane inmates 
housed here. This is what should be 
thought of as a lie. I have not slept in 
weeks due to these non -existing in-
mates beating on the walls and holler-
ing all night. And the most “non -
insane” smearing feces in their cells.  
This is reality.  This place is horrific, with the solitary, 
and the lack of communication outside 
these walls. I’ve been in prison without 
release for over twelve years, and eight 
of them I’ve been in a cage walking 
around in circles. I was released for 23 
days in 2000 after completing a boot 
camp/drug program. I was rearrested 
for drinking beer, a violation of proba-
tion. So I am pretty in tune with the 
concept of solitary. Prison. Cages and 
craziness.  
Out my window I see into a concrete 
yard surrounded by red brick walls. 
There is a drain in the middle of it and 
out of it weeds are growing. I thought 
they were weeds until a few blossomed 
into these beautiful yellow and brown 
flowers.  
Every now and then a pair of owls 
roosts on the security lights. This 
spring they had two babies. We 
watched them grow up and fly away. 
On any given day the sky here is 
breathtaking. The beauty out my win-
dow stays in my mind. I look around 
this cage at plain concrete walls and 
steel bars and a steel door, a steel toi-
let, and I endure its harshness because 
I am able to keep beauty in my mind. 
The window helps greatly.  
I’m in the hole so there is no TV. 
Books help me escape better than my 
words could ever explain, but most of 
all it’s the love of my family, the mem-
ories of beauty, and the knowledge of 
humanity.  
Loneliness is a destroyer of humanity.  
About Solitary Watch  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attorneys, 
legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in prison and 
their families —with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting 
on solitary confinement in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly incar-
cerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive a copy, send a request 
to the address or email below.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people who 
have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address below.  
PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008 / solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  Voices from Solitary: Loneliness Is a Destroyer of Humanity  
3 By Beth Broyles  
On January 4, 2013, Tamms Correction-
al Center in southeastern Illinois offi-
cially closed its doors forever. The state 
supermax prison, where hundreds of 
men were held in complete isolation in 
concrete boxes for 23 to 24 hours a day, 
was notorious for its extreme conditions 
and inhumane treatment of prisoners. 
During its 15 -year history, Tamms also 
became been the focus of a decade -long 
battle by local activists, lawyers, and the 
prisoners themselves —a battle to end 
what opponents of solitary confinement 
saw as torture in their own backyards.  
Opened in 1998 at the height of the su-
permax prison boom, Tamms was sup-
posed to hold only the most dangerous 
individuals —those with a history of as-
saults on prison staff or fellow prisoners. 
In fact, no one received a hearing before 
being placed in the supermax. Most of 
the men in Tamms had not been con-
victed of any violent crime after entering 
the prison system. Instead, according to 
a report published by the American Civil 
Liberties Union, “Tamms was populated 
by men who had sued the Department, 
filed grievances, and otherwise com-
plained about illegal conduct by prison 
officials —wardens were looking for a 
way to get rid of these headaches.”  
There were likewise no hearings to de-
termine who should be released from 
Tamms and no means for prisoners to 
earn their way out. The supermax had 
supposedly been designed for short -
term stays, yet many of men who had 
been sent to Tamms when the prison 
opened were still there 15 years later.  
Even men who had entered Tamms as 
mentally healthy individuals soon devel-
oped deep psychological scars. Many 
others had been shipped off to Tamms 
for committing acts which were caused 
by serious mental illnesses —and for 
them, the trauma was even worse. De-
nied adequate treatment, their mental 
health further deteriorated under the 
inhumane conditions.  
The story of Faygie Fields, which was 
revealed to the public in 2009 by report-
ing in the Belleville News Democrat,  
exemplified much of what was wrong 
with Tamms. Faygie Fields, who suf-
fered from schizophrenia, spent much of 
his early life in mental institutions. At 
age 25, he received a 40 -year sentence for homicide. Prior to being sent to 
Tamms, he had multiple disciplinary 
offenses. “He threw Kaopectate, milk 
cartons, urine, tomatoes, Kool -Aid, a 
food tray. He grabbed at keys. He pulled 
away from handcuffs.” After arriving at 
Tamms, his mental health deteriorated. 
He cut himself with any sharp object he 
could find, swallowed broken glass and 
smeared excrement on his cell walls. In 
response, the prison punished him, of-
ten by taking away his clothes.  
These were the conditions under which 
Fields was imprisoned for six years, un-
til his case was investigated as part of a 
lawsuit filed on his and other prisoners’ 
behalf. Psychiatrists testified during the 
proceedings that Fields was a schizo-
phrenic and needed mental health treat-
ment. The prison doctor who treated 
Fields’s self -inflicted wounds testified 
that, in suturing Fields’s wounds, he did 
not always use anesthetic because mas-
sive scarring from the patient’s frequent 
cutting caused numbness. The prison’s 
supervising psychologist, however, testi-
fied that prisoners mutilated themselves 
as a game, and that Fields was faking his 
mental illness in order to get better con-
ditions in prison.  
The court found that Fields was indeed a 
schizophrenic and ordered the prison to 
provide treatment for his mental illness. 
But by then, Fields, who was originally 
eligible for parole in 2004, had been 
given 34 additional years for offenses 
committed in prison --offenses that were 
caused by his untreated mental illness. He will now be eligible for parole in 
2038, when he is 79 years old —if he 
lives that long.  
Efforts to improve conditions at Tamms 
began with the men who were held 
there. In 2000, they staged a prison -
wide hunger strike that lasted 36 days. 
The participants were protesting every-
thing from the indiscriminate gassing of 
prisoners to the replacement of normal 
food with “nutraloaf” as a form of pun-
ishment. They ended their strike without 
a single demand being met, but some 
believed that the strike had raised 
awareness of the harrowing conditions 
at Tamms.  
In time, that awareness grew through 
friends and family members of the men 
imprisoned at Tamms. Artist and activ-
ist Laurie Jo Reynolds met the mothers 
of two men at Tamms, and was 
“appalled and heartbroken” to learn 
what their sons were enduring. Reynolds 
and others began sending letters and 
poetry to everyone held at Tamms. Some 
wrote back, she recalls, saying: “Hey, 
you know this poetry is great, but could 
you tell the governor what they’re doing 
to us down here?”  
That, Reynolds says, led to the birth of 
Tamms Year Ten, a full -blown campaign 
to end the suffering at Tamms. “We in-
troduced legislation,” she explains. “We 
had lobby days, press conferences. We 
had a huge public education campaign 
with dozens and dozens of events: inter-
ventions and tactics that included blues 
concerts and fine art events and perfor-
mances and panel discussions and state -
wide prayer vigils and cultural projects 
and media correction projects and pars-
ley eating contests. I mean, we had eve-
rything. We tried to saturate the market 
with information about the effects of 
long -term isolation.”  
As one of its projects, Tamms Year Ten 
had volunteers take photographs for 
prisoners at Tamms. They invited the 
men “to request a photograph of any-
thing in the world, real or imagined,” 
and promised to find volunteers to take 
them. “We wanted to give them a chance 
to see something they want to see, used 
to see, or may never see.” Another pro-
ject was the creation of “mud stencils” 
on Chicago walls and sidewalks. (See 
photograph).  
(continued on page 4)  Closing Tamms Supermax  
4 (continued from page 3)  
Legal battles against Tamms were 
waged primarily by the Uptown Peo-
ple’s Law Center. According to the 
ACLU, in July 2010, a court found that 
“every prisoner who had been trans-
ferred to Tamms since it opened had 
been denied a hearing which complied 
with the minimum requirements of 
due process. The court ordered that 
every man be given a hearing, and a 
written explanation of the reason he 
was sent to Tamms...The answer 
turned out to be that most did not 
need to be at Tamms at all.”  The evidence against Tamms grew. 
Although it had been built to reduce 
violence, a 2001 study found the rate 
of assaults on guards either stayed the 
same or increased. The supermax was 
also outrageously expensive. Accord-
ing to another report in the Belleville 
News Democrat , it cost over $26 mil-
lion per year to operate —about 
$85,000 per year per prisoner, as op-
posed to $15,000 to $24,000 per pris-
oner at other facilities.       
This mounting evidence finally suc-
ceeded in convincing Illinois governor 
Pat Quinn that keeping Tamms open was simply too costly, in both financial 
and human terms. Although his efforts 
to close the prison were resisted by 
local politicians and the prison offic-
ers’ union, Quinn finally triumphed.  
As 2012 drew to a close, buses began 
leaving the supermax for other facili-
ties. Some of the men of Tamms were 
released into less restrictive settings, 
while others remained in solitary, but 
with some chance of earning their way 
out. And Tamms Correctional Center, 
now sitting empty, became a symbol of 
hope for opponents of solitary confine-
ment across the nation.  
 NEW YORK – An important new 
report on solitary confinement was 
released in October by the New York 
Civil Liberties Union, entitled Boxed 
In: The True Cost of Extreme Isolation 
in New York's Prisons. Based on a 
year of research, correspondence with 
more than a hundred people in prison, 
and multiple open records requests, 
this report offers a detailed and power-
ful picture of how solitary confinement 
is used and abused in New York.  
New York City and New York State 
isolate their prisoners at the rate of 
about 10 percent and 8 percent, re-
spectively —both rates more than dou-
ble the national average. More than 5 
out of 6 are in solitary for nonviolent 
misbehavior rather than violent of-
fenses, yet many remain there for 
months and even years.  
The report received widespread 
media coverage, and resistance to the 
use of solitary confinement in New 
York is growing. An article by Solitary 
Watch following the release of Boxed 
In noted: “Until recently, it seemed 
like New York's penchant for solitary 
confinement might be irreversible... 
But a growing number of activists are 
working to combat the overuse of soli-
tary in both the city's jails and the 
state's prisons.”  
 
WASHINGTON, DC – In February, 
the office of Illinois Senator Dick Dur-
bin announced that the federal Bureau 
of Prisons (BOP)  had agreed 
to undergo a review of its  solitary con-
finement practices. Durbin stressed 
the importance of this development, 
citing the ever -growing number of 
prisoners held in solitary in the United 
States, a number higher than that of any other country. In 2010, a spokes-
person for the BOP  said that federal 
prisons held approximately 11,150 
prisoners in some form of segregated 
“special housing.”  
 According to Durbin’s statement, 
“this first ever review of federal segre-
gation policies comes after Durbin 
chaired a hearing last year on the hu-
man rights… of solitary confinement.” 
Durbin continued: “I am confident the 
Bureau of Prisons will permit a thor-
ough and independent review and look 
forward to seeing the results when 
they are made public. We can no long-
er slam the cell door and turn our 
backs on the impact our policies have 
on the mental state of the incarcerated 
and ultimately on the safety of our na-
tion.”  
Critics of solitary confinement were 
concerned to note, however, that even 
as it promised a review of its solitary 
confinement practices, the federal gov-
ernment was completing purchase of a 
new prison in Illinois that would hold 
supermax -type prisoners.  
 
CALIFORNIA  – In March, a court -
appointed consultant, forensic psychi-
atrist Dr. Raymond Patterson, report-
ed that the California Department of 
Corrections and Rehabilitation 
(CDCR) had failed to combat the large 
and escalating problem of suicides in 
the California prison system. Patterson 
complained that his recommendations 
over many years had gone unheeded.  
According to reporting by the Los 
Angeles Times , Patterson’s March 13 
report notes that prisoners housed in segregation units have a 33 times 
higher chance of suicide, and that 13 of 
the 15 deaths were attributable to 
some form of “inadequate assessment, 
treatment or intervention.” According 
to Amnesty International, between 
2006 and 2010, there was an average 
of 34 suicides in the California prison 
system a year, 42 percent of which oc-
curred in segregation units.   
The report came as a U.S. District 
Court judge was preparing a decision 
on whether or not California’s health, 
mental health, and dental care must 
continue to be monitored by federal 
courts. Both the CDCR and California 
governor Jerry Brown are seeking to 
end federal oversight.  
 
INTERNATIONAL  – On March 12, 
United Nations Special Rapporteur 
Juan E. Méndez (the UN’s chief tor-
ture investigator), along with the 
American Civil Liberties Union and 
Human Rights Watch, testified before 
the Inter -American Commission on 
Human Rights (IACHR) in its first -
ever briefing on the overuse and dam-
aging effects of solitary confinement. 
Citing the torture of extended isola-
tion, the organizations asked the 
IACHR to examine the abusive use of 
solitary. Méndez called on the IACHR 
to restrict the use of isolation on pris-
oners, stating: “The use of solitary 
confinement can only be accepted un-
der exceptional circumstances, and 
should only be applied as a last resort 
measure in which its length must be as 
short as possible.” He also stated that 
solitary should never be used on chil-
dren and people with mental illness.  
 
News Briefs by Lisa Dawson  News Briefs  