  By Dr. Terry Kupers  
In recent decades in the U.S.A., wealth 
has become more concentrated in few-
er hands, the gap between rich and 
poor has grown, and there has been a 
turn away from  social welfare pro-
grams that support disadvantaged peo-
ple...For example low -income individu-
als with serious  mental illness, on aver-
age, receive less than adequate treat-
ment and support in the  community, 
and tragically, in all too many cases, 
find their way into the criminal jus-
tice system.  
In other words, poor and disenfran-
chised people are “disappeared” by the 
increasingly inequitable society that 
refuses to adequately fund services 
they need to  stay afloat. While this 
trend is rarely discussed in these 
terms, I firmly believe  disadvantaged 
people are being disappeared from pub-
lic view into the jails and pris-
ons because the public is too little inter-
ested in helping them, cannot bear to 
witness their  suffering in the communi-
ty, and all too conveniently, there is the 
politically popular  ideology of “lock ‘em 
up and throw away the key.”  
Criminal defenses built on some  version of 
“incompetence to stand trial” or “not 
guilty by reason of insanity” be-
come  more difficult to win. Sentences 
are made longer, more mandatory and 
harsher. And  meanwhile, in the jails 
and prisons, there is crowding and in-
adequate mental health  services, and 
diminishing opportunities to partici-
pate in meaningful educational 
and rehabilitative programming.  
Individuals with serious mental illness 
spend ever longer periods behind 
bars,  they are less prepared for success 
at “going straight” once they are re-
leased, and their  parole violation rates and recidivism rates rise precipitously.  
While the population of  prisoners with 
serious mental illness might appear a 
“special case,” in fact a comparable  fate 
awaits prisoners who do not suffer from 
significant mental illness. While the 
prison  population has multiplied many 
times over in recent decades, education-
al and  rehabilitation services, like men-
tal health treatment services, have not 
grown apace.  Prisoners face longer sen-
tences, a greater likelihood they will 
spend a significant  amount of time in 
isolation including supermax confine-
ment, and a rapidly rising  recidivism 
rate after they are released.  
In his 2001 book The Culture of Con-
trol, David Garland provides a social 
historical analysis of these develop-
ments,  differentiating between the age 
of reform or the welfare state era that 
lasted for  approximately 100 years and 
came to an end in the early 1970s, and 
the “culture of  control” that has suc-
ceeded the welfare state era and pre-
vails today in criminal justice:  
The criminologies of the welfare state 
era tended to assume the  perfectability 
of man, to see crime as a sign of an un-
der-achieving  socialization process, and 
to look to the state to assist those 
who had been deprived of the economic, 
social and psychological  provision nec-
essary for proper social adjustment and 
law-abiding  conduct. Control theories 
begin from a much darker vision of 
the human condition. They assume 
that individuals will be strong-
ly attracted to self -serving, anti -social, 
and criminal conduct unless  inhibited 
from doing so by robust and effective 
controls…. Where  the older criminology 
demanded more in the way of welfare 
and assistance, the new one insists up-
on tightening controls and  enforcing 
discipline.  Of course, the supermaximum security 
prison is the epitome, and a natu-
ral culmination of control theories. An-
other name for the supermaximum se-
curity unit is  “Control Unit.” And it is 
no accident that little in the way of edu-
cation or rehabilitation is  available to 
the denizens of supermaximum “control 
units.” Rehabilitation is not in 
the government’s plans for them.  
I have focused on prisoners with seri-
ous mental illness  who land in long -
term solitary confinement. Their condi-
tions and their  prognosis become much 
worse on account of the idleness and 
isolation. Of course,  when prisoners are 
kept idle and isolated, there is little or 
no mental health treatment,  nor reha-
bilitation. This explains why prisoners 
with serious mental illness are 
so severely and irreversibly damaged 
by their experience in isolation.  
But the conditions  that cause psychiat-
ric deterioration in prisoners with seri-
ous mental illness are obviously  going 
to cause pain and emotional harm to 
prisoners who might appear to be emotion-
ally stable . Thus...a group of widely rec-
ognized experts on  solitary confinement 
concluded in 2005: “No study of the ef-
fects of solitary or supermax -
like confinement that lasted longer 
than 60 days failed to find evidence of 
negative  psychological effects.”...  
The harsh conditions of solitary con-
finement cause great and permanent 
damage. Prisoners suffering from seri-
ous mental illness are disproportionate-
ly consigned to solitary confinement for 
much of their term in prison. There 
they are unlikely to receive adequate 
treatment, they are not going to partici-
pate very much in rehabilitation pro-
grams, and after they have spent  
(Continued on page 2)  
2 
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attor-
neys, legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in 
prison —with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting 
on solitary confinement in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly 
incarcerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive a copy, send 
a request to the address or email below.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people 
who have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address below.  
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008  
Email: solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  (Continued from page 1)  
a number of years in prison their 
psychiatric disorder is likely to be 
more severe, more chronic, less ame-
nable to treatment, and they are 
more likely to leave prison (if they 
have a determinate sentence, and 
over 90% of prisoners are eventually 
released) broken and incapable of 
adjusting to life in the community.  
Destroying a prisoner’s  ability to 
cope in the free world is one of the 
worst things prison does. I have de-
scribed this as “the decimation of 
life skills,” a form of torture. Crowd-
ing, a lack of rehabilitation opportu-
nities, excessive reliance on isolation 
as punishment, restriction of visits 
and contacts with the outside world, 
pervasive sexual abuse, disrespect 
at every turn, the failure of pre -
release planning — all these things 
add up to throwing the prisoner who 
completes a prison term out into the 
world broken, with no skills, and a 
very high risk of recidivism. This is 
the plight of prisoners with serious 
mental illness, and it is also the 
plight of the other prisoners con-
signed to long -term supermax set-
tings.  
I do not believe the public would 
stand for this outrageous callous-
ness — if the public were aware it is 
going on in our midst. But the public 
is almost entirely ignorant about all of this. After all, there is little media 
attention to the plight of prisoners 
with serious mental illness, nor to 
the plight of prisoners with or with-
out mental illness who spend inordi-
nate lengths of time in  solitary con-
finement and are then returned to 
the community.  
And visiting is very restricted. To a 
great extent, we in the community 
learn what is happening in prisons 
largely from the families of prison-
ers, who visit them and hear about 
their terrible straits, and then re-
turn to the community, and to their 
legislators, to talk about that. But 
supermaximum security units tend 
to be located far from population 
centers. Then, visiting at supermax 
prisons is very restricted,...and quite 
a few prisoners tell me they actually 
dissuade their families from visiting 
because they do not want their loved 
ones to see them in shackles.  The 
public hears little of what occurs in 
supermax prisons.  
I have described a tragic phenome-
non that is all too usual. Prisoners 
in solitary confinement deteriorate 
and become more psychiatrically 
impaired and less capable of func-
tioning back in the community. 
Then, as if to “hide the evidence” 
from the public that supermax facili-
ties are destroying people rather 
than preparing them from a law -
abiding post -release life  in the com-munity, new ways are invented to 
keep the prisoners locked up and out 
of sight even longer...in recent years, 
there has been legislation in many 
states mandating new forms of  post-
release civil commitment, and in-
creasingly new criminal charges are 
brought against  prisoners for rela-
tively minor misbehaviors that once 
would have been punished during 
their  prison term with a short stint 
in segregation.  
So the prisoner who completes his 
prison term is  faced with the possi-
bility of being locked in a psychiatric 
hospital (if he suffers from seri-
ous mental illness) or the possibility 
of being found guilty of a new, in -
prison crime because of his  actions 
while locked in an isolation unit. It 
is as if there is a wish to hide the 
damage wreaked  by years of solitary 
confinement.  
Dr. Terry Kupers is one of the na-
tion’s leading experts on the psycho-
logical effects of prison isolation. 
A psychiatrist, he is on the faculty of 
the Wright Institute in Berkeley, 
California. The following is a brief 
excerpt from a chapter on solitary 
confinement which appears in  The 
Routledge Handbook of Internation-
al Crime and Justice Studies (2013). 
It is reprinted here with the kind 
permission of the author.    3  
May you know in your being that there are people who 
care about your suffering and who think of you and 
your pain. May you know that there are those who are 
fighting for the injustice being done to you.  May you 
find relief from the pain of isolation and confinement. 
May you know that you are not alone. May you feel held 
in the web of life. In love and care —K.R.P.  
 
Lord be with all your children in Seg or SHU right now, 
wrap your arms of love and grace around them and fill 
them all up with your love, peace, joy, rest, stillness and 
an inner strength, I pray, and also that they be removed 
from SHU or Seg right now. So many have been in for 
nothing and they need to be released and rehabilitated 
too to mainline. Encamp your angels all around them 
also I pray.  Amen.  — D.C. 
 
I humbly seek your guidance Heavenly Father for all 
the men and women without voices that are screaming 
to the Heavens using their bodies! Heavenly Father, 
watch over these men and women held without human 
contact, without hope, except in you Heavenly Father. 
Father you aided me when I was one of these men and 
helped me carry my burden, for I would not have been 
able to do this without your loving arms to support me. 
These men are sacrificing the health and possible life in 
their endeavors to be treated humanely. All things are 
possible through the Heavenly Father, His Only Son 
and the Holy Spirit.  —B.N., Your Brother in Struggle  
 
For world peace and personal happiness, please chant 
Nam -Myoho -Renge -Kyo.  
It is a wish -granting jewel of a prayer.  
Nam, mee -yo-ho, rin -gay, kee -yo. 
Say it three times, with conviction in your heart, that 
 ultimately, you are a Buddha.  
It is true.   You. Are. A. Buddha.  
Nam, myoho, renge, kyo.   —L.B. In the name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most  
 Merciful  
Praise be to Allah, lord of the worlds  
The most Beneficent, the most Merciful  
The Only ruling Judge on the Day of Judgment  
You alone do we worship, from you alone do we seek 
 help,  
Guide us along the straight path  
With those of whom have your favor  
Not those who have earned your anger,  
Not those who go astray. Amen. —M.M.  
 
Jesus, Incarnate God, our blindness to your gift of Life 
led to your  judgment, imprisonment, and sentence to 
death.   You are present now in all who are imprisoned, 
whether justly or unjustly.   Be with each one in compas-
sion and light.   Awaken each one to the gift of your holy 
truth and infinite, personal love.   May each one experi-
ence the freedom that comes of accepting you in 
faith.   Amen. —Sister H.R.  
 
Dear God, I ask you to comfort those who are in solitary 
confinement. Please don't let them give up hope or lose 
their dignity. Let them know that they are not forgot-
ten. I thank you for the many people who are moved to 
act to end the huge overuse of incarceration and solitary 
confinement. Please help us to create a society where  
everyone is treated with love. —A. 
 
Dear one —May the God of Justice —the Holy One who 
cries with us when we weep, listens to our pleas and 
delivers us from evil —hear our cries this day. May your 
bravery inspire the people of this state to rise up and 
ban solitary confinement once and for all. May the God 
who never leaves us or forsakes us bring you strength, 
courage and encouragement, even in your darkest days. 
You are not alone. —M. 
 
In advance of Torture Awareness Month this June, the National Religious Campaign Against Torture, California 
Families Against Solitary Confinement, the American Friends Service Committee, and T'ruah: The Rabbinic Call 
for Human Rights, issued a national call for people of faith and conscience to compose and share prayers for all 
who remain in conditions of isolated confinement, and in remembrance of the significance of the upcoming one 
year anniversary of the historic peaceful prisoner hunger strike throughout California prisons which began July 8, 
2013, with more than 30,000 participating.  
 The national response to the call for prayer was moving and overwhelming, with more than one hundred 
prayers submitted in a matter of days. The prayers share an urgent call for restorative justice and an end to the 
cruel and inhumane treatment of long -term isolation, and for an end to systems and practices that sow division 
and distrust.   
 On June 26, the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, an interfaith clergy delegation will 
meet with the California Department of Corrections to deliver a collection of the prayers printed on prayer cards, 
with a request that the cards be delivered to those who remain in SHU in California.  
 The spirit of this interfaith and nationwide effort extends to all who remain in solitary confinement. We 
share a small selection of the prayers with the hope that they will serve as a reminder to you, reader, that you are 
not alone, that you are not forgotten, and that the prayers of our global family continue for you. We believe in freedom 
and will not rest until it comes.   —Rev. Laura Markle Downton, National Religious Campaign Against Tortur e 
● 4 (Continued from page 3)  
 
Immanent God, God who is near to the broken -hearted, 
God who is found even in the darkest places, you alone 
can penetrate any wall, break through any barrier, en-
ter every heart. So I pray that you accompany each and 
every person in solitary confinement today and every 
day. Be with them. Fortify their spirits. Comfort their 
hearts. Strengthen their minds. Keep alive in them 
hope.  
 God who sees and knows all, May those in isola-
tion believe, indeed know in the hidden recesses of their 
hearts, that there are many of us who are working to 
bring their hidden stories into view. May this bring 
them encouragement. May they feel in their souls, that 
there are indeed thousands of us who feel in our souls a 
deep and sharp pain for all they endure. May they feel 
and may they know that there are thousands of us who 
care for them, who are fighting for them, who have not 
forgotten and who will not forget them.  
 Dearest God – source of life of every one of us - 
every parent and every child, console the hearts, en-
courage the spirits and strengthen the resolve of the 
friends and families of those in isolation. May they, and 
their loved ones in isolation know that in their struggle 
– they are not alone. —Rabbi R.G.  
 
In hunger you made a stand to end a punishment most 
unusual and cruel of being kept apart from your fellow 
man so here is a prayer that this unfair treatment may 
end and you rightfully restored to the human race 
again. Blessings to you.  —D.S. A mí y a mucha gente nos indigna la injusticia  que Uds. 
 están viviendo.  
Sepan que no descansaremos hasta que este horror de
 saparezca del mundo.  
A Uds. van dirigidos nuestros más tiernos sentimientos 
 y más altos pensamientos.  
Que Dios borre del mundo toda esta miseria humana. 
Amén —A.N.  
 
Please know that God is ever present everywhere. That 
means holding you and surrounding you even in Man's 
prisons. You are a Child of God and loved deeply by 
your Source of Life and Love and Light. I pray you expe-
rience this Truth. We are all connected as One in  the 
Universe.   
The Ubuntu saying is "I AM, BECAUSE WE ARE "  
 And You Are. Amen. Best Wishes & Blessings.  —S.M.  
 
Great Spirit, You who are That which connects each of 
us to each other ~ each of us drops of water, leaves, ani-
mals and people ~ keep us always aware that we are in 
you One, through prison walls of concrete and steel, 
that all the oppression of our sisters and brothers in 
prisons and prisoners’ families, oppresses us, that their 
victories are ours.  —C.F.R.  
 
You are loved. You are not forgotten. You are not invisi-
ble. We will not stop fighting for you, and for us all. We 
stand outside in solidarity, inside our one heart, our 
collective soul, our spirits calling out for change, our 
hands working for it.  We will not give up. —J.S. 
 
On February 25, the U.S. Senate 
Judiciary Subcommittee on the Con-
stitution, Civil Rights and Human 
Rights held its second public hearing 
on solitary confinement. At a packed 
hearing room on Capitol Hill, the 
subcommittee chair, Dick Durbin, 
called for  “all federal and state facili-
ties to end the use of solitary con-
finement for juveniles, pregnant 
women, and people with serious and 
persistent mental illness, except in 
the rarest of circumstances.” But 
Durbin, an Illinois Democrat, fell far 
short of denouncing solitary confine-
ment altogether, declaring: “Make no 
mistake….Some dangerous inmates 
must be held in segregated confine-
ment.”   A more uncompromising po-
sition on solitary confinement was 
taken by Damon Thibodeaux, who 
spent 15 years in isolation on death 
row in Louisiana’s Angola prison 
before being exonerated. Testifying 
at the hearing, Thibodeaux said: “I do not condone what those who have 
killed and committed other serious 
offenses have done, but I also don’t 
condone what we do to them when 
we put them in solitary for years on 
end and treat them as subhu-
man...As a civilized society, we 
should be better than that. I would 
like to believe that the vast majority 
of the people in the U.S. would be 
appalled if they knew what we are 
doing to inmates in solitary and un-
derstood that we are torturing them, 
for reasons that have little, if any-
thing, to do with protecting other 
inmates or guards from them.”  
On April 24, the American Civil Lib-
erties Union released a report on the 
impact of solitary confinement on 
women. The report found that wom-
en prisoners are more likely than 
their male counterparts to have his-tories of mental illness and physical 
and sexual abuse, and that these 
conditions make them particularly 
vulnerable to the harmful effects of 
solitary.  
On May 8, the Solitary Confinement 
Study and Reform Act of 2014, the 
first federal legislation intended to 
place limits on the use of prison iso-
lation, was introduced in Congress 
by Representative Cedric Richmond, 
a Louisiana Democrat. The legisla-
tion calls for creation of a commis-
sion to study solitary and recom-
mend reforms that would create “a 
more humane and constitutionally 
sound” prison system. Richmond’s 
legislation is supported by human 
rights and civil rights groups, but it 
faces a steep uphill battle in the 
House of Representatives. In recent 
years, bills to reform solitary have 
been introduced in more than a doz-
en states, but few have succeeded in 
becoming law.  
