  By William Blake  
William Blake has been in solitary con-
finement in New York State for close to 
three decades. In 1987, while in county 
court, Blake, then 23, grabbed a gun 
from a sheriff’s deputy and, in a failed 
escape attempt, murdered one deputy 
and wounded another. He is serving a 
sentence of 77 years to life in administra-
tive segregation, meaning he is in isola-
tion more or less indefinitely, despite 
periodic pro forma reviews of his status. 
A prolific reader and a gifted writer, 
Blake here describes what happens 
when he bonds with another creature in 
his solitary cell. We have devoted this 
entire issue of the newsletter to a slight-
ly shortened version of this poignant sto-
ry. 
“Pop! Pop -pop-pop! Pop -pop!” I heard 
the loud noise echoing through the sol-
itary confinement unit in the spring of 
1988. It sounded like somebody was 
slapping a sneaker onto the concrete 
floor of their cell.  
I put down the book I was reading and 
went to my cell gate to call my neigh-
bor, as it sounded like the noise might 
be coming from his cell. “Willie, is that 
you making all the racket?”  
“Yeah. There’s a mouse in my cell, and 
he picked the wrong cell to try to steal 
some food from. I’m gonna kill his ass 
now,” the man locking next to me said. 
Willie had been my neighbor since I 
had arrived at this prison’s Special 
Housing Unit (SHU) in July of the 
year before.  
“Don’t kill him, bro, just chase him out 
of your house. He’s just trying to live 
like everyone else is,” I pleaded for the 
little rodent’s life.  
“No, I’m gonna kill this sucker so he 
can’t come in here again. They ain’t 
feeding us good enough to be giving anything up to a damn mouse,” Willie 
said.  
I heard a few more pops as Willie 
chased the tiny creature around his 
cell, swatting at it with his sneaker. 
All of a sudden, as I stood at the bars 
looking toward Willie’s cell, I saw the 
mouse fly onto the company and stop a 
few feet from the wall opposite the cell 
fronts.  
“Yeah! I got him,” Willie loudly said, 
sounding happy about ridding the unit 
of one mouse. It would not make his 
food any safer, though, the little he 
would save from his trays during the 
day to eat come nighttime. The box 
was loaded with mice, roaches too. I 
have never seen a prison that isn’t, 
and I’ve been in many. Killing one 
would make no difference.  
The mouse didn’t move for several 
minutes as I watched it, so I at first 
thought it was dead. But then it moved 
and began to head down the company, 
right toward my cell. It was moving 
very slowly, though, nothing like a 
mouse usually does, furry little rockets 
on four feet that they normally are, 
shooting across open areas to move 
about along the walls. As it got closer 
and I could see it better in the dim 
light shining on the company, I saw 
that the mouse was dragging itself by 
its front legs only. Its back legs were 
stretched out behind it, looking useless 
and not moving at all.  
The angle the mouse was taking would 
have put it just past my cell gate, so it 
probably was trying to make it to the 
door of the pipe chase between my cell 
and my neighbor’s to the left –Willie’s 
cell was to my right. Mice run under 
the solid -steel doors of the pipe chases 
all the time, and once in there are safe 
from any traffic there might be when 
guards are taking inmates out of their cells to shower, for recreation in the 
empty SHU yards, or to visits or call -
outs to the prison hospital or else-
where. That is probably where they 
make their homes, as those pipe chas-
es are dark and are rarely opened. 
They could hide safely during the day-
time and come out at night to search 
for food, as mice like to do, nocturnal 
things that they are. It looked to me 
like the injured mouse was heading to 
the safest place it knew, heading home 
to the pipe chase.  
Willie may have been happy because 
he thought the mouse dead and still 
lying out near the wall, but to me it 
was a terribly sad sight to see that tiny 
mammal struggle down the company 
dragging its useless back legs behind 
it. I have always loved animals, totally 
innocent and completely without mal-
ice as they are. It is with people that I 
have had my problems. People often 
operate with malicious motivations 
and ill intent, while animals never do.  
My heart went out to that injured 
mouse as I watched him bravely make 
his way down the company, and I 
wanted to help him.  
A “missile” is mandatory cell equip-
ment for inmates doing time in SHU. 
It is a short pole made of rolled -up 
newspaper or other paper. After pull-
ing thread from a bed sheet, or from 
anything else with thread in it, we 
make a long string (called a “dragline” 
in prison parlance) and attach it to the 
missile. By firing the missile through 
the cell bars and dow n the company, 
inmates cross draglines, and the in-
mate whose line is on top of the other’s 
pulls the line in…  
Leave just a crack or small hole any-
where in a cell and the men and wom-
en locked in solitary will find a way to 
gate to gently guide that injured 
2 
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008                                         Email: solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attorneys, 
legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in prison —
with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting on solitary 
confinement in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly in-
carcerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive future copies, 
please send a request to the address or email above.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people who 
have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address above, and tell us 
whether you would like us to use your name or would prefer to remain anonymous.  
Note: We regret that we cannot  offer legal assistance or advice and cannot respond to requests for this type of help. 
Legal materials sent to us cannot be returned to the sender. We also cannot forward mail to others. Thank you for 
your cooperation.  mouse into my cell. He needed help, 
and I wanted to see if I could give him 
some.  
I am no veterinarian or doctor of any 
kind, but after watching how the 
mouse’s hind legs were dragging use-
lessly behind it, it did not take a medi-
cal degree to figure that its back may 
be broken. I was worried about caus-
ing the little animal more pain than it 
was already likely in, or doing more 
damage, so I slid a sheet of writing 
paper under it to pick it up rather 
than use my hand, which would 
squeeze it no matter how gentle I tried 
to be. When I got the mouse onto the 
paper, I took it to my bed and set it 
down there. I wanted to check it out 
thoroughly.  
The mouse was clearly a baby. I didn’t 
have a clue at the time as to how fast 
mice grow or how long they live, but 
since the mouse’s body, sans the tail, 
was no longer than the tip of my pinky 
to the first joint, I knew it had to be 
very young. I could see a bump on the 
lower part of its spine that didn’t look 
like it belonged there, and it grew big-
ger before long. This made me feel cer-
tain that its back was broken.  
What could I do? I thought to myself. I 
expected that it would probably die 
before the night was done, so I decided 
to just try to make the tiny creature 
comfortable till it did. If I let it go it was not likely to find any food or do 
very well in the condition it was in, so 
I set it in my dry sink to keep it from 
wandering off while I made a box for 
it. 
In the early part of 1988 I was allowed 
the same property in my cell as popu-
lation inmates, though I was housed 
in SHU….Later in 1988 New York 
State would enact more draconian 
laws for its administrative segregation 
status inmates, which I was, so they 
would be allowed no more privileges or 
property than inmates serving SHU 
disciplinary sentences for serious vio-
lations of prison rules.  
I had all the privileges and property 
that a general population inmate 
would have when I tried to help the 
paralyzed mouse, I was just segregat-
ed and kept locked in a SHU cell all 
day apart from population...So I had 
tape when the mouse happened along, 
though I would soon be banned from 
possessing it and most of the other 
property in my cell. I used it to tape 
the cardboard backs of five writing 
tablets together to make a box for the 
mouse. When I finished putting it to-
gether I put the mouse in it, keeping 
the sheet of paper underneath him 
lest he be jostled about while I was 
trying to slide it out.  
When I was a kid growing up on the 
south side of Syracuse, New York, the city’s worst neighborhood, we had 
plenty of mice in every house we lived 
in, all of which were multi -family 
homes. My father, with whom I lived 
with a younger brother, fought a never
-ending battle against the rodents and 
roaches that he never gave up on de-
spite the futility. I remembered him 
mentioning that mice love peanut but-
ter and jelly on bread better than any 
cheese; and since he was always catch-
ing plenty in the traps he would set 
around the house, I figured he must 
know what he’s talking about. I didn’t 
have any cheese on hand anyway, so I 
could not have tested the theory had I 
wanted to.  
I did have plenty of peanut butter and 
jelly, though, so I dabbed a bit on a 
small piece of bread and put it in the 
box with the mouse, right in front of 
him so he wouldn’t have to crawl at all 
to get to it. To wash it down the tiny 
fellow would need some water, so I put 
a little in the lid of a Styrofoam cup 
and put it within easy reach for him...  
I thought that with a broken back the 
mouse might be in shock, since I re-
called that severe physical trauma 
could cause it. I could not elevate the 
mouse’s feet above the level of its head 
as I was taught to do in the case of a 
person in shock, but I had the thought 
that the mouse’s physiology didn’t re-
quire it to help the flow of blood to the 3  quire it to help the flow of blood to the 
brain. His head was down and resting 
on the paper he lay on, I saw and 
looked to be as low to the ground as 
any part of him. It was early spring, 
though, and pretty chilly on the unit. 
So I knew what he needed.  
I got my small blunt -tipped scissors 
out and cut a little square from my 
blanket. I then laid it over the mouse’s 
back, taking care not to cover his head 
so as not to interfere with his breath-
ing. That was about everything I could 
do after doing that, little though it 
seemed to me to be.  
A prayer isn’t something that I have 
ever been convinced guarantees any-
thing, or even has a chance to work 
well for anything but the peace of 
mind of the one making it, but I was 
at the time –as I still am –talking to 
God daily on the off chance that He 
may be listening. So I said a prayer 
for that baby mouse, asking God to 
ease the pain that I knew it must be 
in. I did not ask God to save the tiny 
creature. What could a paralyzed ro-
dent living in a solitary confinement 
unit do to stay alive? I had thought. 
Likely nothing. But I was not going to 
pray for the poor animal’s death ei-
ther.  
So I prayed that its pain would be re-
lieved, and I hoped in my heart that it 
would be. Whether the mouse lived or 
died was in God’s hands, or fate’s, or 
whoever it is that has dominion over 
such matters –and I am not going to 
pretend to know…  
The next morning, soon as I got out of 
bed, before I even went to the com-
mode to take my morning leak, I 
checked on the mouse. He was still 
alive, and he had moved. He had also 
eaten all the bread with peanut butter 
and jelly on it. I put my finger in front 
of his nose to see if he had made some 
kind of miraculous recovery and would 
try to run, but he didn’t move at all, 
just stood there frozen, eyes wide open 
so I knew he was not sleeping. I could 
see rapid movements on his body sig-
naling fast breathing and the speedy 
heartbeat of a small animal, so he 
wasn’t dead with his eyes stuck in the 
open position. I could also see the 
bump on his spine far down his back; 
it looked bigger than ever.  When I touched him with my finger he 
moved then. He was still dragging his 
hind legs.  
I didn’t know if the mouse was a he or 
a she, and I knew not a thing about 
their anatomy that would allow me to 
have a look and see what it was. When 
I was talking to him as I did what I 
could to make him comfortable that 
first night, though, I had referred to 
him as a male. So he was always a he 
to me, even if he was in actuality a 
she. 
Since he had lived through the night I 
became hopeful that he would make it 
for the long haul, and I really wanted 
him to. As I watched him still drag-
ging his back legs uselessly behind, I 
was convinced that the bump on his 
spine was indeed a break that meant 
he would never run like a normal 
mouse again. But I was loving that 
tiny animal before he had twenty -four 
hours in my cell, and I wanted him to 
live. He could not be set free in the 
condition he was in because he would 
either starve or be easily caught drag-
ging himself slowly about by an in-
mate like Willie, and I knew this. But 
I would take care of him and hope the 
guards would leave him alone when 
they were in my cell searching it, as 
they did several times a month when I 
was at rec.  
Days passed and the mouse lived and 
got more and more active along the 
way. I stopped keeping him in the box 
except when I was out of my cell. 
When I was in the cell I would block 
the front gate and back door off so he 
couldn’t slip under them and get 
away. This allowed him to roam freely 
around the cell, and I thought it good 
for his rehabilitation. He needed the 
exercise.  
After the first few days, when I was 
convinced that he would live, I official-
ly gave my new pet a name. I called 
him Mouse. I did not want to give him 
a female name and have him turn out 
to be male –and you know he would 
never forgive me for that. Likewise, if 
I gave her a male name when she was 
in fact female, that would not be cool. 
So I gave it the genderless appellation 
Mouse, figuring that there could be no 
name more aptly suited to a mouse. 
That was what I had been calling him since the first day anyway.  
One day, as I was watching him drag 
himself across the floor, I had a flash-
back to something I had seen on TV 
awhile before. I couldn’t recall what 
show I had been watching at the time, 
but while watching television one day 
years before I had seen paralyzed dogs 
in these contraptions with two wheels 
that looked a bit like the buggies that 
jockeys ride in as they race harness 
horses, the trotters and pacers that I 
had watched run countless times at 
the track my father would bring me to 
when I was a kid. The dogs had bro-
ken backs just like Mouse did, and the 
two-wheeled buggies allowed the ani-
mals to run around by using only their 
front legs, bodies resting on and held 
aloft by the buggy, its wheels acting as 
substitutes for the animals’ useless 
hind legs. Could I make a buggy like 
that for Mouse? Would he even move 
around in it if I did? I was going to 
find out.  
I used Styrofoam feed -up trays that I 
was served my meals in to make most 
of the buggy, with a paper clip as an 
axle for the two tiny wheels I had 
fashioned to spin on it. I cut a harness 
out of one of my green prison shirts 
and sewed it right to the platform of 
the buggy that Mouse’s body would 
rest upon. In a couple of hours, after a 
little trial and error, I had the buggy 
done. Now to see if Mouse would like 
it. 
A couple months had passed since 
Mouse’s back had been broken and he 
had grown bigger quickly, had even 
gotten a bit fat. I spoiled him with 
Carnation Instant Milk, which he 
loved, and any food he cared to have 
that I would get in my meal trays or 
in packages and commissary (both of 
which were privileges I would lose 
when the ad seg regulation changed). 
Though he remained paralyzed he 
seemed to otherwise heal well, and I 
could pick him up with no apparent 
distress. I even discovered that he was 
far smarter than I ever thought a 
mouse could be.  
I was wondering if Mouse was in any 
manner trainable, so I decided to put 
him to the test. Before I fed him I 
would tap a plastic pen loudly on the 
cell’s concrete floor and do it in a dis-4  tinctive pattern that I would never 
alter, sort of like spelling the same 
message out each time in Morse code. 
Then I would go get him –usually from 
under the bed where he liked to hang 
out–and feed him. So he only ate after 
hearing the same distinctive tapping 
sound being made on the floor. For a 
few weeks I’d tap and wait before I 
went to get him, and eventually he did 
exactly what I had been wondering if 
he would ever do: he came out from 
under the bed on his own, to where I 
was tapping and had his much -loved 
PB and J on Keebler Townhouse 
Crackers with Carnation Instant 
Milk, looking to eat. He was tentative 
at first but before too long would come 
quickly whenever I would tap. Mouse 
was trainable after all, a veritable ge-
nius among mice, I was certain.  
I maneuvered Mouse into his harness, 
wrapped the little strap around his 
back that secured him snugly, locked 
the strap in place with its clasp made 
of a staple, and put him on the floor in 
his new buggy. He took off immediate-
ly just a short distance at first, like he 
was surprised that he could move so 
easily and quickly, but then he was 
gone, zooming all over the cell like a 
joy-filled man who had just been 
healed at a Christian revival after 
spending half his life in a wheelchair. 
Just like the paralyzed dogs I had 
seen on TV. Mouse could now run fast 
and well, with wheels for hind legs.  
I learned a lot about mice from Mouse 
during those first couple of months 
that I had him, and one of those 
things was that mice will play just 
like a young kitten and puppy will do. 
At least young mice like Mouse was 
will. When I would put my finger on 
the floor and slide it back and forth 
very quickly in front of him, he would 
watch it intently just like a kitten 
does, head snapping from side to side 
to follow and looking like he is ready 
to pounce. When I’d shoot the finger 
toward him real quick Mouse would 
jump as much as having only two good 
legs would allow, take off running in 
his buggy, make a quick circuit of the 
cell and come right back to play some 
more. Sometimes he wouldn’t come 
right back, though. But a tap of the 
pen on the floor would bring him to me fast.  
Mouse was not so little anymore –once 
even requiring me to rebuild his bug-
gy and make a new harness –when I 
went to the yard one fateful day, as I 
did almost every day back then. I al-
ways put him in his box when I would 
leave my cell and I did likewise this 
day, like I had done for all of the sev-
en or eight months I had him. When I 
returned to my cell, after putting the 
newspaper barrier back in front of the 
gate to block it off, I went right to the 
box to set Mouse free. I kept him in 
his buggy most of the time so he could 
move around the cell easily as he 
pleased, taking him out for his thrice 
weekly baths, that I suspected he nev-
er cared for, and not much otherwise. 
He was still in his buggy when I 
looked into his box, but the buggy was 
crushed. Mouse had a black Paper -
mate pen stuck through his back, the 
same kind of pen that I used to call 
him to me, only this was one that a 
C.O. had owned, as many did since the 
prison gave them out free to officers 
and inmates alike. There was blood all 
over the cardboard box.  
A C.O. had come into my cell when I 
was at rec and murdered Mouse. My 
best friend in that prison was dead, 
and I was on fire inside.  
I had three dogs that I loved when I as 
growing up, and I loved Mouse every 
bit as much as I had loved them. For 
the months he was with me he had 
been good company in a place that can 
be a lonely world, and I would miss 
him dearly.  
No inmate could tell me who had gone 
into my cell and killed Mouse because 
none had seen. The inmates in the 
area of my cell were at rec in the SHU 
yards just as I was, or in the dayroom 
if they were protective custody in-
mates. Any C.O. could have come out 
of the SHU control “bubble” (console) 
and gone into my cell unobserved by 
any prisoner. But I knew who had 
done the dirty deed.  
All the guards knew I had the para-
lyzed mouse and none had bothered 
him for the months that Mouse was 
with me, though they regularly came 
into my cell to search it when I was at 
rec or on visits. There is no such thing as privacy in prison and nothing that 
you might think is yours is truly your 
own. The police will come into your 
cell whenever they please, take what 
they please, break and destroy what 
they please, and few have any regard 
for the law or prison rules or regula-
tions themselves, not the regulations 
regarding cell searches or property 
confiscation or any other regulations. 
To them, the law and rules and regu-
lations are for the inmates alone. We 
have no rights but what the whim and 
fancy of our keepers deign to grant us 
at a given moment. These are facts 
that no corrections official would ever 
publicly admit, but that every prison-
er knows only too well.  
I had written a complaint against a 
SHU officer (for all the no good it 
would do) days before Mouse was 
killed, and in the days that followed 
he would let me know that it was he 
who had done the deed. I had known 
it immediately anyway, before he be-
gan taunting me about my friend’s 
bloody death.  
On top of the sadness I felt over the 
loss of my buddy, I was angry in a 
monumental way, the Irish in me 
working its curse through a fiery tem-
perament. I thought about making a 
counterattack on the man in blue who 
had murdered Mouse to punish me for 
writing what was a totally truthful 
complaint, but in the end I chose to 
handle the blow without riposte ra-
ther than get myself in serious trouble 
by serving the cop the comeuppance 
that he rightly deserved. Back then, in 
my younger and more foolish days, I 
did not always make this sort of smart 
choice: I did not always let an injus-
tice or misdeed be served up to me 
without seeking to make the one who 
had served it wish to God that he had 
not, no matter what the consequences 
of the payback might be.  
But we live and learn, and if we are 
smart we gain some wisdom along the 
way. I like to think that I have.  
© 2014 by William Blake. May not be 
reprinted without the permission of 
the author via Solitary Watch.  