  By Jean Casella, James Ridgeway, and 
Sal Rodriguez  
The cell placed at the back of the hearing 
room in the Dirksen Senate Office Build-
ing was a pretty accurate replica of a real 
isolation cell —the kind that exists in su-
permax prisons and solitary confine-
ment units all over the country. It meas-
ured about 7 feet by 10 feet, with a tiny 
covered window too high to see out of 
and nothing inside but a bunk and a toi-
let. The door contained a slot through 
which a guard slides a food tray; for 
many prisoners, this represents their 
only human contact for the day. These 
are the conditions in which some 
80,000 men, women, and children live 
on any given day in American prisons 
and jails. They spend at least 23 hours a 
day in their cells, and some remain in 
solitary for years or even decades.  
Solitary confinement in our prisons and 
jails may be the most pressing domestic 
human rights problem to which most 
Americans remain largely oblivious. But 
on June 19, supporters and foes of the 
practice descended on Capitol Hill for a 
hearing of the Senate Judiciary Commit-
tee Subcommittee on the Constitution, 
Civil Rights and Human Rights, con-
vened by subcommittee chairman Dick 
Durbin (D -Ill.) An overflow crowd of 
some 200 spectators came there to wit-
ness what was —somewhat amazingly —
the first -ever congressional hearing on 
solitary confinement.  
Durbin opened the proceedings with a 
surprisingly strong indictment of solitary 
confinement as it is practiced in US pris-
ons. The senator, who had visited the 
notorious Tamms supermax in his home 
state of Illinois and was apparently much
-affected by the experience, called on his 
colleagues to visit prisons in their states 
and witness the conditions for them-
selves. “America has led the way with 
human rights around the world,” Durbin 
said. But “what do our prisons say about 
our American values?”  
America leads the world in solitary con-finement, Durbin noted, tracing the rise 
of supermax prisons and solitary con-
finement units back to the 1980s and 
making reference to their damaging psy-
chological effects. He ended by quoting 
his Senate colleague John McCain, who 
spent two years in solitary as a POW in 
Vietnam. “t's an awful thing, solitary,” 
McCain later said. “It crushes your spirit 
and weakens your resistance more effec-
tively than any other form of mistreat-
ment.”  
Leading off the testimony was Charles 
Samuels, director of the Federal Bureau 
of Prisons. The BOP would be an obvi-
ous first target for any congressional 
effort to reform prison practices, since it 
is part of the Justice Department and 
subject to direct congressional oversight. 
Yet the federal prison system is a serious 
offender when it comes to the use and 
abuse of solitary: Samuels offered no 
figures for the total number of prisoners 
the BOP holds in isolation, but in 2010 a 
BOP spokesperson told CNN that there 
were more than 11,000 inmates in 
“special housing” —a common euphe-
mism —out of a total prison population, 
at that time, of about 210,000.  
A former corrections officer who rose 
through the ranks at the BOP, Samuels 
came off as a consummate bureaucrat. 
(His predecessor Harley Lappin, forced 
to resign after a drunk driving incident, 
now works for the nation's largest pri-
vate -prison corporation.) Samuels 
quickly made his position clear: 
“Segregated housing,” as he called it, is a 
necessary part of prison practice, and is 
not used excessively in the federal sys-
tem. It's not a “preferred option,” Samu-
els said, but he went on to say he believes 
that it helps stop violence and other bad 
behavior in prison. “It's a deterrent and 
it works,” he declared —though he admit-
ted under questioning that the BOP had 
never actually conducted studies on the 
effectiveness (or the effects) of solitary.  
At the US Penitentiary Administrative 
Maximum (ADX) in Florence, Colorado, 
known as the Alcatraz of the Rockies, prisoners famously live in extreme isola-
tion. But it isn't solitary confinement, 
Samuels said, because the 490 inmates 
there have contact with staff. In fact, 
Samuels admitted, ADX has only two 
shrinks for 490 inmates. He cited a Colo-
rado study that showed no negative 
mental -health effects from years of soli-
tary—a study that has been widely de-
bunked.  
The next panel threw into question just 
about everything that Samuels had said. 
Christopher Epps, Mississippi's correc-
tions commissioner, described how his 
state had reduced its solitary population 
by some 85 percent —and a 50 percent 
drop in prison violence followed.  
Psychologist Craig Haney, a psychology 
professor at the University of California -
Santa Cruz who has spent his career 
studying mental -health effects of soli-
tary, described prisoners responses to 
long -term isolation, which include psy-
chosis, self -mutilation, and suicide. 
“Prisoners have cut off parts of their 
bodies,” Haney said. He also directly 
contradicted Samuels' statements about 
ADX Florence, saying there were men-
tally ill prisoners housed there who re-
ceived little care. (The same claim is 
made in a class -action lawsuit filed in 
federal court in Colorado.)  
Stuart Andrews Jr., an attorney repre-
senting mentally ill prisoners in isolation 
in South Carolina, argued that prisoners 
with psychological disabilities are two to 
three times more likely than others to 
end up in solitary. Prisons —and espe-
cially solitary -confinement cells —have 
essentially replaced psychiatric facilities 
as warehouses for the mentally ill. An-
drews described the fate of one inmate 
with mental illness and mental retarda-
tion who was locked down in solitary 
because he had hygiene problems, de-
spite an absence of any violent behavior. 
He was found “lying face down in his 
own vomit and feces,” Andrews said, and 
“died of neglect, alone in a cold cell.”  
(Continued on page 2)  
U.S. Senate Holds Historic Hearing on Solitary Confinement  News from a Nation in Lockdown  
www.solitarywatch.com  
Print Edition, Fall 2012  2 LOUISIANA  — April 17 marked a 
torturous milestone for Herman Wal-
lace and Albert Woodfox. The two 
men, members of the group known as 
the Angola 3, have been in solitary 
confinement for 40 years. Wallace and 
Woodfox were members of the prison 
chapter of the Black Panther Party at 
the Louisiana State Penitentiary at 
Angola when they were convicted of 
killing a corrections officer in 1972. 
The two men are now in the sixties, 
and their lawyers argue that both have 
endured physical injury and “severe 
mental anguish and other psychologi-
cal damage” from living most of their 
adult lives in lockdown. They also ar-
gue that Wallace and Woodfox are be-
ing held in solitary not because they 
are a threat to prison safety, but be-
cause of their political beliefs. Angola 
Warden Burl Cain said in a deposition 
that the men cannot be released from 
solitary because they are still practic-
ing “Pantherism” and “I would have 
the blacks chasing after them.”  
COLORADO  — In May, a Federal 
District Court in Denver heard a case 
brought by students at the University 
of Denver Law School’s Civil Rights 
Clinic on behalf of Troy Anderson, an 
inmate with mental illness who has 
spent 12 years in solitary at the Colora-do State Penitentiary. Anderson’s law-
yers argued that symptoms of untreat-
ed mental illness are keeping him in 
isolation indefinitely, effectively con-
demning him to life sentence in tor-
turous conditions. In August, the 
judge in the case ordered that Ander-
son’s mental health treatment be re-
viewed. He also ruled that the condi-
tions at CSP constitute “a paradigm of 
inhumane treatment,” and ordered 
that prisoners, who currently receive 
no outdoor exercise, be given some 
“meaningful exposure” to natural light 
and air.  
WASHINGTON, D.C. — In July, 
Bureau of Prisons chief Charles Samu-
els sent a memo to all federal prison-
ers, urging them not to kill themselves.  
“At times you may feel hopeless,” 
Samuels told prisoners in the memo. 
“If you are unable to think of solutions 
other than suicide, it is not because 
solutions do not exist; it is because you 
are currently unable to see them.” The 
memo was issued shortly after two 
lawsuits were filed, asserting that the 
lack of mental health care at ADX, the 
federal supermax in Florence, Colora-
do, was contributing to prisoner sui-cides. While it contained a specific 
reference  to inmates who might be “in 
a Special Housing Unit or Special 
Management Unit cell,” the memo 
ended with a quotation from Albert 
Einstein that might seem a cruel joke 
to people condemned to decades of 
solitary: “Learn from yesterday, live 
for today, hope for tomorrow.”  
VIRGINIA, OHIO, GEORGIA, 
NORTH CAROLINA — During the 
spring and summer, people in solitary 
confinement held separate hunger 
strikes in prisons around the country. 
In May, at Red Onion supermax in 
Virginia, strikers demanded “an end to 
torture in the form of indefinite segre-
gation through the implementation of 
a fair and transparent process whereby 
prisoners can earn the right to be re-
leased.” Prisoners in solitary at the 
Ohio State Penitentiary, during a two -
week May hunger strike, likewise de-
manded a fairer “step -down” program. 
In July, inmates at Georgia’s Diagnos-
tic and Classification Prison went on a 
month -long hunger strike demanding 
better medical care,  due process, and 
human rights. And later that same 
month, a hunger strike was launched 
at three state prisons in North Caroli-
na in protest of conditions in “close 
custody” housing.  (Continued from page 1)  
The most emotional testimony of the 
day came from Anthony Graves, an 
exoneree who spent 18 years in Texas 
prisons, 12 of them on death row, and 
most of those years in extreme isola-
tion. “No one can begin to imagine the 
effect isolation has on a human being” 
unless they have experienced solitary, 
Graves said. He went on, describing 
the self -mutilation, suicide attempts, 
and successful suicides that took place 
around him on death row, concluding 
that solitary “breaks a man's will to 
live.” In response to people who claim 
it has no psychological effects, “I say, 
‘Go live there for 30 days, and then 
tell me that.’...Solitary confinement 
makes our criminal justice crimi-
nal...It dehumanizes us all.”  
So what can be done about all this? 
Sen. Al Franken (D -Minn.) suggested 
a commission to study the criminal -
justice system “from top to bottom,” 
following a plan proposed by retiring 
Sen. Jim Webb (D -Va.). Both Franken and Durbin spoke approvingly of Mis-
sissippi's reform efforts as a harbinger 
and a model. They spoke of the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act, which set na-
tionwide standards for how prisons 
deal with rape and linked compliance 
to federal funding. A similar policy, 
experts have suggested, could force 
prisons to limit or reform their use of 
solitary confinement. There was talk, 
too, of having independent mental -
health professionals to evaluate pris-
oners in solitary, and providing out-
side counsel to represent them, since 
they are placed in lockdown on the say
-so of prison officials who serve as de 
facto prosecutors, judges, and juries.  
But what is probably needed first of all 
is a modicum of transparency. Super-
max prisons are virtual domestic black 
sites, cut off from the public and the 
press, condoned by the courts, and 
largely ignored by elected officials. 
Senators could begin by heeding Dur-
bin's call to visit American prisons —
and directing the subcommittee staff 
to undertake a full investigation, with hearings around the country. If they 
do, they will have the support of advo-
cacy groups including the ACLU, 
which provided the mock cell in the 
hearing room, and the National Reli-
gious Campaign Against Torture, 
which organized a press conference 
after the hearing to break its mem-
bers' “23 Hour Fast to End 23 Hour 
Solitary.”  
They will also have support from pris-
oners' families, who showed up at the 
hearing in force. Among them was 
Irene Huerta, who traveled from Cali-
fornia. “As a wife of a prisoner who 
has been incarcerated for almost 28 
years, and most of that time held in 
Pelican Bay solitary confinement, at-
tending the Senate hearing was very 
emotional and promising for me,” she 
said. “Viewing the mock cell brought 
tears to my eyes; I pictured my hus-
band. No human being should endure 
such torture.”  
This article originally appeared on 
the  Mother Jones website on June 19.  
News Briefs  3  By Enceno Macy  
Editor’s Note: Enceno Macy is the pen 
name of an inmate in a West Coast 
state prison. In prison since the age of 
15, Macy has earned a high school 
degree and completed college courses 
while inside. His writing appears on 
the website Planet Waves , where a 
longer version of the following essay 
was originally published.  
The light is as dim as a 40 watt bulb in 
a basement, like you might see in a B -
rated horror movie. But this light illu-
minates a different kind of horror.  
Imagine you’re in a cube, a concrete 
cube six feet by ten feet max. A thick 
concrete slab three feet high is built 
into the back wall. An exercise mat lies 
atop the slab, three inches thick and 
almost as hard as the slab itself. A 
stainless steel combination toilet -sink 
is built into the side wall, and next to 
it is a solid steel door. There may or 
may not be a small, filthy window, no 
bigger than a VCR tape, high up in one 
wall. The available floor space is about 
the same as a standard 4 x 8 sheet of 
plywood. This is your entire world, 
24/7.  
You have two books, if you’re lucky, 
chosen from a very limited selection of 
dog-eared novels, usually with sub-
jects of no interest to you. A couple 
sheets of paper, a pen the size of a golf 
pencil, a toothbrush and a comb com-
plete the inventory of your property.  
Three times a day, a slot in your door 
opens, a tray is shoved through with 
strictly regulated portions of alleged 
food the FDA may or may not have 
approved strewn across it. Every two 
days, you are restrained —put in hand-
cuffs and leg chains —and taken to 
shower.  
Occasionally you will receive your 
mail if the guards don’t ‘lose’ it and if 
you are fortunate enough to have any-
one care enough to write to you. Every 
little noise echoes. Even the silence 
echoes, a dry, empty silence, the kind 
where you can hear yourself think. As 
months go by, the thoughts you hear 
become actual voices. After years in 
the cube, those voices become some-
one else’s and you no longer have a 
voice of your own.  This is a cell in what they call 
“segregation.” It used to be called soli-
tary confinement, but for some bu-
reaucratic reason it was changed to 
“segregation,” with various adjectives 
added. The use of solitary, once a rela-
tively rare means of isolating prison-
ers whose violence jeopardized both 
guards and other prisoners, is now so 
frequent and so commonplace in U.S. 
prisons that prefab concrete segrega-
tion cubes are standard units of prison 
construction.  
It is not hard to see how difficult it 
would be to keep yourself from going 
crazy in such a cube. Now add the 
probability —actually the strong likeli-
hood —that most of the people put into 
those cubes already have some serious 
psychological problems before they 
are put there, and even a ten year old 
could deduce that such treatment 
would compound whatever problems 
someone had. Yet for the last 25 years, 
there has been a vast expansion of 
dungeons full of cubes like those I de-
scribe in prisons throughout the U.S. 
And their original purpose of keeping 
dangerous prisoners from harming 
others has been vastly expanded to 
include punishments for violations of 
prison rules and any behavior deemed 
insubordinate by sadistic or control -
freak guards.  
 To anyone who has endured the hor-
rors of solitary, it is impossible not to 
view this kind of punishment as an 
extreme form of cruelty. I would say 
cruel and unusual, except that it’s no 
longer unusual because every prison 
in the country has isolation units just 
as bad or worse than my description.  In some prisons, you are put on a 
leash when you exit the cell for any 
reason, like for medical treatment if 
you’re lucky. You are allowed to exit 
for “yard” once a week, for an hour 
alone in a slightly larger concrete cube 
with a screen across the open roof 
twenty feet above. This is your only 
contact with the outdoors. I have done 
a total of some two years off and on in 
solitary cells such as these. Not one of 
the experiences was anything but de-
pressing and painful.  
I am not suggesting that some of the 
people put into these units do not 
need to be segregated from the rest of 
the prison population. Many are in 
prison for anti -social behaviors and 
shouldn’t have been stuck with each 
other to begin with. But a very high 
percentage of them would technically 
be certified for mental institutions if 
not for their violent, criminal behav-
ior. Prison, and especially solitary, 
simply intensifies psychological prob-
lems that might be treatable in anoth-
er setting. It is distressing and sad to 
report from my personal observation 
that there are very few or no opportu-
nities for rehabilitation in prison, 
whether psychological, behavioral or 
even educational.  
Logical thinking might lead one to 
conclude that lock -up, which is pretty 
much a long -term ‘time out’ from soci-
ety, is not an adequate means of deter-
ring criminal activity, especially when 
you herd a bunch of wildly dysfunc-
tional people together and expect 
them to change. Of course it’s not; you 
might as well herd wild horses into a 
corral and expect them to change into 
dressage champions. I think actually 
addressing and correcting convicts’ 
issues would be more productive, but 
there is too much political and eco-
nomic pressure hindering the intro-
duction of rehabilitative services. An 
unempathetic society chooses to pun-
ish offenders instead of helping them, 
even if the punishment creates worse 
monsters than the originals.  
For example, if you put a 15 -year -old 
kid in prison for a lengthy amount of 
time (as I have been), and offer him 
little or no avenue to learn how to be a  
(Continued on page 4)  Concrete Solitaire  
4 (Continued from page 3)  
positive contributor to society, he will 
inevitably learn from what he is being 
exposed to. He will come to know only 
how to cope and survive in a locked -up 
environment surrounded by seriously 
messed -up guys. So when you eventu-
ally re -introduce him to society, what 
expectation can you have of him? Even 
if he tries his best to fit in, his reac-
tions to situations will be a product of 
what he has come to know.  
I have written before about the prison 
environment. It is 99 percent negative 
and sub -primal. This doesn’t mean no 
one ever survives it and returns to so-
ciety to become a functioning citizen, 
but the likelihood of this happening is 
slim to none.  
The same and more so can be said of 
locking someone in a solitary/
segregation cube and expecting him to 
come out any better. The overwhelm-
ing likelihood is that he will emerge a 
far more violent, far more uncon-
trolled, far angrier person than ever 
before. Punishment may be a neces-
sary aspect of deterring certain behav-
iors, but I don’t think people who have 
not experienced this kind of punish-
ment can comprehend how it can ac-
tually harden one to the prospect of 
such consequences.  
When you get put into that kind of 
isolation, you have no choice but to 
accept it. After a time, some people 
actually come to embrace the solitude, 
and it becomes a great discomfort to live in the general population again. 
Now they are not only no longer de-
terred by the threat of solitary, but are 
likely to create the situations that will 
send them there.  
Around the country, some of these seg 
units hold people for years, even dec-
ades, prolonging and eventually pre-
venting their potential recovery from 
such an experience.  
The unrelieved boredom of these units 
and the lack of any live contact drives 
many inmates to create any oppor-
tunity for interaction with anybody at 
all. Common examples are phantom 
or self -inflicted injuries that give them 
a chance to have contact with medical 
staff, who may be incompetent and 
totally indifferent but at least are argu-
ably human.  
Long -term seg units give inmates 
‘packets’ that they are required to 
complete prior to release back into 
general population. These are basically 
a joke. The packets ask inmates to ex-
plore their behavior in an attempt to 
get them to understand how their 
thinking and actions led to their being 
in solitary. But there are no simple 
cookie -cutter answers to such com-
plexities.  
These inmates have spent their whole 
lives becoming who they are; a year or 
more of solitary confinement cannot 
alter the mentality that has been creat-
ed during a lifetime —except to en-
hance the most negative elements of 
it. I mean, think about it: the very last things you’re likely to acquire while 
locked alone in a concrete cube are 
empathy or civil behavior or social 
conflict -solving techniques.  
I am not an expert, so I can not pro-
pose satisfactory solutions to the di-
lemma of holding criminals accounta-
ble and at the same time avoiding any 
contribution to their mental and be-
havioral instabilities. A few things 
come to mind, though, primarily the 
need to help these guys understand 
the importance of becoming educated. 
Services using former prisoners, who 
are more likely to be regarded with 
respect and attention, could teach in-
mates this importance and provide 
opportunities to pursue all kinds of 
knowledge and skills, which would 
give them an incentive to stay out of 
trouble and to better themselves.  
This would fill another important 
need: our need to feel useful and have 
something to do good for. Those who 
have been discarded by society —
unloved, unwanted, uncared for —need 
this above all: a way to acquire or re-
gain that sense of worth. Burying us 
alive in concrete cubes has exactly the 
opposite effect.  
What society has done is invest in 
more and more solitary confinement 
cubes that intensify the problem, in-
stead of investing in the education that 
could cure or prevent it. Somewhere I 
read that it is cheaper to send some-
one to Harvard than to incarcerate 
him for a year. That says it all, doesn’t 
it? 
 About Solitary Watch  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attorneys, le-
gal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in prison –with 
the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting on solitary confine-
ment in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly incar-
cerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive a copy, send a request to 
the address or email below.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people who 
have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address below.  
PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008 / solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  