  By James Ridgeway  
 “While waiting for an officer to hand-
cuff and escort me back to the cell that 
awaited me after showering, I sat on 
the floor holding a razor used for shav-
ing,” W writes to me. “Today was the 
day I decided to end my life.”  
I do not know W. I have never met him. 
I have no idea whether he is black or 
white, tall or short, old or young. I don’t 
know what he’s done that’s landed him 
in prison, or why the prison system has 
seen fit to place him in solitary confine-
ment. And now I don’t know if he is 
dead or alive.  
Every week I receive 50 or so letters 
from people like W. He is one of 80,000 
men, women, and children who live in 
states of extreme isolation in U.S. pris-
ons and jails. They spend their days 
and nights in cells that measure, on 
average, 6 by 9 feet. They live sealed off 
from the world, sometimes without a 
window, usually behind a solid metal 
door with a slot where a guard can slip 
in a food tray. If they are lucky they are 
let out a couple of times a week to 
shower, or to exercise for an hour in a 
fenced or walled pen resembling a dog 
kennel.  
There is no education in these solitary 
confinement cells. No work. The people 
who are held there may or may not be 
allowed reading materials, or a set of 
headphones to plug into a wall jack 
with a few radio stations. They are 
rarely permitted to make phone calls, 
or have visitors. Some are allowed to 
have family photographs, but usually 
only a limited number —so if a new one 
comes in, they have to decide which one 
to give up. Most are forbidden to hang 
the photographs on their walls.  If they are ever taken out of their cells, 
they are flanked by guards, wrists and 
ankles cuffed and shackled to a black 
box at their waists. They may have 
trouble walking, not only because of the 
shackles but because it’s been quite 
some time since they were able to take 
more than a few steps in any one direc-
tion. They will probably have trouble 
seeing, as well, since they’ve had no use 
for their long -distance vision.  
They are escorted down the tier amidst 
a din of screaming prisoners —some 
with underlying mental illness, others 
driven mad by “the box” —who cut 
themselves, pelt their own cell walls 
and the corridor with piss and shit and 
blood. At night the screaming contin-
ues, sometimes turning into the sounds 
of a barking dog, dying down to where 
you can only hear the sobbing, the voic-
es begging for their mothers, for the 
sight of a child last seen ten years 
ago—and frequently, begging to die.  
This is what they tell me in their let-
ters—the letters that at first trickled in 
every once in a while, when I first be-
gan writing about solitary confinement, 
and now come by the dozens. People in 
solitary sometimes manage to com-
municate by shouting, by tapping on 
pipes, and by “fishing” —passing things 
along lines constructed from sheet 
threads and skimmed across the corri-
dor floor, from the crack under one cell 
door to another. Some, it appears, have 
shared my address, and the fact that I 
am interested in knowing what life in 
solitary confinement is like.  
I am a journalist. I’ve been taught to 
report what I see and hear and know, 
and nothing else. These letters should 
be nothing more to me than documen-
tary material —and perhaps not even that, since the conventional wisdom is 
that prisoners’ accounts can’t be trust-
ed. No need, really, to write back, even 
though that’s what my correspondents 
are clearly hoping for.  
“Mail is manna from heaven,” R writes 
me. “When I hear the squeak, squeal 
and rumble of the mail -cart being 
pushed down the gallery, I start saying 
to myself, “You’re not getting any mail, 
so don’t even expect it. Nobody knows 
you anymore. No one wrote, so stop it!” 
Then, as the cart squeaks and squeals 
and rumbles a bit louder as it gets clos-
er, I’ll jump off the cot and start pacing. 
Then I’ll squat in front of one of my spi-
ders (the SHU Prisoner’s Loyal Pet) 
and I’ll start talking to it (you talk to 
your pets, too, don’t you?!) I’ll say, 
“Come on! Hope with me that we get a 
piece of mail. Come on! If you hope with 
me then we’re guaranteed a letter,” and 
I’ll do a little fist pump…”  
So I write back with a few bits of news, 
a few lines of encouragement. I write 
half a page to B, who has been in soli-
tary for more than 25 years. He writes 
back 20 pages, telling me the story of a 
mouse he had begun feeding in his cell. 
The mouse’s back legs were injured, so 
he’d built it a little chariot out of 
Styrofoam and bits of cloth. The mouse 
had learned to get around with on his 
makeshift wheels when a corrections 
officer discovered it and stabbed it to 
death with a pen. “I had three dogs that 
I loved when I was growing up, and I 
loved Mouse every bit as much as I had 
loved them,” B writes. “For the months 
he had been with me he had been good 
company in a place that can be a lonely 
world, and I would miss him dearly.”  
B wants nothing more than to share his  
(Continued on page 3)  
2 
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008                                   Email: solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  
Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the 
shadows and into the light of the public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attor-
neys, legal scholars, law enforcement and corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and people in 
prison —with the first centralized source of background research, unfolding developments, and original reporting 
on solitary confinement in the United States.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly 
incarcerated people, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organizations. To receive future cop-
ies, please send a request to the address or email above.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people 
who have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address above, and 
tell us whether you would like us to use your name or would prefer to remain anonymous.  
Note: We regret that we cannot  offer legal assistance or advice and cannot respond to requests for this type of 
help. Legal materials sent to us cannot be returned to the sender. We also cannot forward mail to others. Thank 
you for your cooperation.  By Emily Sims  
The New York City Department of 
Correction (DOC) has plans to mini-
mize the solitary confinement of 16 
and 17 year olds on Rikers Island. 
The revelation comes on the heels of 
a three -year investigation by the 
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), 
the findings of which were re-
leased  in an August report  by the 
U.S. Attorney’s office in Manhattan. 
Among other abuses, the DOJ found 
that “there is a pattern and practice 
of conduct at Rikers that violates the 
constitutional rights of adolescent 
inmates.”  
The report concludes that “DOC re-
lies far too heavily on punitive segre-
gation as a disciplinary measure, 
placing adolescent inmates —many of 
whom are mentally ill —in what 
amounts to solitary confinement at 
an alarming rate and for excessive 
periods of time.”   not involve lengthy 
isolation” of adolescents, and 
“prohibit placing adolescents with 
mental health disorders in solitary 
confinement for punitive purposes.”  
On September 28, the New York  
the Times  reported that DOC Com-missioner Joseph Ponte had respond-
ed openly to DOJ’s scathing critique. 
Ponte reportedly told members of the 
New York City Board of Corrections, 
the oversight body for Rikers and 
other city jails, that “jail operations 
needed to be changed to better deal 
with adolescents.” In a memo to 
Mayor Bill de Blasio, Ponte alludes 
to policy changes that could bring an 
end to the longstanding practice of 
confining 16 and 17 year olds in cells 
for up to 23 hours a day. The DOC 
puts the number of juveniles cur-
rently being held in isolation at 51.  
Although the memo is “short on spe-
cifics,” the  Times  reported, it “says 
that solitary confinement will be re-
placed by ‘alternative options...for 
misbehavior and steps designed to 
pre-empt incidents from occurring’ ” 
when it comes to children  on Rikers.  
New York is one of only two states in 
which 16 and 17 year olds accused of 
a felony are automatically tried as 
adults and placed in adult jails. Ear-
lier this year, under pressure from a 
lawsuit brought by the New York 
Civil Liberties Union, the New York 
State Department of Corrections reached an agreement  that it would 
limit the use of solitary confinement 
for children under the age of 18 in 
state prisons.  Research has 
shown  that without such re-
strictions, juveniles placed in adult 
prisons and jails are disproportion-
ately likely to end up in solitary.  
Johnny Perez, who spent sixty days 
in solitary confinement on Rikers at 
the age of 16, sees the development 
as positive, but emphasizes that fur-
ther change in needed. Perez, a 
reentry sdvocate at the Urban Jus-
tice Center, is active in the 
NYC  Jails Action Coalition, the 
grassroots group that has spearhead-
ed the fight for change to solitary 
confinement practices on Rikers. In 
an email to  Solitary Watch  about 
the Times  article, Perez wrote, 
“Although Ponte’s decision is a step 
in the right direction, there is still 
much work to do. As we know the 
brain is not fully developed until the 
age of 25, so ideally we would like to 
see all people 25 and under excluded 
from Solitary confinement.”  
Emily Sims is a Reporter/Researcher 
for Solitary Watch.  
3  (Continued from page 1)  
thoughts, to know that there is an-
other human being, somewhere in 
the world, who is interested enough 
to read them. Others want things. G 
wants me to look up a long -ago high 
school girlfriend. He hasn’t heard 
from her in 25 years and doesn’t 
know where she lives. He wants her 
address so he can write to her. I 
know I can’t send it to him, so I don’t 
even look.  
D manages to write to me in spite of 
that fact that, like about a third of 
the people in solitary, he suffers 
from severe mental illness. After a 
while he asks for a sex magazine, 
even though receiving one could get 
him in deep trouble. When I refuse, 
he asks for —and I send —some Spi-
derman comic books. Next he asks 
for a Bible. He seems to sound less 
suicidal than usual, so I quickly 
send that as well. D writes me that 
it never arrived, so I track the pack-
age on Amazon, which says the Bible 
was delivered to the prison. Appar-
ently someone stole it. Then D asks 
if I can put his name on my website 
so “I can have penpals…and maybe 
find that special someone.”  
J writes on behalf of another person 
he met in prison: “During my stay at 
the mental health unit, I came to 
know a man named G. Mr. G was 
clearly not a quick thinker and had 
mental health issues. On one occa-
sion an emotionally unstable correc-
tions officer opened G’s cell and 
slapped him across the face because 
he had taken too long in giving the 
officer back a food tray after a meal. 
In another example, involving these 
two, I witnessed the corrections of-
ficer direct a nurse not to give G his 
mental health medication because G 
could not decide in a timely manner 
if he wanted to take the medicine or 
not…These two incidents happened 
in a mental health area reserved for 
suicidal prisoners.”  
I know that thousands of people in 
solitary are like G —too ill, or not 
literate enough, to write at all. They 
are completely cut off, trapped in 
their own minds as well as in their 
cells. But I have a hard enough time dealing with the people who write to 
me, and try hard not to think about 
the people who are not writing.  
Y reports: “I’ve witnessed officers…
encourage a mentally ill prisoner 
who had smeared feces all over his 
control cell window, to lick it off, and 
they would give him some milk. And 
this prisoner licked most of the fecal 
matter off of the window, and was 
‘rewarded’ by the officer who threw 
an old milk to the prisoner through a 
lower trap door to the cell.”  
Along with the tirades about certain 
guards there are copies of painfully 
hand -printed legal documents, full of 
“whereas” and citations of this or 
that federal court case, written in 
the hope that some judge will read it 
and get the author out of solitary. 
But the judges, with few exceptions, 
have ruled that solitary confinement 
is not cruel and unusual punish-
ment. Not even for the man who 
drilled a hole in his head to try and 
stop the pain.  
There are so many letters now that I 
cannot possibly reply to most of 
them, even with a couple of volun-
teers to help. So I buy packages of 
cards, and gather up all the ones 
sent to me for free by wildlife groups 
as thank -you gifts for donations. I 
start sending people in solitary pic-
tures of polar bears and endangered 
gray wolves, with just a few hand-
written words: “Thanks for your let-
ter. Stay strong.” They write back with a level of gratitude totally dis-
proportionate to my lame missives.  
A man writes me about the sound of 
rain in a drainpipe. It is his weather 
report. Another writes about the pa-
rade of cockroaches down the corri-
dor at night, which he watches 
through the slot in his door, desper-
ate for any sign of another living 
thing. Still another writes to thank 
me for the smell of perfume that he 
detected on an envelope containing a 
card. The smell lingers in his cell, he 
says, and fills him with dreams of 
the outside world.  
Some people manage to pick up in-
formation about what is going on in 
that outside world. They write to ask 
for more news about the hearing on 
solitary confinement held in Con-
gress, about whether things are 
changing. I can’t bear to tell them 
that it may be years or decades be-
fore anything changes for them —
though some already know it. “I 
heard the head of the Bureau of 
Prisons in Congress (on radio) say-
ing they do not have insane inmates 
housed here,” writes J, who has 
spent a decade in the federal super-
max prison. “I have not slept in 
weeks due to these non -existing in-
mates beating on the walls and hol-
lering all night. And the most ‘non -
insane’ smearing feces in their cells.”  
Some of these people have done very 
bad things in their lives. Others not 
so much. People get sent to solitary 
in the United States for a panoply of 
absurd reasons —having too many 
postage stamps, smoking a cigarette, 
refusing to cut their hair. But after 
reading these letters, I can’t accept 
that even the worst of them deserve 
to live this way.  
J, who is in solitary for trying to es-
cape, remains defiant. “I refuse to 
embrace the solitude. This is not 
normal. I’m not a monster and do 
not deserve to live in a concrete box. 
I am a man who has made mistakes, 
true. But I do not deserve to spend 
the rest of my life locked in a cage –
what purpose does that serve? Why 
even waste the money to feed me? If  
(Continued on page 4)  
4 (Continued from page 3)  
 
I’m a monster who must live alone in a 
cage why not just kill me?”  
I know that some people, in fact, do 
prefer to die rather than live this way. 
In barren cells, they become ingenious 
at finding ways to kill themselves. 
They jump head -first off of their 
bunks. They bite through the veins in 
their arms. About five percent of all 
American prisoners are in solitary con-
finement, but half the prison suicides 
take place there.  
The rest find ways to keep going. 
What keeps D alive is his mother. For 
B, it’s his writing. For J, it’s the small window in his cell. “Every now and 
then a pair of owls roosts on the secu-
rity lights,” he writes. “This spring 
they had two babies. We watched 
them grow up and fly away. On any 
given day the sky here is breathtak-
ing. The beauty out my window stays 
in my mind. I look around this cage at 
plain concrete walls and steel bars and 
a steel door, a steel toilet, and I endure 
its harshness because I am able to 
keep beauty in my mind.”  
Sometimes, now, I spend entire days 
reading letters from these people, 
these criminals, these models of hu-
man fortitude. I can’t do much of any-
thing for them, except keep on read-
ing. A second letter comes from W. “I want 
to apologize to you for my previous 
letter,” he writes. “It must have been 
very uncomfortable for you to read 
that letter. It was extremely wrong for 
me to express such a personal issue to 
people I don’t know. But my lack of 
interacting with people on the outside 
sometimes causes me to come out and 
express things that I probably should-
n’t. So I hope you can somehow empa-
thize with my situation and forgive me 
for the context of my previous letter.”  
W is alive.  
James Ridgeway has been a journalist 
for more than 50 years. He is founder 
and co -director of Solitary Watch.  
ARIZONA —In September, the 
American Civil Liberties Union 
(ACLU) released a series of 26 re-
ports alleging extensive problems 
with the Arizona Department of Cor-
rections’ (ADC) healthcare program 
and its use of solitary confinement.  
     The reports, which were released 
ahead of a federal class action trial 
against the ADC, assert that medi-
cal, dental and mental healthcare in 
Arizona State prisons has declined 
to unsafe levels and that solitary 
confinement is excessive. According 
to a press release by the California 
based Prison Law Office, there are 
“significant, dangerous problems 
with the ADC’s use of solitary con-
finement,” with people being placed 
in solitary prisons placing people in 
isolation because prison beds else-
where are full and that people with 
mental illness are often placed in 
isolation because the ADC does not 
have “treatment alternatives.”  
     Corrections officials have disput-
ed the reports, which were made 
public earlier this month after the 
ACLU won a federal court hearing to 
have them unsealed.  
 
MISSISSIPPI —Civil rights advo-
cates, including lawyers from the 
Southern Poverty Law Center 
(SPLC) and American Civil Liberties 
Union (ACLU), filed a motion in fed-
eral court on September 26 with re-
gard to expand a lawsuit against the  By Lisa Dawson and Jean Casella  
 
Mississippi Department of Correc-
tions with regard to the East Missis-
sippi Correctional Facility (EMCF), 
a privately run for -profit prison.  
     The state of Mississippi has won 
praise in the past for reducing its 
use of solitary confinement. But the 
men held at EMCF, including many 
with mental illness, are often held in 
long-term isolation. In addition, ac-
cording to the ACLU: “The motion 
includes hundreds of pages of expert 
reports that give a glimpse into a 
dank and filthy prison that left the 
experts aghast. They document a 
facility where cell doors don't lock, 
prison officials frequently resort to 
unnecessary force, and prisoners 
struggle to receive the medical care 
they need .”  
     "Taken as a whole, the conditions 
in solitary confinement at EMCF are 
the worst I have witnessed in my 40 
years as a forensic psychiatrist in-
vestigating jail and prison condi-
tions," Dr. Terry A. Kupers wrote in 
a report examining the prison's men-
tal health care system. "These condi-
tions can accurately be described as 
torture according to international 
human rights agreements and 
standards.”  FLORIDA —No fewer than ten sus-
picious deaths of individuals held in 
the Florida prison system are now 
under criminal investigation. In one 
incident, officers are accused of 
throwing a man in solitary confine-
ment and gassing him over the 
course of five hours until he died. In 
another incident at a Miami -Dade 
county jail, according to the Miami 
Herald , a man with mental illness 
jail was placed in a scalding hot 
shower as punishment for defecating 
in his cell. He died in the shower 
with his skin peeling off.   
     In September, dozens of prison 
staff were fired, including several 
allegedly involved in the gassing 
incident. But critics say that exces-
sive uses of force are endemic in 
both state prisons and local jails 
throughout Florida.  
 
NATIONAL —Amnesty Internation-
al has launched a petition campaign 
aimed urging U.S. Secretary of State 
John to grant repeated requests 
from the UN Special Rapporteur on 
Torture, Juan Méndez, to visit U.S. 
supermax prisons. Méndez, who is 
the UN’s chief torture investigator, 
has taken a strong position against 
solitary confinement, asserting that 
isolation beyond 14 days qualifies as  
cruel, inhumane, and degrading 
treatment and can constitute tor-
ture. So far his requests to visit 
American prisons have been denied.  
