  Longtime journalist Alisa Roth dedi-
cates her newly published book, In-
sane , to exposing the warehousing of 
people with mental illness behind the 
bars of U.S. prisons and jails, often in 
solitary confinement units. She relays 
the firsthand stories of people with psy-
chiatric disabilities buried within the 
depths of the criminal justice system, 
calling on reformers to address this 
destructive trend alongside the promi-
nent criminal justice issues of race and 
poverty. The following excerpts from 
the book are published here by permis-
sion of the author and the publisher.  
By Alisa Roth  
There is still little consensus about the 
rationale for incarceration: is it deter-
rence, rehabilitation, or retribution? 
Given the dramatic overrepresentation 
in our jails and prisons of people of col-
or and low -income people, it could be 
argued that the reality has as much to 
do with oppression and social control 
as it does with any coherent theory of 
punishment. Regardless, we have cre-
ated a system that has left the United 
States with by far the highest per capita 
incarceration rate of any large nation in 
the world. It ’s important to 
acknowledge how often race, poverty, 
and mental illness overlap in the crimi-
nal justice system, creating a mutually 
reinforcing downward spiral.  
But of all the gross imbalances of our 
current approach to criminal justice, 
perhaps no group has been hurt as 
much as people with mental illness. 
Once they are caught in the criminal 
justice system, they are far less able to 
cope with its demands and are at much 
higher risk for exploitation and abuse. 
This book seeks to understand why we 
are shunting some of the most vulnera-
ble people in America into jails and 
prisons – and why have they been so 
mistreated when they get there … 
The pharmaceuticals we have today, 
while imperfect, are much more effec-tive at treating symptoms of the diseas-
es than earlier ones, and they are a far 
cry from early, often cruel treatments 
such as lobotomies or water immersion 
– a therapy that involved suspending 
patients in tubs of water for days on 
end.  
Yet in so many other ways, we contin-
ue to treat people with mental illness 
almost exactly as we did before elec-
tricity was invented, before women had 
the right to vote, and before the aboli-
tion of slavery. We still lock sick people 
away from the rest of society. We still 
keep many of them in solitary confine-
ment. We still fail to provide adequate 
treatment for them. And we have 
known almost since the beginning that 
all of this is wrong. It ’s wrong because 
it doesn ’t cure mental illness or prevent 
people with mental illness from commit-
ting crimes when they get out. And it ’s 
wrong because locking up vulnerable 
people in inhumane conditions is fun-
damentally immoral.  
That we know all this but continue to 
relegate sick people to our courts, our 
jails, and our prisons shows how irra-
tional – how insane – our approach to 
both mental health care and criminal 
justice remains...  
In the twenty -first century, [the] devas-
tating consequences of [solitary con-
finement] have been documented with 
clinical precision. For example, ex-
treme isolation may exacerbate or 
cause symptoms of psychosis such as 
hallucinations, paranoia, sleepless-
ness, and self -harm. More than half of 
all prison suicides occur in solitary con-
finement. A study of self -harm incidents 
at Rikers Island showed that people 
who had spent time in solitary were 
almost seven times more likely to try to 
hurt themselves than prisoners who 
had not. At the same time, in many sol-
itary units mental health treatment is 
almost nonexistent. In some places, 
prisoners stay in their cells or in cages 
for group therapy, with the therapist sitting in the hallway between or among 
the cells.  
Individual therapy, when it exists, may 
be conducted cell -side. That means 
either shouting through the steel door 
while the rest of the tier listens in or 
bending down to talk through the tray 
slot, which is typically waist -high. I 
have spoken to prisoners through 
those doors; it ’s hard to hear them, and 
it’s hard to be heard. Even a casual 
conversation is difficult, let alone some-
thing as personal and nuanced as a 
therapy session.  
One of the terrible ironies about solitary 
is that because of the disciplinary struc-
ture of most prisons and jails, people 
who already have a severe mental ill-
ness are often those most likely to be 
put there. For sick prisoners, this 
means a two -part trap in which they are 
punished for their “abnormal ” behavior 
with disciplinary measures that, in turn, 
make their condition worse...  
Such cases, and there are a great 
many of them, show just how poorly 
suited current incarceration practices 
are to dealing with a large population of 
people with mental illness: not only are 
we, in a great many of our penal institu-
tions, failing to give these prisoner -
patients anything like appropriate treat-
ment; we are also putting them in envi-
ronments we know will make their 
symptoms much worse. Indeed, it 
would be hard to come up with a sys-
tem more perfectly designed to inflict 
maximum damage to the psyche than 
solitary. Worse, we are actually making 
our sick population grow. One of the 
most tragic effects of solitary is the ex-
tent to which it renders ostensibly sane 
people mentally ill – sometimes pro-
foundly so.  
Adapted from Insane: America ’s Criminal 
Treatment of Mental Illness . Copyright © 
2018 by Alisa Roth. Available from Basic 
Books, an imprint of Perseus Books, a divi-
sion of PBG Publishing, LLC, a subsidiary 
of Hachette Book Group, Inc.  
2 
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008                                           Email: info@solitarywatch.org  
Founded in 2009, Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.org) is a national watchdog group that investigates, reports on, 
and disseminates information on the use of solitary confinement in U.S. prisons and jails. Over the past nine years, we 
have helped to expand public awareness and understanding of this once -invisible domestic human rights crisis. We hae 
also stimulated mainstream media coverage, supported advocacy campaigns, and informed government policymaking.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is available free of charge to currently and formerly incarcerated people. To receive 
future copies, please send a request to the address or email above. We also welcome stories, essays, poems, and 
drawings about life in solitary confinement, for publication the Voices from Solitary series on our website. SPECIAL 
CALL FOR WRITING AND ARTWORK : We are currently seeking submissions from people currently or formerly held in 
solitary confinement on the theme of “Pets in Solitary. ” This can include creatures (spiders, mice, birds, etc.) you 
“adopted ” in your cells or watched from your windows; imaginary pets; memories or dreams of free world pets; thoughts 
about captive animals; or anything else about how relationships with animals affected you during your time in isolation. 
Please send to the address above, and tell us whether you want us to use your name or prefer to remain anonymous.  
Note: We regret that we cannot  offer legal assistance or advice and cannot respond to requests for this type of 
help. Legal materials sent to us cannot be returned to the sender. We also cannot forward mail to others. Thank 
you for your cooperation.  
 
Solitary Watch sent out a survey last summer, but received a limited number of responses. We are concerned that it did 
not reach everyone, so we are trying again.  
Later this year, Solitary Watch will be completing a report on alternatives to solitary confinement. Our intent is to show 
how long -term solitary can be replaced with more humane and effective alternatives, in order to reduce and eventually 
eliminate this practice in U.S. prisons and jails. For this project, we have researched and visited some prisons that have 
implemented alternatives to solitary confinement. We have also spoken to dozens of officials and experts. Now we want 
to hear from you —the incarcerated individuals who have experienced solitary firsthand.  
If you would like to participate in our survey, please write the answers to the following questions on paper and mail them 
to the address below. Your answers can be as long or as short as you like. Feel free to skip some questions, and please 
add any additional thoughts you want to share with us. No names will be used in the report ; if we quote you we will 
use only your first initial and the state where you are being held. All individuals who respond to the survey will receive a 
copy of the full report if permitted by prison rules; if not, they will receive a summary.  
1. How much time have you spent in solitary confinement? What is the reason you were sent to solitary?  
2. Many prison officials say that solitary is needed to punish individuals who break prison rules. Are there other ways to 
make sure the most important rules are followed? What ways do you think would be most effective?  
3. Sometimes solitary is used for “protective custody. ” How else could prisons safeguard vulnerable people such as 
gay/lesbian/transgender individuals, juveniles, people with disabilities, or people convicted of sex offenses?  
4. Some people are placed in solitary because of behavior that results from mental illness. What other approaches 
would you suggest for dealing with mentally ill people who end up in prison?  
5. Some people are placed in indefinite solitary (often called Administrative Segregation) because they are considered 
a threat to the “safety and security ” of the prison. Do you think anyone belongs in long -term solitary confinement? If 
so, who and why? If not, what do you think should be done instead to keep prisons safe and secure?  
6. Is solitary needed to prevent gang violence in prison? If not, what are some possible alternatives for dealing with 
rival gangs and making sure no one gets hurt?  
7. What are some things that can be done to make conditions better for the people who need to be separated from the 
general population, even for a short time?  
8. Have any reforms of solitary confinement (such as step -down programs or mental health units) been made in your 
prison system? Have you participated in them? Please describe these changes and tell us what you think of them.  
Please send your survey responses to: Solitary Watch Alternatives, 123 7th Avenue #166, Brooklyn, NY 11215. 3  By Abram Wolfe  
Late last year, a 24 -year-old asylum -
seeker from Bangladesh named 
Shoaib Ahmed was placed in solitary 
confinement at the Stewart Detention 
Center in Georgia. His punishment, he 
said, came after he was overheard 
expressing frustration at not receiving 
a weekly paycheck for the kitchen work 
that he and other detained immigrants 
were forced to do for $4 a day. Ahmed 
described being locked in a cell 23 
hours a day: “If you talk, the sound 
does not go outside. And nobody 
comes to talk with us, ” he said. 
“Sometimes I think I will be mentally 
sick…I feel pain in my head. ”  
Ahmed became one of the plaintiffs in 
a class action lawsuit against CoreCiv-
ic, the private company that runs Stew-
art under a contract with U.S. Immigra-
tion and Customs Enforcement (ICE). 
The suit claims immigrants are forced 
to work in slave -like conditions for little 
or no pay, and that refusing or resist-
ing brings retaliation in the form of bru-
tality, deprivation, and solitary confine-
ment. Lawsuits with similar allegations 
have been filed against detention cen-
ters in California and Colorado, and 
Washington State.  
The experiences described in these 
lawsuits expose a grim, dehumanized 
reality inherent in all forms of incarcer-
ation: Wherever there is resistance to 
dominant policies and practices, there 
is solitary confinement —the primary 
tool for coercing or forcing individuals 
into submission. Other stories illustrate 
the additional ways in which solitary 
confinement in immigrant detention 
functions much as it has in U.S. pris-
ons and jails: as a way to maintain 
control in overcrowded, understaffed 
facilities; as an expression of ingrained 
racism; and as a warehouse for people 
with mental health problems.  
For most detained immigrants, the well
-documented psychological damage 
caused by isolation compounds the stress of living with traumatic pasts 
and uncertain futures. Yet by all ac-
counts, the use of solitary in the immi-
gration detention system is only in-
creasing, with little to no oversight —
and with devastating and sometimes 
deadly consequences.  
Many undocumented immigrants have 
broken civil, but not criminal law, while 
others have committed misdemeanors 
by crossing a border illegally. The pen-
alty for their actions is generally depor-
tation, not incarceration, and as re-
cently as 20 years ago, they were sel-
dom jailed. But the number of people 
incarcerated in the U.S. immigration 
system his risen from an average of 
less than 7,500 in 1995, to 30,374 
people in 2015. This 400% increase 
outpaced the growth of non -immigrant 
incarceration, which about doubled in  
the same period. And while the U.S. 
prison population has declined slightly 
in the past few years, immigrant incar-
ceration only to continues to grow, to 
nearly 40,000 by the end of 2017.  
ICE does not report or even track its 
use of solitary confinement, and many 
immigration detention facilities are run 
by private contractors, which are sub-
ject to even less accountability. But 
clearly there are hundreds, if not thou-
sands, of detained immigrants in soli-
tary in ICE facilities, held in both Ad-
ministrative Segregation and Discipli-
nary Segregation. ICE is supposed to 
limit most terms in solitary confinement 
to 14 days. But reports by advocacy 
groups and even by ICE ’s own internal 
monitor found many facilities in viola-
tion of their own policies. Individuals 
have been placed in isolation for not 
being able to speak English, watching 
the Spanish TV channel, complaining 
about the quality of the drinking water, 
having an extra blanket, fasting during 
Ramadan, and  sharing a cup of coffee 
with another detainee. Even immigrant 
children have told stories of being pun-
ished for misbehavior by being held in 
isolation in small cells, as well as beat-en and strapped to restraint chairs.    
Individuals have died in solitary con-
finement in ICE facilities from both 
medical neglect and suicide. At Stew-
art Detention Center last year, for ex-
ample, one immigrant from Panama, 
who had been diagnosed with mental 
illness, hanged himself after being 
placed in solitary confinement, report-
edly as punishment for an earlier sui-
cide attempt. In May, an immigrant 
from Honduras was placed in a pad-
ded isolation cell when he became 
distraught after his three -year-old son 
was taken from his arms under the 
new policy that called for separating 
families at the border. He committed 
suicide that night.  
Those who survive solitary confine-
ment also speak of the confusion, hor-
ror, and sense of helplessness they 
feel when placed in isolation. “It was 
like somebody was choking me, ” a 50-
year old immigrant from Nigeria said of 
this 45 -day stay in solitary. When he 
expressed his distress to staff, they 
reportedly told him: “Take your medi-
cine, go back to sleep. ”  
Yet as non -citizens, and often non -
English -speakers, living under con-
stant threat of deportation to countries 
where their lives may be at risk, most 
detained immigrants are unable to le-
gally challenge their conditions, includ-
ing their placement in solitary. As the 
National Immigrant Justice Center re-
ports, “guards have unfettered power 
over immigrants, who have no legal 
recourse for unfair custody decisions, ” 
and little ability to make their cases 
known to the outside world. While ad-
vocates have tried to provide legal  
and emotional support to incarcerated 
immigrants, the anti -immigrant rhetoric 
and policies of the Trump era have left 
tens of thousands of vulnerable men, 
women, and children in increasingly 
dire positions. For some, this includes 
the anguish of being locked up alone 
in a cell in a strange country, without 
information, help, or hope.  
4 VIRGINIA —The American Civil Liber-
ties Union of Virginia released a report 
in May that found that the state contin-
ues to overuse the practice of solitary 
confinement, despite the Virginia De-
partment of Corrections ’ continued 
claim to be a model for solitary con-
finement reform. The report includes 
several first -hand accounts of inhu-
mane conditions in solitary confine-
ment and calls for further reduction in 
the use of solitary confinement, trans-
parency and accountability in docu-
menting its use, and alternatives to 
solitary confinement. The report pro-
vides a list of recommendations for the 
state of Virginia to implement mean-
ingful reforms in accordance with in-
ternational laws, the US Constitution, 
and psychological and penological 
research. The ACLU of Virginia has 
called on Gov. Ralph Northam to ban 
the use of solitary confinement in state 
prisons for longer than 15 days and 
prohibit the use of solitary confinement 
on vulnerable populations, especially 
individuals with mental illness.  
NEW JERSEY —The New Jersey Par-
ents’ Caucus and the New Jersey 
Youth Justice Initiative released a re-
port last spring documenting the expe-
riences of youth in adult correctional 
facilities in the state of New Jersey. 
While the 2015 Comprehensive Juve-
nile Justice Reform Bill banned the 
use of disciplinary solitary confinement 
in juvenile detention facilities, former 
Governor Chris Christie vetoed legis-
lation in 2016 that would have prohibit-
ed the use of solitary on children held 
in adult facilities. The report concluded 
that solitary confinement psychologi-
cally damages youth as well as adults 
and exacerbates prior mental illness-
es. The report also found drastic racial 
disparity in the number of Black youth 
held in solitary and the length of soli-
tary confinement stays for Black and 
Hispanic youth. The report calls for a 
ban on the use of solitary confinement 
on children in adult prisons.  
SOUTH CAROLINA —Men on South 
Carolina ’s death row await trial for 
their 2017 lawsuit, claiming they have 
been subjected to “cruel and baseless 
solitary confinement, ” “confined for up to 24 hours a day to small, windowless 
cells that measure approximately ten 
feet by ten feet ” for periods ranging 
between nine and twenty years 
“without legitimate or valid penological 
reason. ” According to the South Caro-
lina Department of Corrections, the 
state currently holds 36 individuals on 
death row. Individuals held on death 
row in at least two other states —
Louisiana and Florida —have also filed 
lawsuits challenging their automatic 
placement in solitary confinement.  
LOUISIANA —The Louisiana State 
Penitentiary at Angola has closed the 
solitary confinement unit Camp J, 
which resulted in the release of about 
400 individuals into general popula-
tion, according to the Louisiana De-
partment of Corrections (DOC). The 
director of the advocacy organization 
Promise of Justice Initiative, Mercedes 
Montagnes, described Camp J as 
“more akin to a dungeon, ” and ex-
plained that it “was used to house indi-
viduals who were more in need of 
mental health treatment than discipli-
nary action. ” The closure of Camp J 
comes after the DOC partnered with 
the Vera Institute of Justice on the 
Safe Alternatives to Segregation Initia-
tive aimed at reducing the use of soli-
tary confinement. Despite closing the 
notorious unit, Louisiana continues to 
hold thousands of individuals in soli-
tary confinement throughout the state.  
OREGON —Disability Rights Oregon 
(DRO) followed up last year on a re-
port they had released in May 2015, 
which revealed the Oregon State Pen-
itentiary has been holding about 40 
severely mentally ill individuals in soli-
tary confinement at the Behavioral 
Health Unit. After DRO threatened to 
file a lawsuit, the Oregon Department 
of Corrections (DOC) began to in-
crease the individuals ’ time out of their 
cells but eventually reverted to keep-
ing the individuals in their cells for 23 
hours a day. The DOC and DRO have 
come to an agreement that in two 
years, individuals will be allowed out of their cells for at least 20 hours a 
week, which means they will still be 
kept in their cells for 21 hours a day. 
In the published report, DRO stated 
new recommendations for the DOC, 
including an end to solitary confine-
ment for individuals with mental ill-
nesses by December 31, 2019, as 
well as a significant reduction of the 
use of solitary confinement in general.  
MISSISSIPPI ─The American Civil Lib-
erties Union and the Southern Poverty 
Law Center filed a class action lawsuit 
in 2013 against the Mississippi De-
partment of Corrections for “barbaric 
and horrific conditions, ” failing to pro-
vide adequate health care, and impos-
ing solitary confinement at the East 
Mississippi Correctional Facility, a pri-
vately run prison. Plaintiffs claim that 
the prison staff, while aware of health 
hazards and medical emergencies, 
continues to allow the conditions to 
persist. In the case ’s trial last April, the 
attorneys ’ closing argument expressed 
the danger of placing these responsi-
bilities in the hands of private prison 
corporations. The judge ’s ruling has 
yet to be presented.  
ALABAMA —Last February, Federal 
District Judge Myron Thompson or-
dered the Alabama Department of 
Corrections to either remove individu-
als with serious mental illness from 
solitary confinement or provide a rea-
son for their placement in solitary. 
Thompson ruled last summer that 
mental health care in the Alabama 
prison system was “horrendously, ” 
constitutionally “inadequate ” and 
found that individuals with mental ill-
ness were held in solitary confinement 
for long periods of time without treat-
ment. The Southern Poverty Law Cen-
ter and the Alabama Disabilities Advo-
cacy Program filed a lawsuit in 2017 
that found 152 individuals with mental 
illness being held in solitary in the 
state prison system, and the judge ’s 
order found 131 still there. Lawyers 
recently called for an “emergency re-
quest ” to halt the placement of mental-
ly ill people in solitary, since two sui-
cides have already occurred this year.  
 
News Briefs by Valerie Kiebala  
 