NOTES   FIELD
THE CHILDREN’S RIGHTS NEWSLETTER
Making Kids Homeless in KansasIN FOCUS:
In September, the media reported the 
alleged rape of a 13-year-old girl sleeping 
in a child welfare agency office in Johnson 
County , Kansas. The story of this child —  
staying overnight in an office because Kansas’  
broken system lacked any housing for her — 
exemplifies a long-known danger. Kansas’ 
child welfare system is, and has been for 
at least a decade, systematically failing to 
protect children in foster care in the custody 
of the state’s Department for Children and 
Families (DCF).
 In November, Children’s Rights took 
action. The class action lawsuit we filed tells 
the stories of what the ten child plaintiffs 
named in the suit have endured — but they 
speak for thousands more.
 The plaintiffs range in age from 7 to 17, 
and have been in foster care for anywhere 
from several months to nine years. They 
have all been subjected to disrupted housing 
conditions so extreme that they are essen -
tially rendered homeless while under the care of the state. They are pushed to the breaking 
point by being moved from place to place 
with little more than the clothes on their 
backs. The state pays more than $900,000 a 
month to private agencies to treat children 
this way — with no accountability . 
 And things are getting worse. According 
to a 2018 study , which Children’s Rights 
believes actually underreports the extent of 
the problem, housing instability for Kansas 
children is on the rise. Children are churned 
through new placements at a rate more than 
twice the national average, and the number 
of repeat placements has increased by 30 
percent since 2016. 
 “Churning” in the Kansas foster care 
system dates back almost 20 years. This 
dangerous practice moves children from 
one foster care placement to the next — 
anywhere from ten to over 100 times while 
in DCF custody . Churning treats children FROM
THE
WINTER 2019
From New York to 
Atlanta and beyond, 
Children’s Rights is 
building community 
across the country
INSIDE:
Victory for kids:  
Texas court ruling 
means major reforms 
for children in  
foster care
Continued on page 6
2
It was a tough year for America’s children. The opioid crisis is driving up the 
number of children entering foster care, thousands of immigrant children 
remain in detention facilities, and government cuts to basic nutrition, health 
and anti-poverty programs put hundreds of thousands of kids at risk.
And our political system has for decades been indifferent. It doesn’t matter 
who is in the White House, who has the majority in Congress or who occupies 
the state house.  In red states, blue states and purple states the lack of mean-
ingful and sustained investments to prevent harm to children goes back a long 
way . W e spend less on children than almost any other developed nation. One-
fifth of American children live in poverty , and they account for more than one-
fifth of the homeless population. Each year about 2,000 American children die 
from child abuse or neglect and, on any given day , nearly half a million children 
are living in foster care.
It doesn’t have to be this way . Liberal or conservative, Democrat or Republican, 
let’s make 2019 the year we take this personally . Let it be the year we each say: 
“I am committed to children. I will hold my government accountable.” 
If we do, we can build a movement that will transform millions of young lives. 
T ogether we can build the just, compassionate society that our children so 
richly deserve.
Sandy Santana
Executive DirectorON THE FRONTLINES
Our Beating Heart
Recently , we decided to tell the story of Children’s 
Rights through the lens of the children we serve. 
After all, kids are the beating heart of what we 
do. The result? A boxed set of four child-size books. 
These books may be small, but they tell a mighty 
story . The story of how we — with your support — 
are protecting hundreds of thousands of children 
each year.
Download the books at childrensrights.org/books3RI
CTPA
TNMOIA
GAAZ
TXMIWI
SCKS
FL
MISSOURI
Our groundbreaking 
lawsuit exposes the 
use of psychotropic 
drugs as “chemical 
straightjackets.”
AND IN CONNECTICUT, SOUTH CAROLINA, GEORGIA, MICHIGAN, MILWAUKEE,  
RHODE ISLAND AND ARIZONA
we are holding governments accountable for reforming their broken child welfare systems.IOWA
Our lawsuit shines a light on the inhumane 
practice of juvenile solitary confinement.
TEXAS
In a huge 
victory for 
children, a 
judge required 
reforms to 
a woefully 
inadequate 
child welfare 
system.TENNESSEE
Our landmark case led to 
the overhaul of the child 
welfare system — and is now 
a model for the nation.GEORGIA
Our new office brings 
hope to over 180,000 
children in the South’s 
child welfare system.
NATIONWIDE
We helped stop the  
illegal separation of 
immigrant children  
from their families.
We worked to protect  
the rights of LGBTQ  
youth in states  
across the U.S. 
Our voice was heard  
in national press and  
media outlets as we  
spoke out for abused  
and neglected children. 
FLORIDA
Our case 
targets abusive 
housing 
practices and 
insufficient 
mental health 
care.
KANSAS 
We are taking 
legal action to stop 
the traumatizing 
practice of night-to-
night placements 
and make sure 
children receive 
adequate mental 
health services.2018: A Year of Progress for Children
PENNSYLVANIA
Our report investigates 
systemic dangers and 
inadequate education 
for youth in residential 
foster care.42018 was an eventful year for Children’s Rights. A committed group of supporters gathered to defend the rights 
of children across the country. Check out some of our favorite moments here.
Children’s Rights hosted not one, but two benefits in 2018. Our 
annual Benefit & Inspiration Awards in NYC honored Sixto 
Cancel, CEO of Think of Us; the technology platform Box.org; 
and Lee Gelernt, the Deputy Director of ACLU’s Immigrants’ Rights 
Project. Our inaugural Atlanta benefit honored Kate Atwood, founder 
of Kate’s Club; Trenny Stovall, Director of DeKalb County Child 
Advocacy Center; and George McKerrow, co-founder and CEO of 
T ed’s Montana Grill. Thank you to our amazing event co-chairs and 
many supporters who made both benefits a success!
NYC 1. Speaker Padma Lakshmi 2. Board member 
Chiara Mai and Friends 3. (Left to right) Board members 
Lewis Tepper, Alice Rosenwald, Honorable Bryanne 
Hamill, Alan Myers, Jerry E. Garcia, Board Chair Megan 
Shattuck, Executive Director Sandy Santana, Chiara Mai, 
Bethany Pristaw, and Jay Galluzzo 4. Leslie Odom Jr. 
from Hamilton 5. Board member and gala co-chair Molly 
Gochman and husband Michael Armilio 6. Children’s 
Rights staff 7.  Gala co-chairs Kelli Shaughnessy and Jim 
Stanton 8. Honoree Sixto Cancel, Young Professional 
Leadership Council member Lexie Gruber, and guests 
Front cover: Padma Lakshmi and emcee Jordan Roth. 
ATLANTA 9.  Greg Hecht, National Advisory Council 
Member and Southeast Steering Committee Chair  
10. Award Presenter Laura Seydel 11. Steering Committee 
Member Jo Ann Herold and guest 12. Jason J. Carter, 
Partner, Bondurant Mixson & ElmoreOut & About for Children’s Rights
Celebrating and Shining a Light in NYC and Atlanta
1
3 42
5
10 11 1296 7 85Lexie Gruber, member of our Y oung Professional Leadership Council, shared her story 
on Instagram in order to support the inaugural Children’s Rights Fellowship, which  
will provide five former foster youth with the opportunity to intern at Children’s  
Rights in Summer 2019. W ant to support the fellowship? Become a monthly donor at 
childrensrights.org/member!Friendraiser: Children’s Rights 
gathered new supporters at the 
African American Museum in 
Philadelphia. Top: Event co-host 
Reshma Moorthy and Children’s 
Rights Board member Alan Myers. 
Bottom: Event co-host Allen Riddick 
and wife Crystal Cummins.Children’s Champion Ride: 
In partnership with longtime Children’s 
Rights Board member Dan Galpern, 
we held our first-ever #RideForKids, 
cycling to raise money for children in 
state foster care, education, immigration, 
and juvenile justice systems.
Shopping for a Cause: Kelli Shaughnessy, founder 
of SSY Designs, hosted a shopping party with 100% 
of proceeds going to support Children’s Rights. 
Learn more at instagram.com/ssy_designs.Rocco , one of our youngest 
supporters, hosted a lemonade 
stand and raised $1000 for 
Children’s Rights.We Get By with Help from Our Friends
We are pleased to introduce 
our new Children’s Rights Board 
member, Anne Robinson. 
Anne is Managing Director, 
General Counsel, and Corporate 
Secretary of Vanguard, 
and brings her passion for 
protecting children across the 
country. Welcome!
6A 2018 court decision is good 
news for the 12,000 children in 
permanent foster care in T exas. 
In October, the 5th Circuit Court 
of Appeals upheld major parts of 
an earlier ruling by a district court 
judge finding that the children in the 
care of the state’s broken, unconsti-
tutional system “almost uniformly 
leave state custody more damaged 
than when they entered.” Children’s 
Rights and T exas co-counsel, Y etter 
Coleman LLP and Haynes and 
Boone LLP , brought the suit in 2015. 
 The appeals court agreed that the state was deliberately indifferent 
to the systemic flaws threatening 
the safety of children, and that while 
in the child welfare system many 
children experience concrete harm. 
 “This ruling gives hope that the 
state of T exas will finally invest the 
resources it needs to properly serve 
the most vulnerable children in its 
care,” said co-counsel Paul Y etter.
 With the court-ordered reforms, 
the state will increase the number of 
caseworkers overall while reducing 
their exorbitantly high caseloads. 
The state will also be required to improve its woefully deficient 
investigations practices and take the 
actions necessary to keep kids safe.
The World Just Got a Little Better like packages on a conveyor belt: forced to find a place 
to sleep for a night or two anywhere a bed, couch, office 
conference room, shelter or hospital can be found. The 
vicious cycle can go one for days, weeks or even months.
 The Kansas City Star quoted Lori Ross, a long-time 
Missouri child advocate, describing how constant 
churning dehumanizes already traumatized children: 
“What one-night stays do is make it very clear to the 
child that they have zero value to anyone. Y ou aren’t 
valuable enough to have stuff. Y ou’re not valuable 
enough to go to school.”
 In addition to the devastating emotional and 
psychological impact, research shows that repetitive 
night-to-night placements also have a direct impact on 
children’s normal brain development, and can cause 
developmental and neurological damage that may be 
irreparable. 
 Children entering foster care are by definition trau-
matized and need mental health care. Y et administrative 
barriers within DCF, delays, and long waits for mental 
health services mean that children are being deprived of 
the treatment they need. 
 Churning is deeply tied to the problem: the trauma 
makes the need for mental health services even more 
urgent, while the very nature of churning creates 
barriers. Haphazard and unpredictable placements make 
it hard for kids to make or keep appointments.  The story of M.L., one of the plantiffs named in the 
suit, is all too typical. M.L. is 17 years old. She entered 
foster care when she was six and was eventually adopted 
along with her sister. They were sexually assaulted 
repeatedly by their adoptive foster father but stayed 
in that home for three years before re-entering DCF 
custody . Since then, DCF has moved M.L. more than  
42 times. Once, for an entire week, she was forced to 
sleep in agency offices. Despite being diagnosed with 
PTSD and bipolar disorder, M.L. has not received 
consistent medically necessary mental health treatment. 
She has run away on several occasions and been the 
victim of sex trafficking.
 T raci Dotson, a social welfare student at the Univer -
sity of Kansas, sees the state’s shortcomings through a 
very personal lens. She is herself a survivor of Kansas’ 
foster care system. 
 “From 15 to 17 years of age I was in the custody of 
DCF. I am now working to change a broken system 
from the inside out. Our state is setting records for the 
number of children in custody; that’s a record to be 
ashamed of. This lawsuit can deliver real, tangible relief 
for children who desperately need it. But even by just 
bringing this case to court, Children’s Rights is telling 
the world that Kansas is not protecting our most vulner -
able children. People are finally talking about this. That’s 
the beginning of real change.”  (continued from page 1)Making Kids Homeless in Kansas IN FOCUS:7A new report by Children’s Rights and 
the Education Law Center raises 
grave concerns about the safety and 
educational opportunities of youth in 
residential foster care in Pennsylvania. 
 The number of children living in 
Pennsylvania group facilities exceeds the 
national average. T oo often, because of 
a woeful lack of oversight, they suffer 
verbal, physical, and sexual abuse and 
mistreatment from staff and other 
children. Y et the state continues to 
ignore repeated reports of violence 
and mistreatment — and uses taxpayer 
dollars to put children in harm’s way .
 But the harm doesn’t stop there. 
Children’s educations are also being 
largely ignored: most of them attend “on-grounds” schools located at or near 
the residential facilities, instead of at 
a nearby public school. These schools 
often lack even the basics of a decent 
education, with children of various ages 
mixed in one classroom and a curriculum 
that relies heavily on worksheets. 
Sometimes, students cannot even receive 
high school credit for their work because 
the coursework at these schools is not 
recognized.
 The report was released in December, 
and early response from the media and 
advocates has been one of outrage. Penn-
sylvania’s children deserve what every 
child deserves: safety and security at 
home, and educational opportunities at 
school. Pennsylvania owes them no less.Investigation: Children Face Abuse  
and Indifference in PennsylvaniaCR: What made you want to get 
involved with Children’s Rights?
A dear friend invited me to an introduc -
tory session with Children’s Rights staff, 
and I was just blown away by the severity 
of the problems kids face. It was an eye-
opener. And the staff! So passionate and 
articulate. The meeting ran two hours 
and I didn’t want it to end. 
CR: How does being a mother 
affect your perspective on child 
welfare? 
I pray every night for my kids to be 
healthy , happy and safe. There are 
children out there who are not any of 
these. When my children can stomach 
the realities — and that will be soon — I 
will be introducing them to Children’s 
Rights. I want them to be aware. I want 
us involved as a family . CR: Why is it so important for 
CR to have a strong presence in 
Georgia and the South? 
I am not from the South, but I have 
lived here for a long time. I am proud to 
call it my home. But Georgia is in many 
ways a difficult place for young people. It 
ranks 42nd in state child welfare rank -
ings nationwide. Atlanta’s airport is the 
busiest in the world, but it is also a major 
international hub for sex trafficking. Our 
public school system is the 35th worst in 
the country . 
CR: What would you tell someone 
looking to get involved in Chil-
dren’s Rights?
I’d tell them about the look on the faces 
of the people at our benefit as they 
learned about all the children who are 
not healthy , not happy , not safe. There Q/A WITH HOLLI HINES EASTON
ATLANTA STEERING COMMITTEE MEMBER
Children’s Rights celebrated the opening of our new Southeast office — located in space 
donated by law firm Hall Booth Smith — by hosting an awards benefit in Atlanta on 
November 16. The event was a huge success, thanks to the efforts of a dynamo steering 
committee of local community leaders and advocates in Atlanta. Here we talk to Holli Hines 
Easton, committee member and co-chair of the benefit. Holli is managing director of BFG 
Marketing, a full-service advertising agency representing major brands including Coca-Cola 
and Progressive Insurance.
were no devices out. No one spoke. Once 
you hear their stories and see what a 
difference Children’s Rights can make — 
I defy you to look away . I know I can’t. 
Holli Hines Easton, left, with Children’s 
Rights Atlanta Benefit Honoree George 
McKerrow and National Advisory Council 
Member Karyn Froseth
UNSAFE  
AND 
UNEDUCATED:
INDIFFERENCE TO DANGERS IN 
PENNSYLVANIA’S RESIDENTIAL  
CHILD WELFARE FACILITIES Stay informed!
Sign up for Southeast updates at 
childrensrights.org/southeast
Download your copy of the report at 
childrensrights.org/unsafewww.childrensrights.orgTo make a gift to Children’s Rights, visit www.childrensrights.org and click “Donate Now.”
@ChildrensRights              facebook.com/childrensrights              @childrensrightsAll proceeds from our events sponsor advocacy and legal action 
to protect abused and neglected children across America.
SAVE THE DATETD 
FIVE BORO BIKE TOUR
Join the Children’s Rights charity team 
in the TD Five Boro Bike Tour 
on May 5th, 2019. 2019 
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS 
BENEFIT & 
INSPIRATION AWARDS
Mark your calendars and stay tuned 
for more information about our annual gala.OCTOBER 28, 
NYCMAY 5, 
NYC
Register at 
development@childrensrights.orgPurchase pre-sale tickets and sponsorship at 
childrensrights.org