NOTES   FIELD
Children’s Rights’ Landmark Win  
for Kids to Air on PBSIN FOCUS:
Actor Sam W aterston is best known for his 
roles in Law and Order and The Newsroom. But he has also spent years as host of The 
Visionaries, an award-winning PBS documen
-
tary series featuring organizations tackling some of the country’s most difficult social problems. This year, Children’s Rights is proud to be one of the 12 nonprofits, selected from among hundreds, to be profiled.
 W aterston is committed to The Visionaries 
because he believes in the central idea that “doing what you can about huge, intractable problems — is an idea worth encouraging.” The Children’s Rights story certainly fits that mold: it shows us how one of the worst child welfare systems in the country became one of the best.
 The film chronicles the lengthy legal 
battle waged by Children’s Rights and our partners to transform T ennessee’s badly broken foster care system. When the lawsuit was first filed, the situation for kids in foster care in T ennessee was dire. They were kept in overcrowded emergency shelters, moved from placement to placement, denied contact with siblings and their home communities, and warehoused in group facilities.
 Almost 20 years later, harnessing the 
power of the courts proved to be the most effective tool to spark lasting reform. T oday children in T ennessee are more likely to be reunified with their families, adopted more quickly , and not put in group homes. Fewer kids are aging out of care without a permanent family , and more children get the critical assistance they need. And there has been progress in reducing the overrepresen-tation of African American children in the foster care system. No state’s system is perfect, but 
T ennessee has come a long way toward better serving children and their families — and has become a model for other states across the country . For information about viewing the  
documentary , visit childrensrights.org/pbs.FROM
THE
SUMMER 2019
PROTECTING KIDS IN THE SOUTH
Welcome Betsy to our growing Southern team!
INSIDE:
PROVIDING HOPE
Join our movement for America’s most vulnerable children
THE CHILDREN’S RIGHTS NEWSLETTER
SOUTHERN EDITION
Photos courtesy of The Visionaries2On any given day there are nearly 150,000 children in foster care systems 
across the South. These children yearn for healing, but are often denied access to critical physical and mental health services. They seek stability , but are often shuffled through a labyrinth of shelters, foster homes, group homes and detention facilities. And with every move, the trauma of being separated from their original home is compounded. A shocking number enter adulthood with no family , no support and few life skills.
 
That’s why a year ago Children’s Rights launched our Southern office and put into action a plan to bring hope to a new generation of children in the region.  W e didn’t do this alone. W e did it with formidable and passionate champions for the rights of kids: our amazing steering committee of community leaders 
who are galvanizing local support across the region; and the folks at Hall Booth Smith, who are not only providing us with office space in downtown Atlanta, but building a team of pro bono attorneys to work by our side.  There is much work to be done. But we are making progress. As the map below shows, we currently have boots on the ground in several Southern states, holding governments accountable for the children in their care — children who are powerless to advocate for themselves. And because of your support, Children’s Rights can continue to change hundreds of thousands of lives.
TN
TXGASC
FLON THE FRONTLINES
SOUTH CAROLINA 
& GEORGIA
We are holding 
governments accountable 
for reforming their broken 
child welfare systems.TENNESSEE
Our landmark case led 
to the overhaul of the 
child welfare system — 
and is now a model for 
the nation.
GEORGIA
Our new office brings hope to children in 
child welfare systems across the South.TEXAS
In a huge victory for 
children, a judge required 
reforms to a woefully 
inadequate system.Making Life Better for Kids in the Region
FLORIDA
A settlement in March 
will help keep kids safe 
and healthy.
Through advocacy efforts and competency trainings, our LGBTQ Project 
works to improve the lives of LGBTQ youth in out-of-home care.
Sandy Santana, Executive Director
REGIONWIDE3
CR: Hall Booth Smith’s offer is incred-
ibly generous—free office space and firm-wide pro bono support. What made you jump on board so decisively in support of our work?
John Hall: Greg is an old friend, so I knew I wanted to have him and Chris
-
tina tell us the story of what Children’s Rights is trying to do in the region. It was an eye-opener. Children’s Rights does a good deal of its work in the South because the region’s nearly 150,000 chil
-
dren in foster care are in desperate need. W e were impressed both with the success you are having locally here in Georgia and across the country , but also the need to do so much more. It was clear that you are doing important work. 
CR: Where would you like to see the partnership with Children’s Rights be in a year?John: W e are very excited that the staff is already growing and that Christina has added a full-time staff attorney . W e have all the space and support in place to help you expand even further. At the same time, I want to get our whole team involved and be a big partner with Chil-dren’s Rights in the South, where you have so much going on.
CR: What would you say is the ROI for 
Hall Booth?John: Giving back to the community is in our firm’s DNA. Providing pro bono support to an organization like Children’s Rights is something we are tremendously proud to do. This way , we are making the connections that much easier for our attorneys because we are all here in the same space. W orking with Children’s Rights strengthens our firm by giving us a common vision.
CR: As a litigator, what is your perspec -
tive on the use of legal action to effect 
large-scale change?John: There is no question in my mind — and Children’s Rights’ track record is a testimony to this — that litigation can galvanize reform of government systems that are harming people, especially defenseless children, in the process. I am also impressed that Children’s Rights is making a big push to expand beyond CR INSIDER: JOHN HALL ON THINKING BIG
When Children’s Rights Lead Counsel Christina Remlin and Southern Steering Committee 
Chair Greg Hecht made a presentation in early 2018 to a roomful of lawyers from Hall Booth 
Smith, one of Atlanta’s largest litigation defense firms, it made a big impact. Amazingly, Hall 
Booth Smith responded by offering office space for the Children’s Rights Southern team in their own headquarters, as well as staff assistance and pro bono legal support. Founding 
partner John Hall recently talked about why Hall Booth Smith is making this significant 
contribution to CR’s future growth.
litigation and use the tools of advocacy 
and partnership to strategically address systemic problems in a targeted way that will enhance your overall effectiveness. It’s an exciting time to partner up with Children’s Rights and pool our resources to make a difference in the lives of countless children.
Our Atlanta office is thrilled to welcome Betsy W eintraub, who joins Children’s Rights as a staff attorney . Betsy comes to us from T ennessee, where she has had extensive litiga-
tion and trial experience. She worked in private practice in the area of employment litigation, and in public interest positions including supervising a violent crimes unit as an Assistant Attorney General (including sex crimes, DV cases and crimes against children), and with Legal Services handling domestic violence cases. Betsy received her J.D. from University of Memphis School of Law .  W elcome to the team, Betsy! #ProtectingKidsStaffing Up to Protect 
Even More Kids
John Hall, Hall Booth Smith
Children’s Rights is proud to work with our 
Southern Steering Committee and staff:
Greg Hecht, Chair; David Brackett; Cecilia Crutchfield; Holli Hines Easton; Karyn Froseth;
 
Jo Ann Herold; Dr. Rhonda Jeffries; Patricia Kellner; Hon. Cassandra Kirk; Darren Summerville.
Sandy Santana, Executive Director;  atlanta-based staff : Christina Wilson Remlin, 
Lead Counsel; Aaron Finch, Senior Staff Attorney; Betsy Weintraub, Staff Attorney.TAKE OUR SURVEY
What are your top priorities for 
children in 2020 and the years 
ahead? Tell us which issues
matter to you most:  
www.childrensrights.org/survey 
STAY CONNECTED:  
JOIN THE CONVERSATION 
ONLINE
To make a gift to Children’s Rights,  
visit www.childrensrights.org and click “Donate Now.”@ChildrensRights   
facebook.com/childrensrights 
@childrensrightsJOIN THE ATLANTA  
BENEFIT COMMITTEE
Email  
development@childrensrights.org  
to learn more.
BECOME A MEMBER
For as little as $10/month,  
you can make a difference for  
America’s children.  
childrensrights.org/member
DONATE YOUR BIRTHDAY
Celebrate by giving back. 
Learn more at  
childrensrights.org/birthday
GET INVOLVED!