NOTES   FIELD
THE CHILDREN’S RIGHTS NEWSLETTER
Victory for Kids in Missouri, 
Wake-Up Call for the NationIN FOCUS:
Life is cruel for so many reasons for too 
many children in Missouri’s child welfare system. Now , a ground-breaking court 
settlement approved late last year means more than 13,000 children will be safer in the future. 
 The settlement resolves a ca
se brought 
in 2017 by Children’s Rights, the National Center for Y outh Law , Saint Louis Univer-sity School of Law Legal Clinics, and the law firm of Morgan, Lewis & Bockius. Our goal was to stop the misuse of psychotropic drugs administered to children in foster care without clear necessity or oversight. Their stories are heartbreaking: children put on daily doses of multiple drugs that cause confusion, hallucinations, dramatic weight gain, myriad health problems – and do nothing to address the underlying mental health disorders children suffer from because of trauma and abuse.
 Children
’s Rights and our partners 
identified numerous failures on the part of the state, including not keeping adequate medical histories for the children, or not having a mechanism to review extreme cases, such as when a child is prescribed as many as seven psychotropic medications at one time.
 W
e knew there was a better way to 
provide care for these kids. Our agreement sets in motion a process for overhauling the state’s practices and protecting children: medical records will be monitored; doctors and caregivers, with real input from youth, will vet the risks and the benefits of medica-tion before it is administered; and an inde-pendent child psychiatrist will be available to provide secondary review of prescriptions for efficacy and safety .
 As the first federal cla
ss-action lawsuit 
in the country to focus singularly on the dangerous use of psychotropic medications among youth in foster care, the case will not only benefit children in Missouri, it also sets the stage for tackling what is a nationwide problem in the foster care system. 
 On any given day
, there are more than 
440,000 children in U.S. foster care. All are victims of trauma—through abuse, neglect, and the experience of removal from their homes. Nearly all enter state custody with FROM
THE
SPRING 2020
LIVING HER DESTINY  How Attorney Shereen White Found Her Way to Children’s Rights
INSIDE:
LOOKING GOOD Shop in Style With Children’s Rights!
Continued on page 6
2Throughout 2019, friends and family from across the country came out to defend the rights of children.  
We also had a lot of fun.
This year, Children’s Rights hosted its 14th annual Inspiration Awards & Benefit Gala at the Mandarin Oriental in New Y ork. It was a knock-out success — and we had some very special guests. 
W e honored Vincent Mai, Founder and Chairman of The Cranemere Group; William McNabb, III, Former Chairman and Chief Execu-tive Officer of V anguard; and Lexie Pèrez-Grüber, Health & Public Management Service Consultant at Accenture.
 W
e also had a special visit from Karli, a 6 ½ year-old Sesame Street 
muppet in foster care. She told the crowd, “My mommy has been having a hard time. She can’t take care of me right now even though she loves me very much. So my forever parents keep me safe and give me a place to belong for now .”
NYC Gala: 1. Speaker and actor Rosario Dawson and special guest Karli from Sesame 
Street  2. Emcee Jordan Roth  3. Board member Anne Robinson  4. Honoree William McNabb, III  5. Board members and gala co-chairs, Lewis Tepper and Chiara Trento Mai  6. Board chair Megan Shattuck  7.  Honoree Vincent Mai  8. Honoree Lexie Pèrez-Grüber You Showed Up for Children’s Rights
“I Miss My Mommy, But I’m Safe”: A Night to Remember
7 82 3 4
56
13Take a look at some of our favorite moments from the year.
Wine and Words for Youth: 
Our Young Professionals Leadership Council (YPLC) came together to raise funds and raise awareness for our cause. “I was in the foster care system and although I had difficulties for sure — I am one of the lucky ones,” YPLC member Candice Chachkin shared.Children’s Champion Ride: From Manhattan to Staten Island, our hardy Children’s Champion Team powered through the raindrops and cycled for kids as part of the TD Five Boro Bike Tour in NYC.
Atlanta on the Move: We gathered our Georgia supporters for a fun, multi-charity fundraising run in Atlanta! (No, this baby boy did not run the 5K because he can’t walk yet. Maybe next year!)Races and Duffles and Lemonade, Oh My!
Rocco  does it again. This 
youngster’s recurring lemonade stand, with all proceeds supporting Children’s Rights, was a big hit this year. Join  our Kids for Kids lemonade stand campaign in 2020 by emailing Mary Grace Cobbs at  mcobbs@childrensrights.org.Everyone Left This Party with a Bigger Heart: The Delouvrier family opened their home to Children’s Rights and our supporters on a beautiful autumn evening full of inspiring stories.
Holiday Helpers: Our inaugural bag drive was a huge success! In partnership with iThrive Worldwide, we delivered 50 gift bags to youth who are aging out of foster care.Glimmers of Hope: Artist and YPLC member Ronald Draper designed this gorgeous limited-edition, 14-karat gold HOPE necklace for the 2019 gala. Contact development@childrensrights.org  for more information.
4
Have you always been interested 
in children’s issues?The truth? I can’t say that children’s issues have always been at the top of my radar. But as a father, I started learning about local children’s organizations and paying more attention to news stories highlighting the plight of at-risk kids. Since I began supporting Children’s Rights, this issue has become very important to me.
What aspect of the work is most 
important to you?There is almost no ‘greater good’ than assisting a child in need. Vulnerable chil-dren can’t advocate for themselves, and because of that, their hardships often go unnoticed until it’s too late. Additionally , helping children during such formative years means there’s a real chance to make positive, lasting change in their lives.Why do you think people should join the Children’s Rights Monthly Sustainer Program?First of all, it’s easy . I guarantee if you’re reading this newsletter that there’s a dollar amount you can fit into your monthly budget — whether it’s $5 or $500. Second, whatever amount you decide to contribute, it will undoubt-edly be the best money you spend that month. Finally , helping at-risk kids is one of the most worthwhile causes we can dedicate ourselves to. There’s no ques-tion that every dollar you contribute is money well spent.
What would you like to see 
changed in the child welfare system over the next five years?That’s a tough one. The fact that there are so many abused and neglected kids in our country is a tragedy . How can we 
CR INSIDER: TYLER WINSLOW
WHY I’M A MEMBER 
Meet Tyler Winslow — car enthusiast, father of two girls, and monthly donor to Children’s 
Rights! As the owner of a Mercedes auto shop in Cincinnati, he learned about Children’s Rights when the organization was featured in a news article in 2015. Here’s why he’s been a loyal supporter ever since.
make the biggest impact? In my opinion, 
real change will be made when we focus on prevention. As a society , we should take a long, hard look at the causes of child maltreatment, and then decide, as a community , that we’re going to try to address and prevent those problems. That’s what Children’s Rights does, and that’s why I’m a monthly member.
It was 4:28 AM when Shereen White hit send. She’d seen the Children’s Rights job opening weeks earlier. It focused on 
her life’s passion. But commute to New Y ork City from Connecticut with an infant and toddler at home? No way . Finding Her Way to Children’s Rights
Meet Staff Attorney Shereen White
 Shereen gre w up in a family that 
moved a lot, which taught her lessons about resiliency and adapting to new situations. Along the way , she developed a love of learning and knew her destiny was somehow connected to children and education. She also had a direct connec-tion to the ills of the child welfare system.
 “ My dad spent many years in the foster care system and aged out. He’s an amazing and special human being, and he tells stories that leave us both in tears because that’s how awful they are.” 
 This drive t
o make things better led 
Shereen to Duke, where she got her undergrad degree, and on to Villanova Law and a job with a private firm, where she was encouraged and helped to follow her heart: first as an advocate attorney for abused and neglected kids, and then as assistant general counsel for special education for the School District of Philadelphia.
 Which brought Shereen t
o that 
middle-of-the-night job application. Commute or no commute, she couldn’t get Children’s Rights off her mind. So when she woke up at midnight, she told herself, “If it’s still there, I’m going for it.” She heard back the next day .
 “I ha
ve a strong faith in God and 
I know the plan for me is to have an impact on the lives of children—not kid by kid, but by changing systems. Being here feels like all of my experi-ences professionally and personally come together. I was literally being prepared for this job, this mission, this fight. W orking at CR feels in every way like I’m fulfilling my destiny .”5
John Lewis, Still Fighting the Good Fight
By Christina Wilson Remlin, Lead Counsel, Children’s Rights
Children’s Rights is hosting a panel discussion  
with interfaith leaders in NYC!  
Visit childrensrights.org/interfaith-nyc  
to learn more and RSVP.This year Martin Luther King Day was a special one for me, 
personally and professionally . On Monday , I cuddled up with my three-year old son Oliver and read portions of March, the 
moving graphic novel trilogy about the civil rights movement written by Representative John Lewis. On W ednesday , I had the honor of meeting the Representative’s staff to share Children’s Rights’ support for a critical bill he has sponsored.
 Oliver wa s riveted by March and especially by its portrayal 
of Dr. King as a towering voice of peace and justice who died so tragically . As an Atlanta native, I grew up listening to the same stories of the movement to change the world that has its roots in my birthplace. T oday , my office is just a quick trip to Repre-sentative Lewis’s headquarters, which is where I found myself last W ednesday . 
 M
y colleagues and I were there to applaud and support the 
Every Child Deserves a Family Act (ECDF). It was introduced in June by Lewis and Republican Representative Jenniffer González-Colón of Puerto Rico.
 The ECDF 
Act promotes the best interests of children 
by prohibiting federally-funded child welfare agencies from discriminating against children, families, and individuals on the basis of religion, sex (including sexual orientation and gender identity), and marital status. 
 Our nation is currentl
y facing a shortage of homes avail-
able for young people who need them. Now , a spate of state laws and policies, and a pending federal proposal that would enshrine taxpayer-funded discrimination on religious grounds, threaten to reduce the number of foster homes.
 Ele
ven states have enacted laws that explicitly allow adop-
tion agencies to discriminate against families that are, in their view , not “traditional” — such as LGBTQ, religious minority , and mixed faith families. Only federal legislation can put a stop to these heinous, cruel laws.
 That is why Children ’s Rights supports the ECDF Act — 
and applauds Representative Lewis. It’s also why Children’s Rights recently launched our Interfaith Coalition for Children’s 
I’ve been a children’s rights lawyer for over 20 years, but the outrage I feel as  
a witness to the abuse and neglect of innocent children never goes away.  
At Baker & McKenzie our focus is on making an impact on children’s lives that  
is measurable and sustainable. Our partnership with Children’s Rights has been 
rich and rewarding. We share the same values — superior legal talent, a passion 
for collaboration and a commitment to systemic change.Rights. Partnering with faith organizations around the country , Children’s Rights and the Interfaith Coalition oppose legislation and policy changes that would ultimately deprive vulnerable children of safe, loving homes.
 In  March, John Lewis paints a vivid picture of his own 
life-long struggle for justice — all the way from poverty on a sharecropper’s farm to the halls of Congress. T oday , even as he does battle against a deadly cancer, Lewis continues to fight the good fight on behalf of vulnerable children who would otherwise have no voice. That’s exactly the spirit Children’s Rights strives to embody in our work.
Angela Vigil
Partner and Executive Director  •  Pro Bono Practice  •  Baker & McKenzie LLP
“ ”
PROUD TO BE A PARTNERFrom left: Christina Wilson Remlin, Lead Counsel; and Aaron Finch, 
Senior Staff Attorney meet with Rep. John Lewis Staff
Baker & McKenzie recently partnered with Children’s Rights on a pro bono basis to secure a win for vulnerable children in the Southern Region of Florida.6…But  in Georgia’s largest county jail, the right 
to an education is being systematically denied to students with disabilities.
 That’ s why last year Children’s Rights, Atlanta law firm Bondurant Mixson & Elmore and the Barton Juvenile Defender Clinic at Emory University School of Law filed a lawsuit on behalf of incarcerated youth who have a right to special education services. The lawsuit alleges that the DeKalb County Jail is violating federal statutes that guar-antee every child the opportunity to be educated.
 US F ederal law clearly spells out the essential right of Education is not a privilege — it’s a right…significant mental health needs, which frequently leads to the prescription of psychotropic medications.
 Antipsychotics, one of the most pow
erful classes of 
psychotropic drugs, are often administered to children in foster care to treat a diagnosis, such as ADHD, that the drug was never designed to address. These medica-tions can sometimes lead to other profound and even permanent adverse effects including psychosis, seizures, irreversible movement disorders, suicidal thoughts, aggression, weight gain, organ damage, and other life-threatening conditions.
 The gra
ve harms and risks to foster children flowing 
from the administration of psychotropic medications are exacerbated because these children often live with caretakers who do not have detailed knowledge of their trauma background, mental health needs, or medical history . This puts children at a heightened risk of serious physical and psychological harm because of the lack of an adequate oversight system to ensure that psycho-tropic drugs are administered safely and only when necessary .
 The settlement in Missouri wil
l establish better  
practices there that prioritize the health and well-being of its most vulnerable children. But experts also hope that it marks the dawn of a national wake up call for states across the country .
 J
ohn Ammann, the McDonnell Professor of Justice 
in American Society at Saint Louis University School of Law , said he believes the settlement will serve as a “model road map for social service agencies and advo-cates in other states.”
 “This is a problem in many stat
es. Kids in foster care 
face so many challenges. And what happened is with the growth of psychotropic medications prescribed for all sorts of mental health issues, we have fallen into a system where it is easier to give a child a pill than to be patient and engage in therapies.”(continued from page 1)Victory for Kids in Missouri,  
Wake-Up Call for the NationIN FOCUS:
every student, including incarcerated students, to a fair 
and appropriate education. That includes the specially designed instruction necessary for students with disabilities to ensure their academic success.
 “DeK
alb County Jail is utterly failing young people 
with disabilities who already face an uphill path to a better life. W e want to send a message to these chil-dren: you are worth educating; we are not giving up on you. An education is a transformative experience that you deserve – and that’s what we are fighting for,” said Randee W aldman, Director of the Barton Juvenile Defender Clinic at Emory University School of Law .
 The perc
entage of incarcerated youth with disabili-
ties is far greater than the national average. Between 30% and 70% of young adults in detention qualify for special education services and accommodations – as compared to 14% of public school students in the general population.
 The lawsuit cal
ls on public education and county jail 
officials to work together to develop a plan for ensuring that special education services are provided to all eligible students.7
Purchase pre-sale tickets and sponsorship at childrensrights.org
All proceeds from our events sponsor advocacy and legal action to protect  
abused and neglected children across America.
SAVE THE DATE2020 ATLANTA BENEFIT GALA & 
INSPIRATION AWARDS
Honoring 
Delta Airlines  
for its commitment to  
fighting human trafficking 
and
Talley Wells, a pioneering  
disability rights attorney 
and
Greg Hecht, Chair of the  
Southern Steering Committee2020 BENEFIT &  
INSPIRATION AWARDS
Honoring
Cyndi Lauper  
for her work advocating for  
LGBTQ homeless youth 
and
longtime Board Member,  
Dan Galpern 
for his 20 years on the 
Board of Directors, 
among othersOCT. 26, 
NYCSEPT. 10,  
ATLANTA
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
Megan Shattuck, Chair; Lewis T epper, Vice Chair; Daniel 
Galpern, T reasurer; Bethany Pristaw , Secretary; Kasseem ‘Swizz Beatz’ Dean; Jerry Garcia; Molly Gochman; Honorable Bryanne Hamill; Chiara T rento Mai; Alan C. Myers; Jay Neukom; Anne Robinson; Alice Rosenwald; Peter D. Serating; and James Stanton.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS ADVISORY COUNCIL:
Alissandra Aronow; Michael Borofsky; Jim Coleman; Rachael De Chacón; Christen Douglas; Karyn Froseth; Steven Haedrich; Jill Hayman; Greg Hecht; Christy Irons; Sandra Kapell; A. Elizabeth Korchin; Mark Lindsay; and Enid Maran.CHILDREN’S RIGHTS SOUTHERN STEERING COMMITTEE:
Greg K. Hecht, Chair; David Brackett; Cecilia Crutchfield; Holli Hines Easton; Karyn Froseth; Jo Ann Herold; Bill Holbert; Dr. Rhonda Jeffries; Patricia Kellner; Honorable Cassandra Kirk; Christina Remlin; Dr. Rashad Richey;  Sandy Santana; and Darren Summerville.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS YOUNG PROFESSIONALS  
LEADERSHIP COUNCIL:
Doreen Allen; Candice Chachkin; Clare Connaughton; 
Brittany Davis; Ronald A. Draper; Lexie Gruber; Alexis Harvey; Rachel Hertzberg; Meghan Kacsmar; T obin Kassa; Caitlyn Levine; Airenakhue Omoragbon; Christine Rivera; Kathleen Rivera; Suveer Seemangal; and Briana Williams.Look Good and Do Good!
www.childrensrights.orgTo make a gift to Children’s Rights, visit www.childrensrights.org and click “Donate Now.”
@ChildrensRights              facebook.com/childrensrights              @childrensrights
The new Children’s 
Rights Swag Store is up and running. From tote bags and umbrellas to t-shirts and even a onesie for your baby, there’s a little something for everyone to shop for a good cause. #RememberMe: 
Join Children’s Rights for  
Foster Care Awareness Month
This May, Children’s Rights will  
feature youth stories and help  spread awareness about the  work we are doing to keep  America’s most vulnerable  children safe and healthy.  Stay tuned! Visit  childrensrights.org.
NEW!
Visit childrensrights.org/store!