“What I wanted the most 
was a family , but instead I was shuffled from facility to facility like I was an animal.”
For Elijah Sullivan, this was 
his reality growing up in foster care. Now a 25-year-old juvenile supervision officer, Elijah recognizes that if he had been given the chance to live with a stable relative, his path to success and self-suffi-ciency would have been much easier. “I had an uncle that was willing to take me into his home a couple of years after I entered the system, but it ended up never happening.”
For many like Elijah, foster 
care can be a whirlwind that keeps them spinning from placement to placement, without any safety nets to help them succeed. After aging out at 18, Elijah strug-gled to find housing and a sense of stability for almost a year. “I thought things would be easy , but I was severely mistaken,” he told Children’s Rights. “Responsibilities hit me like a ton of bricks. I didn’t have the slightest idea how to shop for groceries, make appointments, set up my electricity . I was lucky THE CHILDREN’S RIGHTS NEWSLETTER
NBC’s Natalie Morales honored at 11th Annual Children’s Rights Benefit
NOTESFROM
THEFIELD
FALL
2016
INSIDE:
Victory in South Carolina! Federal Judge approves  life-changing settlement for children in foster care
Continued on page 7Preserving Family Connections  
For Children in Foster CareIN FOCUS:
Elijah Sullivan says his path in life would have been easier if he had 
lived with a stable relative. Photo credit: OmarStylez Photography
to have a few mentors — 
without them, I’m sure I would have been lost.” 
The importance of family 
ties is increasingly being recognized, including by the U.S. Congress. The Family First Prevention Services Act, introduced by Senate Finance Committee Chair Orrin Hatch, R-UT ., and Ranking 2
In June, renowned artist and Fostering the Future blogger Ronald Draper arrived at our 
office to envision a one-of-a-kind installation for Children’s Rights. Within minutes, he came up with the words that embody our mission: Hope in Action.
Of course, we’ve had more literal descriptors of CR’s work. Y es, we defend America’s abused and neglected kids. Y es, we use the law to protect thousands when child welfare systems fail to do so. But we took an instant liking to Ronald’s new tagline and his fresh perspective on our work.
Because while every child should have hope, improving foster care rarely happens on its own — it requires tough 
advocacy . Here at CR, we strive to put hope in action every single day . And this edition of Notes From the Field has some great examples. Our victory in South Carolina is one. Thanks to a recent settlement in Michelle H. v. Hailey, the case that CR and our amazing co-counsel brought on behalf of some 3,400 children in foster care, our action has put hope at the fore: now more kids will be placed in family homes and get the medical care they need.
Our October benefit was also cause for celebration. Thanks to our Board of Directors, Advisory Council, Y oung 
Professional Leadership Council and amazing honorees — NBC’s Natalie Morales and Paul Y etter and his firm, Y etter Coleman LLP — as well as remarkable foster care alumni, we had one of our most successful benefits ever. Knowing our supporters believe in us and contribute so meaningfully to our work is also a cause for hope.
And then there is some of our lesser-known advocacy . In recent months, CR began representing four unaccompa-
nied minors who fled to the United States to escape unthinkable violence in Central America. In October, thanks to CR’s dedicated attorneys, a judge positioned two of these children to receive Special Immigrant Juvenile Status from the federal government. Now these vulnerable young people will finally be able to live without fear.
None of this amazing work would be possible without you. By extension, every last one of you also exemplifies 
Hope in Action. As we enter this season of giving, we want to express to you our profound thanks.
Best wishes for very happy holidays.
Sandy Santana
Executive DirectorON THE FRONTLINES
FROM CR’S EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
3Children’s Rights is thrilled to announce 
the launch of its Y oung Professional Leadership Council — a dynamic and passionate group of individuals who will help CR advance its mission of making a difference in the lives of vulnerable kids. The group will work in a variety of capaci-ties, from bolstering fundraising efforts to organizing netw
orking events and panel 
discussions with like-minded leaders.
The group is made up of seven profes-sionals from diverse areas: Jason Bressner, F
ounder of Limpuagua; Motell G. Foster, 
third-year graduate acting student at NYU Tisch School of the Arts (see above); Christine Rivera, VP of W ealth Management at America Deutsche Bank; Hana Shahin, Accounting Manager at MacAndrews & Forbes Incorporated; Cindy L. T aylor, Founder of Full Extent Coaching LLC; Maria Vlassenko, Private Equity Attorney at Goodwin Procter LLP; CR: What motivated you to join 
CR’s Young Professional Leadership 
Council?
MF: One of my mentors, Karen Baynes-
Dunning, is a court-appointed monitor for CR’s Kenny A. case in metro Atlanta. Prior to the summer I told her I wanted to get away from theater to spend time advocating for foster youth. I also told her I wanted a thorough education on the child welfare system. Consequently , I worked with different players within the system and several organizations that monitor it. This is how I connected with CR. When the Council came up, it was a no-brainer. CR’s a very impactful organization — but, like most, there is a need for more constituent voices. This is where I come in.CR:
 You have a passion for the arts. 
Why?
MF: As a kid, I experienced a lot of neglect and trauma. This led me to favoring imaginative worlds over reality . Daydreaming, anime and role-play are some of the things that made life bear-able. Of course, it’s a larger conversation — but acting and theat
er have provided 
me the time and distance, via role-play , to unpack my trauma; specifically , the patterns attached to it. This art is the lens through which I’ve seen more of myself.
CR: What does the future hold  
for you?
MF: I believe I’ll do well as an actor. I’m really excited about the possibility , but I don’t think about it a ton. Currently , one of my big aims is to find the best way to provide the trauma-unpacking benefits of role-play to foster youth. I’m in the early stages of creating a Drama- Therapy frame -
work for just that. I have high hopes.
CR: What is the one accomplishment 
you are most proud of?
MF: I usually try to veer from that lane of thinking, but I’m proud of the aware-ness and action that I’ve helped to culti-vate in my networks on behalf of foster youth. Thankfully , it’s just the beginning.
CR INSIDER
Motell G. Foster , an inaugural member of the Children’s Rights Y oung Professional Leadership Council, spent 14 years in Alabama’s foster care system. He has a bachelor’s degree from The University of Alabama and now lives in New Y ork City where he is in his final year at NYU Tisch’s Graduate Acting Program.
New Young Professional Council to Help 
Advance CR Mission
Members of the Children’s Rights Young Professional Leadership Council join together at 
CR’s Annual Benefit Oct. 18 at the Lighthouse at Chelsea Piers. From left to right: Cindy L. Taylor, Maria Vlassenko, Christine Rivera, Samrat Singh, and Jason Bressner.
and Samrat Singh, VP at U.S. T rust, Bank 
of America Private W ealth Management.
The council will host various events to raise funds for CR, conceptualize panel topics and help coordinate networking opportunities for council members,  CR staff and other supporters of the organization t
o engage in deeper dialogue 
and foster a sense of community .
Interested in becoming a member or learning more? Contact our Develop-ment Manager Kathleen Rivera at 646-216-3306 or by email at krivera@childrensrights.org. 4Hope in Action — that was the theme of Children’s 
Rights’ 11th Annual Benefit on October 18. The senti-ment carried through the evening as honorees Paul Y etter of 
Y etter Coleman LLP and NBC’s Natalie Morales 
movingly described what fuels them to make a difference in the lives of vulnerable kids. 
“T wo decades ago, a report referred to young people 
in T exas foster care as ‘the children that even God has forgotten,’” said Y etter, who, along with his firm, was honored for extraordinary efforts in helping CR secure a landmark ruling on behalf of 12,000 children.“But not even this dire descriptor was enough to change the status quo. If CR and our team hadn’t stepped in to say ‘enough is enough,’ we wouldn’t be where we are today .”
As part of the TODAY Show’s “Pay It Forward” series, 
Morales interviewed three former foster youth — including benefit keynote speaker Steffanie Kramer — and created a Public Service Announcement for CR that has aired more than 18,000 times across the country . “This organization is near and dear to my heart,” said Morales. “Every single day , CR thinks of the hopes and dreams that are eluding so many of our kids, and takes decisive action to make them a reality .”
The tremendously successful event raised more than 
$920,000 to help CR continue its work to protect and defend the rights of abused and neglected children. 
Those in the room and following on social media 
commemorated the evening with the hashtag  #HopeInAction, a tagline inspired by the artwork of H
arlem-based artist and attendee Ronald Draper. Other 
notable guests included Board Chair Megan Shattuck, benefit Co-Chairs Molly Gochman and Jay Galluzzo and former foster youth Kim Larson and Kristopher Sharp.
Several foster care alumni shared their stories with 
bravery and passion. Kramer recounted eight months of sexual abuse at the hands of a foster father. She then recalled how her fourth set of foster parents helped turn her life around. “T onight I do not stand before you worth-less and abused ... I stand before you wanted, chosen, lo
ved and adopted,” she said to a standing ovation.Extraordinary Allies Natalie Morales, Yetter 
Coleman LLP Honored at CR Benefit
1. Corbin Irons, Mia Irons, Joseph Irons, Adam Irons (front), Celee Irons, Christy Irons, Asher Irons, George and Karen Milner, Auggie Irons  
2. Ronald Draper, Demetrius Napolitano  3. Jim Stanton, Joseph Regele  4. Auctioneer CK Swett  5. Jane and Robert Julius  6. Christy Irons, Enid Maran  7.  Cecilia Fang, Mary Ann Zoellner, Natalie Morales, Jaclyn Levin, Rachel DeLima, Megan Kopf  8. Lewis Tepper, Steven 
Katz, Paul Byrne, Jill Schildkraut-Katz, Kim Rimer  9.  Paul Yetter, Alan Myers  10.  Peter Serating, Molly Gochman, Megan Shattuck, Anne 
Strickland Squadron  11. Jenny and Jay Galluzzo  12. Dianne Bartosz  13. Dan Galpern, Cori Galpern, Lewis Tepper, Kim Rimber  14. Paul and Patti Yetter  15. Kristopher Sharp  16. Megan Shattuck, Sandy Santana, Bethany Pristaw, Alice Rosenwald  
1
52
4
63517. Latham Thomas, Terry 
Danziger, Molly Gochman  
18. Kim Larson, Natalie Morales, Sara Bartosz, Steffanie Kramer    
Photos ©David Berkwitz  
10
177 8
9
11 12
16 15
1413
186Landmark Settlement ‘A Huge Step Forward’ 
for Kids in South Carolina 
For decades, a drastic shortage of 
foster homes has plagued South  Carolina’s Department of Social Services (DSS), causing a shocking number of kids — even those as young as 5 — to be institutionalized. Caseworkers are so overburdened, with many workers responsible for over 50 kids at a time, that maltreat-ment often goes uninvestigated. 
These unconscionable circumstances prompted Children’s Rights, the South Carolina Appleseed Legal Justice Center and Matthew T . Rich-ardson, an attorney with the South C
arolina law firm Wyche, P .A., to file a 
federal class action lawsuit in January 2015. By October 2016 we had a break-
through victory . A landmark agree-ment was reached on behalf of 3,400 children in the ca
se known as Michelle 
H. v. Haley. 
The agreement was the result of more than a year of intense negotiations and promises vital changes, including ensuring reasonable caseloads, improving investigations of abuse allegations, preventing children 6 and under from being placed in institu-tions and revamping health care so that all children get the medical, dental, and mental health screen-ings and treatment they need. The settlement also makes final a set of interim relief that was negotiated last September. This includes phasing out dangerous practices such as letting children in state custody stay over-night in hotels and DSS offices and allowing foster kids to remain in juve-nile detention facilities, even though they have completed their sentences or pleas, due to having no place to house them.
“This settlement is a huge step 
forward for kids in foster care in South Carolina,” said Christina Remlin, senior staff attorney at Children’s Rights. “Governor Haley and DSS Director Alford deserve credit for coming to the table early and committing to large-scale changes, which will vastly improve safety and outcomes for the young people in their care.”
T wo national child welfare experts, 
Paul Vincent of the Child W elfare Policy and Practice Group and Judith Meltzer of the Center for the Study of Social Policy , have been appointed as independent co-monitors as a result of the settlement and will be issuing periodic public reports on the state’s progress.
“This result is an excellent example 
of legal advocacy leveling the playing field,” said Richardson. “There is nothing more important or gratifying than knowing these children, the very future of the state of South Carolina, will receive the attention and resources they need to thrive.” 
Sue Berkowitz, director of the South 
Carolina Appleseed Legal Justice Center, echoed that sentiment: “W e partnered in this effort because of the dire need to bring accountability to DSS. There’s a lot of hard work ahead but, with children’s very lives at stake, the end result will clearly make the effort worthwhile.”
Attorneys from CR, South Carolina Appleseed and Wyche, P.A. celebrate in front of 
the U.S. District Courthouse in Charleston, SC. From left to right: Ira Lustbader, Steve Suggs, Sue Berkowitz, Matthew Richardson, Christina Remlin, Kate Wood and Dione Brabham.7Member Ron Wyden, D-OR., would redirect federal funds to 
provide services to keep children safely with their families and out of foster care. If foster care were the only viable option, it would allow federal reimbursement solely for family-based settings and select residential treatment programs for children with special needs.
There is good reason for this. The majority of children who come into foster care do so because of their parents’ mental health and substance abuse issues; with the proper supports and services, many of these families can remain intact. But though the Family First Act was passed through the House shortly after its introduction in June, it was not taken up by the Senate before congress recessed for the November elections. 
“Foster care should be the final recourse and, when it is neces-sary , kids need to be with supportive, loving families,” said Sandy Santana, executive director of Children’s Rights. “The bill supports critical services to keep families together and provides incentives to help kids in care be placed in families rather than in more expensive and harmful group homes. It’s disappointing that the Senate failed to act on landmark legisla-tion that would improve outcomes for hundreds of thousands of our most vulnerable children.” 
Children’s Rights has worked with stakeholders in a number 
of cases to help preserve family connections. After Children’s Rights and co-counsel reached a settlement in Juan F . v. Malloy, a suit brought on behalf of children placed in Connecticut foster care, substantial measures were taken to help kids maintain family connections and avoid foster care when safe to do so. The percentage of siblings placed together, for example, increased from a baseline of 57 percent in 2005 to an aston-ishing 90.6 percent in 2014. And, furthermore, the placement of children with relatives has increased from 17 percent in 2011 to over 33 percent today . Connecticut has also dramatically reduced the use of group-care settings by 65 percent in the same period. 
Lexie Grüber, who spent time in congregate care, knows 
the damage it can do. She was removed from her family of origin when she was 14 years old and spent two years shuffling between group homes. In one, she told CR, “Foster children were treated like animals at a zoo. Fridges were padlocked until ‘feeding times’ and we stayed in cockroach-infested spaces with no air-conditioning.” 
Now a policy analyst for the American Public Human Services 
Association, Lexie believes that Congress’ failure to send the Family First Act to the President’s desk is putting more children at risk. In a recent W ashington Post op-ed she noted that if the legislation were in place years ago, “my parents could have received the help they needed to keep me safe and at home and prevented me from entering the foster care system in the first place.” 
Multiple studies have examined the importance of family pres-
ervation. In a series of studies tracking thousands of children, Massachusetts Institute of T echnology economics professor Joseph Doyle, Jr. found that children placed in foster care experienced drastically higher juvenile delinquency rates, adult arrest rates, teen motherhood rates, and unemployment rates than children who experienced similar abuse or neglect and remained with their families.
The apparent benefits of keeping families together aren’t only 
developmental, they’re emotional as well. Ask V annak Kong, a blogger from CR’s 2014 Fostering the Future campaign:
“I just wanted to be close to my family , even if it meant hiding 
in the attic for just a few days or hours. I was so affected by the trauma I experienced, I wet the bed until I was 13. One time, when I was around that age, I even stole my foster parents’ expensive bicycle, riding 32 miles on a cold December morning in urine-soaked pajamas just so I could get home.”
For some children, foster care is necessary , even life-saving, and 
Children’s Rights will continue to serve as watchdog to make sure it functions as well as possible. But for many children, state care simply cannot replace family ties. 
Preserving Family Connections For 
Children in Foster Care
(continued from page 1)IN FOCUS:
Lexie Grüber says Congress’ failure to pass the Family First Act is 
putting more children at risk.
Children’s Rights
88 Pine Street, Suite 800New York, NY 10005
Like Children’s Rights on Facebook
Follow us on Twitter and Instagram @ChildrensRights
www.childrensrights.org
To make a gift to Children’s Rights, visit 
www.childrensrights.org  
and click “Donate Now.”IN THEIR OWN WORDS
“If you think about it, in one day you lose your whole family— whether 
it is bad or good, it is what you know. And then you are thrown into 
something different. It may be better, and sometimes it’s worse. You might 
be a couple hundred miles from home. And when you are so young all 
you know is your whole world just got flipped upside down. It’s scary.” 
— Emalee