When Crys O’Grady entered 
foster care at the age of 13, she began to experience what is all too common for foster youth. She bounced between several homes, and with almost every placement move came a new school. 
“The frequent moves 
disrupted my education. … I missed a month and a half, which is a fundamental time to prepare for high school,” she told CR. 
Like many other children in 
state care, school changes were a signiﬁcant problem for O’Grady . T ransferring between schools caused her to completely miss out on learning critical concepts like basic algebra and the periodic table, leaving her scrambling to ﬁnd ways to ﬁll the gaps. 
For young people like 
O’Grady , entering state care means being at risk of drop-ping out of high school, and battling an even steeper climb to get a college degree. The statistics are grim: Just under 60 percent of young people who age out of foster care graduate from high school by age 19, compared to almost 90 percent of all young people, THE CHILDREN’S RIGHTS NEWSLETTER
Fifth Annual  Campaign Says  #FosterMyEducation!
NOTESFROM
THEFIELD
SPRING
2017
INSIDE:
States Fail to Protect Transgender Youth in Out-of-Home Care
Continued on page 7Educational Instability a Grim 
Reality for Youth in CareIN FOCUS:
Crys said bouncing between three schools and four homes 
disrupted her education.
while only 4 percent of former 
foster youth who age out of care graduate from a four-year college by age 26.Christian Delacruz entered foster care the day he was born. He spent much of his childhood bouncing back and forth between foster homes 2
More than 1 in 5 children under age 5 live in poverty in America. This should be cause for sustained 
national outrage. Y et, the policy changes being considered in W ashington indicate quite the opposite. Our very social safety net seems to be on the chopping block. 
T ake health care reform. Although the Affordable Care Act remains in effect, many expect that deep 
cuts in Medicaid will soon be back on the table and that millions of poor and disabled children may be left with no access to desperately needed physical and mental health services. At the same time, state cuts in food stamps, welfare, substance abuse treatment and other programs may lead to more children shufﬂed into our already-strained child welfare systems. 
In this environment, our advocacy must be ﬂexibly responsive to the threats coming out of 
W ashington D.C., and state capitals. And it must always remain grounded in the needs of suffering children. It is why we are building a Healthy Kids litigation strategy to ensure that children in foster care continue to receive the medical care to which they are constitutionally entitled, no matter what changes are ultimately made to the Medicaid program.
It is also why we are working with an extensive network of advocates to protect LGBTQ youth in 
state care from discrimination; why we continue to represent unaccompanied minors arriving from Central America in search of protection — and who are at risk of being returned to great harm, even death, in their countries of origin; and, as we highlight in this issue, why we will ﬁght attempts to roll back laws and policies designed to promote educational stability for children in foster care.
While our work is evolving to meet a changing political landscape, the need for accountability and 
system change to protect and improve the lives of our most vulnerable children has never been more urgent. And the voices of these children must remain front and center, lest we forget the harm and suffering far too many experience — and the remarkable perseverance, resiliency and hope they exhibit even under the most horriﬁc circumstances. Their voices, the urgency of our mission, and your support inspire us as we move forward. 
Sandy Santana
Executive DirectorON THE FRONTLINES
FROM CR’S EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
3CR: How did you learn about  
Children’s Rights? 
Chiara: From CR board member 
Molly Gochman. It was a great ﬁt: My husband and I are strong supporters of organizations that use the courts to enforce basic constitutional rights when they are not being met. 
CR: 
Clearly a commitment to social 
justice runs in your family.  
Chiara: I really looked up to my 
older brother, Andrea, who strongly values fairness and equal opportunity . My contributions will always pale in comparison—last year he was recognized as the Pro Bono V olunteer Lawyer of the Y ear by the Maryland bar! I’m constantly in awe of him.
CR: 
How has your commitment to 
social justice evolved? 
Chiara: Our parents sent us to 
Tijuana to help children in need. The government’s solution often involved putting children into the street—literally . I felt grateful to live in a country that protects basic human rights of children, but I was wrong. T ake a look at any of CR’s cases. It makes me want to stand up for them and ﬁght.CR:
 What inﬂuence do you hope you 
can have on future generations? 
Chiara: T o change the system so it is less life-threatening and inhumane for children in foster care. Along with CR, we can provide them an opportunity to have healthier childhoods and grow to be positive contributors to our society . 
CR INSIDER
Children’s Rights is extremely fortunate to have the support of Chiara Trento Mai, an independent film producer and co-founder of Bystander Films. Her current indie, THE CURSE OF DOWNERS GROVE, is in release on STARZ and iT unes. She lives on Long Island with her husband and three children.
CÉLINE and CR team up to 
support vulnerable kids
Children’s Rights and French fashion house CÉLINE joined forces for an 
end-of-winter shopping beneﬁt at the ﬂagship boutique in New Y ork City . Hosted by CR Board Member Molly Gochman, the event shared our critical mission with new audiences and raised over $5,000 in support of our work. 
Special thanks goes to CR Board Chair Megan Shattuck, Jenny Galluzzo, 
Katie Ford, Hana Shahin, CR Staff, the incredible CÉLINE SoHo T eam and all the shoppers who showed their commitment to the kids we serve.  
CR Board Chair Megan Shattuck and Board Member Molly Gochman.
STEP UP FOR KIDS 
TODAY!
Support Children’s Rights by making  
a tax-deductible contribution at  www.childrensrights.org.
Kathleen Rivera Senior Manager, Advancement and  Donor Relations apezzulli@childrensrights.orgAdriana Pezzulli Development Director 
krivera@childrensrights.orgCONTACT:4May is a month when students across 
the country are not only celebrating academic feats and achievements but also the bright futures for which their hard work has paved the way . For thousands of American young adults, this month signiﬁes an exciting rite of passage … the beginning of the rest of their lives. But for those who experi-enced foster care, the month of May can tell a very different story . Children’s Rights’ Fifth Annual Campaign 
Asks the Nation to #FosterMyEducation
“Ironically, going to court and advocating for myself to stay at 
the same school meant that I had to miss a bunch of school. … 
Do I tell my teachers I’m a foster youth in order to avoid getting 
zeros on all my missed tests and homework assignments, or  
do I try to keep the very little privacy I have?”
– Ariella
This May , in honor of National Foster 
Care Awareness Month, Children’s Rights’ ﬁfth annual Fostering the Future campaign sets out to “school” the nation on what it’s like to attain an education in, and after, foster care. 
Harnessing the power of digital story-telling — including ﬁrst-person blogs, compelling statistics and youth-produced video content — Fostering the Future 2017 is about amplifying the voices of a population that is all too often unheard. Each week will kick off a new thematic “subject,” around which the week’s stories will center, such as Graduation, Survival Skills 101 or A+ Mentors. 
“Y oung people in care often experience lower academic achievement, higher rates of grade retention, higher chronic absence and higher dropout rates,” explains Celeste Bodner of FosterClub, a Fostering the Future 2017 partner. “ As an organization that empowers foster youth to advocate on their own behalf, we are thrilled to be a part of a campaign that’s turning this unacceptable and unfair reality into a national conversation that inspires systemic change.”
In this edition of Notes from the Field, we pay tribute to one of the youngest members of the extended CR family — Auggie Irons, son of our Advisory Council Chair Christy Irons, who passed away on March 22 at age 6, after going into cardiac arrest.
Augustin, as he was once called, was born on Feb. 9, 2011 in Cherkasy , Ukraine. He lived in an orphanage, never having a visitor until Christy and her husband Nigel adopted him on August 31, 2015. He was 4 ½ years old and an unimaginable 8 pounds, 4 ounces. Time and again the orphanage tried to convince them that they shouldn’t take him. Christy simply responded, “I absolutely do want him.”
Auggie thrived with the Irons family , despite frequent illnesses and several surgeries. He was a social butterﬂy , the happiest child with the biggest smile, always ready for a picture to be taken. 
He loved his siblings and loved being 
held, especially by his mother. And though he never grew to like traveling, he managed to visit us in New Y ork City not once, but twice, most recently at CR’s 2016 Annual Beneﬁt. 
In looking for the true deﬁnition of 
compassion, one needn’t look further than Nigel and Christy , who fostered and/or adopted eight of their nine chil-dren. They have continued to recognize the value of Auggie’s brief time on this Earth — including during his Celebra-tion of Life service, where Nigel sent a strong message about stepping up for In Memoriam: Gideon David August IronsWant to make a diﬀerence? Read, watch and share our stories by visiting fosteringthefuture.com and following Children’s Rights on 
children in need, “without waiting for a better time or a bigger bank account or a nicer house.” “Let’s commit to a point of view that’s focused on the future of these children’s lives, and not our present situ-ations,” Nigel urged the more than 250 people in attendance.
It is a message that Christy has shared on 
her blog, the Sometimes 8 Irons:
GO and DO.
Change the world.Change a life,  and in so doing change YOUR life.
Nigel and Christy most certainly 
changed Auggie’s life — and he, in turn, is changing the lives of other children who need our help most. He will be missed and remembered by his parents, grandparents Charles and Joye Irons and George and Karen Milner, and his siblings, T .C., Celee, Judsen, Joseph, Mia, Corban, Asher and Adam. Children’s Rights will miss him, too. 5Fighting on Behalf of Transgender Youth
Now more than ever, transgender 
peoples’ lives are playing out on the airwaves, in the news, in the court-room. But while public recognition may be increasing, acceptance is slow to catch up. And being a trans-gender woman of color is downright dangerous: according to GLAAD, eight have already been murdered in the U.S. in 2017.
T ransgender and gender non-
conforming (TGNC) children are also at risk. They are often rejected by their birth families, only to face additional discrimination, and even danger, in foster care, the juve-nile justice system and shelters for runaway and homeless youth. Because most of these settings are sex-speciﬁc and many aspects of youth’s supervi-sion and care are governed by sex or gender, acceptance and afﬁrmation of TGNC young people is rare. In fact, only three states in the nation include gender identity in their deﬁnitions of sex or gender, and only one of those does so in a regulation speciﬁc to out-of-home care.
Such are the results of a new report 
from Children’s Rights, Lambda Legal and the Center for the Study of Social Policy . The report, Safe Havens: Closing the Gap from Recommended Practice to Reality for T ransgender and Gender Nonconforming Y outh in Out-of-Home Care, includes a ﬁrst-of-its-kind 50-state survey of policies, regula-tions and statues, and urges states to adopt comprehensive protections for TGNC youth. 
In absence of these safeguards, conse-
quences can be dire. Lydia, a 19-year-old transgender woman who was in long-term secure juvenile justice facilities, says some staff discrimi-nated against her and peers harassed and assaulted her. “While I was in the facilities, I wasn’t able to focus on my classes and what I needed to learn,” she said. “I was always more focused on who was out to ﬁght me and who was going to jump me today . I was so busy paying atten-tion to my surroundings that I couldn’t pay attention to my work.” At times, “I just wanted to kill myself and leave it at that.”  
Right now , only 27 states and 
W ashington D.C. explicitly include sexual orientation and gender identity in non-discrimination protections speciﬁc to the child welfare system; only 21 states and D.C. do so in juvenile justice systems; and only 12 states and D.C. do so in facilities serving runaway and homeless youth. Safe Havens includes recommendations that were developed with signiﬁcant input from TGNC youth and providers who have translated recommended practices into reality for the youth they serve. 
“Grappling with gender identity 
can be overwhelming in even the most afﬁrming of homes. Exposing youth to severe trauma in out-of-home placements leads to devas-tating outcomes for transgender and gender-nonconforming youth,” said Christina Remlin, CR lead attorney and an author of the report. “With this report, we can better equip states and empower TGNC people with a vital resource to hold systems accountable for ensuring safe, supportive place-ments for all children.”
6and his biological family , and endured brief periods of home-
lessness. Delacruz says he faced a lack of support from child welfare staff during his time in state care and a lack of under-standing from educators in the GED program, leaving him ill-prepared for college. “ Although I worked hard to earn my GED and make up for lost time, I struggled. When I enrolled in college, I didn’t know things that I should’ve known, and professors weren’t equipped to deal with everything that I had missed.”
While children in state care have always faced steep odds,  
with a new administration, child advocates fear that it could start to become even harder for foster youth to reach their educational goals. 
The Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) — which replaced 
No Child Left Behind and governs U.S. K–12 public education policy — included hard-won and important protections for children in foster care, such as immediately enrolling children in school once they’ve been placed in a new home, and imple-menting transportation plans to ensure school stability . Educational Instability a Grim 
Reality for Youth in Care
(continued from page 1)IN FOCUS:
As of press time, however, U.S. Secretary of Education Betsy 
DeV os’ new framework is expected to shift responsibility from the federal level to the states, giving states much more leeway in how they choose to implement the law . 
“I think this will impact [youth in care] negatively , unless states step up to the plate to fully implement both the letter and promise of ESSA,” said Maura McInerney , Senior Attorney at the Education Law Center. “In the absence of the common ground and clarity of federal regulations detailing how states should build effective state plans and promptly intervene to support struggling students, our marginalized students will suffer.”
What’s causing education instability?
Children in foster care face extraordinary barriers that follow them during their entire pursuit of education — from K-12 through higher education. At the root of the problem is frequent placement moves and school disruptions. Constantly moving causes the child to fall behind in coursework and suffer academically due to excessive absences and schools not trans-ferring credits. 
In addition, kids’ social lives are impacted negatively . “Being 
a new student made me a target for bullying. On the bus, other students would put things in our hair and shout out reasons why we may have been removed from our homes,” said O’Grady . While “school had always been an outlet for me,” she now felt unwelcome not only in her foster homes, but in school. “The treatment from peers made me want to stay at my placements,” she said. T o cope, she sought refuge in a construc-tion zone near one foster home. “I would sneak into the fenced in area to crawl into a giant concrete tube and journal.”
She also faced roadblocks to extracurricular activities. “In 
middle school I couldn’t play sports because I was transferred between foster homes that were over two hours away from each other,” she said. In high school, she was forced to drop out mid-season when she either couldn’t afford dues, or her placements wouldn’t allow her to travel for games or to go to practice. “It was difﬁcult for my varsity lacrosse coach to understand why I needed to miss some practices.” 
Both Delacruz and O’Grady assert that being overmedicated 
with powerful psychotropic drugs while in foster care added another layer of complications, with O’Grady saying they “impacted my attendance,” and Delacruz experiencing “a severe lack of motivation.”
Christian faced a lack of support from child welfare staff, leaving 
him ill-prepared for college.7And the hardships often continue for these children beyond 
high school.
Y outh in state care frequently “age out” between ages 18 to 21 
without permanent families, leaving them to face inconsistent and hard-to-navigate ﬁnancial aid processes alone, and without basic needs like housing. 
“I entered unhealthy relationships and stayed with signiﬁ-
cant others during college breaks and holidays because I had nowhere else to go,” said O’Grady . “One summer, before a live-in summer internship started, Stanford connected me with the Stanford Parent Association. I had a special counselor at the ofﬁce of ﬁnancial aid who helped. If it wasn’t for her, I wouldn’t have known these services or connections were avail-able. I went to her because I struggled.”
Although some young adults qualify for ﬁnancial aid, the 
amount they receive may not go far enough to cover their costs. Pending proposals in Congress include tuition waivers for community college, an income-based repayment program and increasing the amount of money offered to foster youth through Pell Grants. 
What CR Is Doing
Children’s Rights has successfully used impact litigation to demand that states support education for youth in foster care. In T ennessee, which is positioned to soon exit court oversight, the state has extended foster care to age 21, and is supporting youth in post-secondary education and employment programs. The state is also promptly providing current Individual Educa-tion Plans (IEPs) for children with special education needs, and has dismantled the inappropriate use of in-house schools in shelters and group homes. In our current cases, like Arizona, CR is ﬁghting for children like C.P . who, by 6 years old, had been in foster care for less than two years, and had already attended eight different schools.
Children’s Rights and Foster Care Alumni 
‘School’ the Nation This May
Throughout National Foster Care Awareness Month, CR will devote its ﬁfth annual Fostering the Future campaign 
to the issue of education in foster care. Using the hashtag #FosterMyEducation, we will illuminate ﬁrst-hand stories from those who have faced barriers in pursuing their education, and the positive inﬂuences along the way who have helped them succeed. Check out page 4 to see how you can make a difference!Data: Chapin Hall, University of Chicago, Midwest Evaluation of the 
Adult Functioning of Former Foster Youth: Outcomes at Age 26
Only
4 percent
of foster youth 
who age out of care 
graduate from  
a four-year college.
“For children already exposed to the trauma of being uprooted 
from their families, school disruptions increase the risk that they will not lead the stable, fulﬁlling adult lives they so richly deserve,” said Children’s Rights’ Executive Director Sandy Santana. “CR is committed to systemic reforms that promote educational stability and success for our most vulnerable chil-dren. W e must do more.”Children’s Rights
88 Pine Street, Suite 800New York, NY 10005
Like Children’s Rights on Facebook
Follow us on Twitter and Instagram @ChildrensRights
www.childrensrights.org
To make a gift to Children’s Rights, visit 
www.childrensrights.org  
and click “Donate Now.”DID YOU KNOW ?
Average number of 
weeks missed per 
school year by children in foster care: 5.Percent of 17-18 year olds in state 
care who have had 5+ school changes: 34. T herefore, the average reading 
level of 17-18 year  olds in foster care:  7th grade.