 
 
 
 
Prepared for the United States Senate Judiciary Committee  
Hearing on the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA)  
 
July 13, 2011  
 
 
 
 
1 
 Just Detention International would like to thank Chairman Leahy and members of  the Sen ate 
Judiciary Committee for holding this hearing , entitled “The Violence Against Women Act: 
Building on Seventeen Years of Accomplishments .” For your consideration, the following 
submission explains why it is imperative to apply the Prison Rape Elimination Act  (PREA) of 
2003 and its associated  regulations (to be enacted pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 15607 ) to Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) detention facilities through the 2011 Violence Against Women Act  
Reauthor ization (2011 VAWA Reauthorization).  Specifically, this will protect women and other 
immigrants from sexual abuse while they are in the custody of Immigration and Customs 
Enforcemen t (ICE) . 
 
Just Detention International  (JDI) is a health and  human rights organization  that seeks to end 
sexual abuse in all forms of detention. JDI is the only U.S. -based organization  exclusively 
dedicated to ending this type of violence. Specifically, JD I works to ensure  government 
accountability for prisoner rape; to transform ill -informed public attitudes  about sexual violence 
in detention; and to promote access to resources for those who have  survived this form of abuse.  
All of JDI’s efforts are guided  by the expertise of men,  women, and children who have endured 
sexual violence behind bars and who have been  brave enough to share their experiences.  
 
I. Introduction  
 
In 2003, the United States Congress unanimously passed  PREA and President Bush signed it i nto 
law to “establish a zero tolerance standard for the incidence of prison rape in prisons in the 
United States” and “make the prevention of prison rape a top priority in each prison system.”1  
PREA defines “prison”  as “any confinement facility of a Feder al, State, or local government, 
whether administered by such government or by a private organization on behalf of such 
government .”2 PREA charges the Attorney General with “adopting national standards for the 
detection, prevention, reducti on, and punishment of prison rape ” through the publication of the 
standards as a final rule.3 
 
In his proposed final rule, the Attorney General has left a regrettable gap in the implement ation 
of PREA by excluding ICE detention facilities from the regulations’  (and therefore, the law’s)  
scope. Such a narrow reading of PREA’s mandate  leaves tens of thousands of women annually 
held in immigration detention facilities vulnerable to significant and preventable sexual abuse.  
 
Such abuse runs counter not only to PREA but also to VAWA ’s mandate to prevent sexual 
assault and provide resources for victims of this form of assaul t. Therefore, JDI is callin g for the 
incorporation of specific language (attached at Appendix A) into the 2011 VAWA 
                                                 
1 42 U.S.C  §15602  (1-2).  
2 42 U.S.C. § 15609 (7)  (emphasis added ). 
3 42 U.S.C. § 1560 7 (a)(1). 2 
 Reauthorization proc ess. This language will requir e the Department of Homeland Security and 
private operators of immigration detention facilities to comply fully  with PREA and the national 
standards created to implement it.   
 
II. Sexual Abuse in U.S. Immigration Detention  
 
The Department of Justice  has determined that sexual abuse in detention is a pervasive problem . 
The DOJ found that an estimated 200,000 prison and jail inmates and more than 17,000 juvenile 
detainees were sexually abused in U.S. facilities in 2008 alone.4 These shocking numbers only 
begin to illustrate the problem. Survivors of abuse are often a ssaulted  relentlessly  by a 
perpetrator  and marked as fair game for attacks by other detainees  and facilit y staff . In the 
aftermath of an assault, incarcerated survivors experience the same emotional pain as other 
victims,  which  is oftentimes  exacerbated by prior trauma and the ir inability to control their daily 
surroundings . To compound the pro blem, few detainees ha ve access to adequate  – much less 
expert  – medical  and mental health services . In addition to the physical injuries that are often 
inflicted during an assault, prisoner rape survivors are at grave risk of contracting HIV and other 
sexually transmitted infections  through sexual assault .5  
 
Esmeralda Soto’s experiences are unfortunately typical of those of sexual abuse survivors in 
immigration detention:  
 
“On December 19, 2003, a few days after being transferred to the San Pedro detent ion 
center, I was taken to see my lawyer. Because she was with another client at the time, I 
was placed in a locked holding cell. While I waited in the cell an immigration officer 
came in with his pants unzipped and told me that “I was going to suck him of f.” He 
checked the hall to make sure nobody was around, then re -entered the cell and forced me 
to perform oral sex. Once he was done, he put his finger to his mouth and ordered me not 
to tell anyone. He had ejaculated in my mouth, on my red detention unifo rm, and on the 
floor.  
 
… To this day, the thought of what that immigration officer did to me makes me nauseous 
and fills me with fear, disgust and anger. It is difficult to comprehend how a federal 
employee who was supposed to maintain a secure environmen t for me while I was 
detained could abuse his authority in such a flagrant and appalling manner. In the 
holding room by myself, I had not felt unsafe because I knew my lawyer was in the next 
                                                 
4 U.S. Department of Justice, PREA Notice of Proposed Rule making, 76 FED. REG. 6249 (Feb. 3, 2011) . 
5 HIV and other sexually transmitted infections are significantly more prevalent in corrections settings than in the 
general population. See, e.g., Laura Maruschak, Bureau of Justice Statistics , HIV in Prisons, 2007 -08 3 (2010) . 
(estimating HIV rate in U.S. prisons to be 2.4 times the rate in society); Scott A. Allen et al., Hepatitis C Among 
Offenders —Correctional Challenge and Public Health Opportunity , 67 Fed. Probation 22 (Sept. 2003) (findi ng that 
Hepatitis C rates were 8 to 20 times higher in prisons than on the outside, with 12 to 35 percent of prison cases 
involving chronic infection); see also Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, U.S. Dep’t Health & Hum. Svcs., 
Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance 2007 89 (2008), available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/stats07/Surv2007 -
SpecialFocusProfiles.pdf  (last accessed July 12, 2011). 3 
 room and there was an officer patrolling in the hallway. Little d id I know that the person 
I needed to fear was an officer who was supposed to keep me safe, and that he would feel 
so confident that he could get away with raping me that he would do it with my legal 
counsel so close by.  
 
After the assault, I was returned to the cell with the other transgender women. I 
immediately began to notice an air of hostility from the immigrations officers in the unit. 
They treated me as if I was a liar and blamed me for the dismissal of their coworker. I 
repeatedly asked to see a co unselor because I needed to vent what I was feeling. I 
literally felt like I was going to explode. The officers continuously ignored or humiliated 
me, and looked upon me with what I felt was pure hatred. Meanwhile, the memory of the 
assault was killing me inside. I lost my appetite and could hardly stomach any food. I quit 
sleeping altogether and I slipped further and further into depression. Finally when I 
threatened to commit suicide, one of the other transgender detainees in the cell pleaded 
with an offi cer and convinced him that I desperately needed help.  
 
Because there are no mental health providers at the San Pedro facility I was taken to the 
El Centro Detention Facility near San Diego, CA. Unfortunately, I was still not given 
counseling, or any lastin g relief. The psychologist simply gave me three tranquilizers and 
sent me back to San Pedro. Eventually, the nurse at San Pedro did manage to prescribe 
me anti -depressants, and I was given sleeping aids.  
 
Due to the negative attitudes that officials at the  facility had taken toward me, my biggest 
fear at this point was that my application for asylum would be denied and I’d be deported 
back to Mexico. I felt a constant pressure to retract my complaint against the officer, but 
I really did not want to give in . I wanted to remain strong and show that I was not going 
to let myself be taken advantage of . … I was eventually able to see a judge in my case and 
she granted me “withholding of removal.” Today I live in Santa Ana, CA and am still 
struggling to let go of  the horrible experiences I had at the San Pedro Service Processing 
Center. ”6 
 
Immigration detainees tend to be among the most vulnerable to s exual abuse. Unlike criminal 
defendants, immigra tion detainees are civilly confined and have no right to an atto rney. This lack 
of legal assistance makes it unlikely that survivors of sexual abuse in immigration detention have 
access to someone who is able to explain their rights and to advocate on their behalf.7 In 
addition, after being traumatized by a sexual ass ault, non -citizen detainees of ten have difficulty 
speaking out due to cultural isolation, past abuse by authority figures, language barriers, and 
limited literacy.  
 
                                                 
6 Elimination of Prison Rape: Immigration Facilities and Pers onnel/Staf fing/ Labor Relations, Hearing befor e the 
National Prison Rape Elimination Commission (Dec . 13, 2006)  (testimony of Mayra Soto) . Since testifying before 
the Commission, Ms. Soto has changed her first name.  
7 Clay M cCaslin, “ My Jailor is My Jud ge:” Kestutis Zadvydas and the Indefinite Imprisonment of Permanent 
Resident A liens by the INS , 75 TUL. L. REV. 193, 224 (2000).    4 
 Moreover, immigration detainees are unique in that they are held by the very entity seeking to 
determine their legal status . Correc tions departments that run prisons and jails play no role in 
prosecuti ng and sentenc ing a criminal defendant. ICE, however, has complete control over a 
detainee’s initial determinat ion of legal status, detention, and possible removal from the country . 
As a result, fearing the possibility of retalia tory removal , immigration detainees tend to be even 
less likely to challenge the conditions of their confinement than people held in criminal justice 
facilities .  
 
Immigration detainees generally come from marginalized populations which are at greatest risk 
for sexual abuse. In particular, lesbi an, gay, bisexual, and transgender  (LGBT ) individuals,  
youth,  and de tainees living with mental illness or dis abilities are disproportionately targeted  for 
sexual abuse . 
 
The p roblem of  sexual abuse in immigration  detention has received increasing attention in recent 
years.  In 2010,  a transportation officer at the T. Don Hutto Detention Center  in Texas  (a 
Corrections Corporation of America (CCA) facility contract ed exclusively w ith ICE) admitted  to 
sexually assaulting numerous women detainee s while transporting them to local  airport and bus 
stations after they had been released on bond.8 Moreover, the National Prison Rape Elimination 
Commission,9 Human Rights Watch ,10 and the Women ’s Refugee Commission11 have all 
recently documented widespread sexual abuse in immigration detention facilities.    
 
III. The Exclusion of ICE Facilities from the Prison Rape Elimination Act  
 
In excluding  immigration detention facilities from the scope of the PREA standards, the Attorney 
General asserted that the  terms “ prison” and “j ail” do not encompass facilities used primarily for 
the civil detention of aliens pending removal from the U.S. As made clear in Section I above, this 
interpretation  runs counter to PREA’s plain language. Excluding immigration detention from 
PREA’s protections and mandates contradicts the law’s explicit intent . In accordance with the 
law’s definition of “prison,” the legisla tive history of PREA recognized the law’s application to 
both criminal and civil detainees.12 And, Senator Edward Kennedy, a lead co -sponsor of PREA, 
                                                 
8 Tricia Rosetty, Former T. Don Hutto worker sentenced , TAYLOR DAILY PRESS, Nov. 10, 2010.  
9 NATIONAL PRISON RAPE ELIMINATION COMMISSION , FINAL REPORT , 174-88 (2009 ). 
10 HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH , DETAINED  AND AT RISK: SEXUAL ABUSE AND HARASSMENT IN UNITED STATES 
IMMIGRATION DETENTION  (Aug. 2010), available at  http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/08/25/detained -and-risk, 
(last accessed  July 12, 2011).  
11  WOMEN ’S REFUGEE COMMISSION , HALFWAY HOME: UNACCOMPANIED CHILDREN IN IMMIGRATION CUSTOD Y 
(Feb. 2009 ), available at  http://www.rcusa.org/uploads/pdfs/H alfway%20Home%20WRC,%202 -4-09.pdf  (last 
accessed July 12, 2011).  
12 U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary, Report on the Prison Rape Reduction Act  of 2003 , 108th Cong., 1st sess., 
2003, H. Rept. 108 -219, at 14, 115 , available at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi -
bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=108_cong_reports&docid=f:hr219.108.pdf  (last accessed July 12, 2011).  5 
 explicitly noted his satisfaction that the law would protect immigrati on detainees , in his remarks 
at the first hearing of the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission.13 
 
Consistent with this history, federal entities charged with implementing PREA – in particular the 
National Prison Rape Elimination Commission and the Bu reau of Justice Statistics – have 
included civil detention in their mandate. The Commission held a public hearing that focused on 
immigration detention, convened an expert working group on immigration detention, included a 
section on immigration detention in its final report, and proposed supplemental standards for 
facilities housing immigration detainees in its recommended adult prison and jail standards.14 
The Bureau of Justice Statistics similarly included facilities run by Immigration and Customs 
Enforce ment (ICE) in its collection of statistics on prison er rape mandated by PREA. Beyond the 
urgent need for the standards in immigration detention facilities, where sexual abuse is rife, t he 
DOJ’s problematic assertion  that these facilities are beyond the sco pe of PREA will likely 
preclude further collection of vital data from these neglected facilities.  
 
IV. Inclusion of PREA in 2011 VAWA Reauthorization Act  
 
The Violence Against Women Act has, from the beginning, had strong, specific provisions 
addressing the sp ecific needs of immigrant women. Through past reauthorization acts, these 
provisions have been modified to meet new or pressing needs. Sexual a buse of immigrant 
women in our nation’s i mmigration detention facilities is not a new issue but it is certainly a  
pressing one.  
 
Failure to require I CE facilities and ICE contracted facilities to adhere to PREA and its 
regulations violates the basic spirit of the law . It also perpetuat es the very type of violence that 
VAWA a ddresses. Further, t he exclu sion of immigration detention facilities fro m PREA’s 
mandates undermines the Administration’s own efforts to reform the immigration detention 
system.15 Notably, in response to sexual abuse perpetrated by the  transportation officer at Hutto 
Detention Center , ICE requested a “PREA audit” of its CC A-contracted facilities. To assess 
                                                 
13 The Cost of Victimization: Why Our Nation Must Confront Prison Rape, Hearing of the National Prison Rape 
Elimination Commission  (June 14, 2005 ) (testimony of Senator Edward M. Kennedy ), avail able on -line at 
http://cybercemetery.unt.edu/archive/nprec/20090820160727/http:/nprec.us/d ocs/SenatorEdwardKennedyRemarks_
Vol_1.pdf  (last acces sed July 12, 2011).  
14 NATIONAL PRISON RAPE ELIMINATION COMMISSION , “STANDARDS FOR THE PREVENTION, DETECTION, RESPONSE, 
AND MONITORING OF SEXUAL ABUSE IN ADULT PRISONS AND JAILS: SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR FACILITIES 
WITH IMMIGRATION DETAINEES, pp. 59-72 (June 2009), available at 
http://www.wcl.american.edu/nic/documents/NPREC_PrisonsJailsStandards.pdf?rd=1  (last accessed July 12, 2011). 
15 See, e.g., Dr. Dora Schriro, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Immigration Detention Overview and 
Recommendations  22 (2009 ), available at http://www.ice.gov/doclib/about/offices/odpp/pdf/ice -detention -rpt.pdf  
(last accessed July 12, 2011)  (“The system must make better use of sound practices such as … practices tha t comply 
with the Prisoner  [sic] Rape Elimination Act .”); Nina Bernstein, U.S. to Reform Policy on Detention for Immigrants , 
N.Y. TIMES , Aug. 5, 2009 (quoting Assistant Secretary for ICE John Morton  as seeking to work toward a “truly civil 
detention system ” that would demonstrate greater respect for the dignity of individuals held in the agency’s 
custody ).  6 
 these facilities’ PREA readiness, the recommended standards were a key tool relied upon by the 
monitor  who conducted those audits .16 
 
If immigration facilities are excluded from the PREA standards , an immigration detainee in a 
local jail would be protected by PREA but would lose that protection if transferred to an ICE 
facility. It is inconceivable that Congress intended PREA protection for detainees to be a matter 
of luck, depend ing on the facility that happens to confine  them.  
 
Inclusion of the attached language in the 2011 VAWA Reauthorization Act will ensure that the 
promul gation of standards to protect detainees from sexual abuse is  consistent with all other 
aspects of PREA implementation  – where  the Congressional intent to include immigration 
detention within the coverage of PREA has been clear throughout . JDI therefore  calls upon the 
Senate Judiciary Committee to amend VAWA to require that the DHS and operators of 
immigration detention facilities comply fully with PREA  in order to ensure that all detainees are 
protect ed from sexual  abuse – no matter wh ere they are detained . 
 
 
                                                 
16 This audit was conducted in the fall of 2010, and therefo re the Department’s proposed standards were not yet 
available. The auditors relied on the Com mission’s recommendations.  