Stories from
Prisoner Rape and the War on Drugs
A Publication of  
STOP PRISONER RAPE
Inside  
STOP PRISONER RAPEInsideStories from
Prisoner Rape and the War on DrugsStop Prisoner Rape (SPR)  is a human rights organization that
seeks to put an end to sexual violence in all forms of detention. SPRworks to: engender policies that ensure government accountabilityfor prisoner rape; change flippant and ill-informed public attitudestoward sexual abuse behind bars; and promote access to servicesfor survivors of this type of violence.
Copyright 2007 © Stop Prisoner Rape
Attributed reproduction of this report is encouraged.STOP PRISONER RAPE
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340, Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel: (213) 384-1400  •  Fax: (213) 384-1411
Email: info@spr.orgwww.spr.org
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 1
Stop Prisoner Rape and the Stories from Inside  Campaign 2
Introduction 3
Definition of Prisoner Rape 4
Methodology 4
Testimonies: Bryson Martel 5 • Hope Hernandez 6
Sexual Violence Behind Bars in the U.S. 8
Background 8
The Impact of Prisoner Rape 9
The Aftermath 10
Testimonies: Jackie Tates 11 • Darryl Barnett 12 • Robin McArdle 14 •
Oliver Michaels 16  • John Cooks 16 • Marilyn Shirley 17 • Daniel Sanford 19
The U.S. War on Drugs 20
Background 20
Harsh Sentencing Laws 21
Questioning the Drug War 23
Testimonies: Leah Atkinson 25 • Troy Bishop 26 • Frank Johnson 28  •
Chance Martin 29 • Sue Linez 31 • David Smith 32
The Impact of the War on Drugs on Sexual Violence 33
Prison Overcrowding 33
Lack of Appropriate Classification 34
Insufficient Rehabilitative Services 36
Testimonies: Michael Piper 37 • Hedda Lowry 38 • Carl Shepard 40  •
James Davis 41 • Sophia Brooks 42 • Betty Vasquez 44 • William Kent 45
Recommendations 46
Testimonies: Jami Naturalite 49 • Kobutsu Malone 50
Notes 52Executive Summary    1Executive Summary
Prisoner rape is a human rights cri-
sis of appalling magnitude. Accord-
ing to the best available research,
as many as one in four female and one infive male inmates experience sexual vio-
lence while incarcerated. While anyone
can be a victim of prisoner rape, inmatesconvicted of a non-violent drug offense
typically possess characteristics that put
them at great risk for abuse. They tendto be young, unschooled in the ways of
prison life, and lacking the street smarts
necessary to protect themselves fromother detainees.
For survivors of prisoner rape, the
physical and psychological effects are dev-astating. In addition to physical injuries,
many survivors contract HIV and other
sexually transmitted diseases, are impreg-nated against their will, and suffer long-
term psychological harm. Once released,
they bring all their prison experienceswith them as they return home to their
families and communities.
Every year, scores of non-violent men
and women are placed at risk for sexualviolence behind bars as a result of the
“war on drugs.” For more than three de-
cades, with its focus on long sentences fordrug offenses and limited judicial discre-
tion to offer leniency, the war on drugs
has been America’s primary response tothe problems of drug use and addiction.
The financial and moral costs of these
drug policies have been substantial andwell-publicized. Federal, state, and local
governments have spent billions of dol-
lars on the implementation of the war ondrugs. In the meantime, a majority of
Americans have come to believe it is a
losing cause.
The massive prison population growth
caused by current U.S. drug policies has
resulted in increasingly overcrowded de-tention facilities, rife with idleness and
tension among inmates. With an aston-
ishing 2.3 million people behind bars atany given time, U.S. prisons and jails have
simply run out of bed space, leading non-
violent detainees to be housed togetherwith predators in poorly monitored dor-
mitories or cramped cells. The swelling2    Stories from Insideprison population also strains rehabilita-
tive services, rendering it impossible for
those struggling with drug addiction and
other problems to receive the treatmentand counseling they need.
Prisoner rape is known to be a signifi-
cant problem in U.S. prisons and jails—and the ways to prevent it are known as
well. This report offers the following rec-
ommendations that, if implemented,would significantly reduce sexual violence
behind bars.
•  Employ standardized classification
systems that effectively separate
likely rape victims from likely sexual
predators.
•  Provide vulnerable inmates with
voluntary, non-punitive protective
housing.
•  In the aftermath of an assault,immediately separate perpetrators
from victims.
•  T rain corrections officials on how to
prevent and respond to prisoner rape.
•  Ensure that victimized inmates have
access to safe and effective medicaland mental health services that are
not contingent upon filing a report.
•  Establish a confidential complaint
system that encourages reporting
sexual violence without increasingthe risk of future attacks or any other
form of retaliation.
•  Reduce incarceration rates for people
convicted of non-violent drugoffenses.
•  Utilize diversion programs and
treatment services to address drug
addictions.
This report is one component of a media and advocacy campaign, Stories
from Inside , that seeks to draw attention to the relationship between cur-
rent U.S. drug policy and prisoner rape. This initiative is built around the
first-hand testimonies of men and women who were raped or sexually assaulted
while serving time for a non-violent drug charge.
It may take years or even decades before a survivor of prisoner rape is able to
talk about the sexual violence that he or she experienced behind bars, and some
are never able to do so. SPR applauds the courage of the survivors who told
their stories for use in this report, either “on the record” or anonymously. SPRalso thanks the Marijuana Policy Project for its generous support of the Stories
from Inside  campaign.
Names in quotation marks in the testimony introductions indicate that a pseudonym was used at the
request of the survivor.Stop Prisoner Rape and the Stories from
Inside  CampaignIntroduction    3Introduction
The U.S. is the world’s leading per-
capita jailer, with some 2.3 million
people incarcerated at any given
time.1 Among these inmates, a stagger-
ing number experience sexual violence.
In fact, prisoner rape is arguably the most
widespread and neglected form of humanrights abuse in the U.S. today.
The war on drugs has directly contrib-
uted to the unconscionable rate of sexualviolence behind bars by causing prisons
to become overcrowded with people con-
victed of non-violent drug offenses. Atany given time, more than 500,000 people
are incarcerated on drug charges,
2 with
thousands more non-violent individualsimprisoned on other drug-motivated
crimes, such as property offenses and
public order violations.
3 Federal and state
governments pursue policies that incar-
cerate low-level drug users and exacer-
bate overcrowding. One in five stateinmates and nearly three in five federal
prisoners are serving a drug sentence.
4
Drug enforcement personnel often focus
on minor offenses. Of the nearly 1.75million drug arrests made in 2004, more
than 771,000 involved marijuana.5 Mari-
juana arrests also accounted for more than
80 percent of the increase in drug arrestsbetween 1990 and 2002.
6 More than
four-fifths of all drug arrests in that pe-
riod were for simple possession.7 In 2003,
89 percent of marijuana arrests were for
possession, with no allegations of sale or
trafficking.8
Despite a prison building boom span-
ning nearly two decades, overcrowding
persists. Officials at many U.S. correc-tions facilities have converted dining halls
and gymnasiums into dormitories and are
operating at almost double capacity. Se-vere overcrowding creates opportunities
for predators, and the rapidly swelling
ranks of inmates with non-violent drugconvictions are among the principal vic-
tims of sexual assault in prison. Many of
these inmates struggle to defend them-selves in a hostile environment, even as
they cope with untreated drug addiction.
As the stories that accompany this re-
port illustrate, people who are raped or4    Stories from Insidecoerced into sex behind bars are more
than just numbers. They are individuals
whose lives have been irreparably changed
by the sexual abuse they suffered whileincarcerated. They come from every walkof life. Some were high-school students,
military veterans, or business owners be-
fore they were incarcerated. They have
one thing in common—all were caughtin the web of the U.S. war on drugs.
Methodology
Stop Prisoner Rape receives letters daily from current and former inmateswho were sexually abused behind bars. In seeking survivors to share theirexperiences for the Stories from Inside  initiative, SPR contacted individuals
listed in its survivor database, advertised in a number of publications geared
toward prisoners, placed a link on its website inviting survivors to tell theirstories, asked allied organizations to place notices in their newsletters, and sent
letters to members of a prisoner mailing list. The brave individuals who are a
part of this project range from survivor advocates who have worked activelywith SPR for a number of years to people who heard about the project through
word-of-mouth at their facilities and are telling their stories for the very first
time in this report. While every survivor’s story is unique, the accounts in-cluded here are representative of what SPR regularly hears from inmates around
the country.Definition of Prisoner Rape
Like all of Stop Prisoner Rape’s work, this report examines sexual violence
behind bars broadly, addressing sexual assault and harassment as well as
rape.  While the term “prisoner” is typically used to describe a post-con-
viction inmate housed in a state or federal prison, and “rape” is often limited toforced sexual intercourse, the phrase “prisoner rape” is used here to describe all
forms of sexual violence inflicted on anyone in custody, including someone
awaiting trial in a county jail.Introduction    5
When I went to prison, people
started preying on me. I started
getting attacked almost right
away. I got jumped on in prison. I got beaten.
I had a knife pulled on me.
I got sexually attacked too. You get la-
beled as a faggot if you get raped. If it gets
out and then people know you have been
raped, that opens the door for a lot of other
predators. Anywhere I was, everybody looked
at me like I was a target.
I wrote everything down and docu-
mented it. I filed grievances. I did all the pro-
cedures that I could do.
I fought. I deliberately disobeyed so I
could run away from my predators. I deliber-
ately caught charges. I went to the hole.
When they put you in the hole, it’s complete
isolation. It was just so hard.
Eventually, they put me in protective cus-
tody. That didn’t work. I was raped there too.
A lot of folks get into protective custody. They
put me in a cell with a predator, a guy thathad full-blown AIDS. He attacked me. He
made me perform oral sex and then he had
anal sex with me against my will.
You never forget. You never heal from it
emotionally. You might heal your body, but
you will never get over it emotionally. That’s
something that is stuck in you. I wake up with
it on my mind.
I started getting sick. I started bleeding
really bad from the rectum. That’s when I got
the devastating news. Then everything added
up. The guy that raped me in the cell had
full-blown AIDS.
I felt suicidal. I felt like my world had
come to an end. I felt ashamed, embarrassed,
degraded, and humiliated.
Living with AIDS is an uphill battle. It’snot easy. I accept the fact that I’m going to
die. They took my life.
They should have screened the inmates
that they put me in the cell with. Don’t put
me in a cell with murderers. You could have
been in there for forgery and not even walk
out alive. I’ve seen guys get stabbed or killed
because of rape.
I think that locking up people for drug
addiction is wrong. Putting everybody in prison
for drug addiction causes overpopulation.
They’re not getting any help in there. A lot of
them need help. They have to learn to lead a
productive life, to keep them from robbing,
stealing, doing something self-destructive, to
get some skills. All the things the prison
doesn’t do. You waste the taxpayer’s money.
The people who are out there raping and kill-ing people—those are the ones who need to
be locked up.
There are so many predators in prison. I
don’t care where you go—to Arkansas or
Memphis, California or New York, wherever
you go, you got the same aggressive preda-
tors there. They do it in the county jail, too.
They robbed me of my manhood, my se-
curity, serenity, all that. It’s horrifying to get
robbed of all that. They didn’t take my pride,
because I hold my head up. But like I said, I
still think about it, it hurts. I try not to worry
about it. I try not to let my family worry, but
they do. They worry constantly.
It’s awful that a person would have to go
in and pay that price like that. I paid double
price. That check I wrote cost me my life.Bryson Martel,
formerly knownas Kendell Spruce,is a 42-year-oldMichigan manwho went to livewith his grand-mother as aninfant whenhis parentsabandoned him.He grew up inArkansas,Michigan, andCalifornia whilebeing moved fromrelative to relative.He began usingdrugs at 12, afterreturning to hismother’s home. Hebecame addictedto crack cocaine atthe age of 20 andwas sent to jail orprison more than15 times over thenext decade. In1993, he wassentenced to jailin Arkansas forforging a check tobuy crack cocaine.Upon his release,Mr. Martelviolated the termsof his probationand was sentto prison.
They robbed me of my manhood, my security, serenity, all that.You could have been in there
for forgery and not even walkout alive.Testimony: Bryson Martel6    Stories from InsideAt first, I was only using heroin on
the weekends, but after a while, I
had to use it all the time. At first it
was one bag a day, then it was two, and then
it was four, then it was 14, and by the time I
finally got arrested, I was up to 20 bags or
more a day if I could afford it. Affording it
became the really hard part. We were steal-
ing property and selling it.
Eventually, I was indicted on 19 felony
charges and was arrested. I got stuck with all
of these drug charges. I was buying dope for
myself, for my own personal usage, but I
helped this girl score one time, and they
charged me with distribution.
I was given a court date and released the
next day to go to rehab, but in rehab I got so
ill from withdrawal that they took me back to
jail because they said they didn’t have the
medical facilities required to take care of me.
There were two jails in Washington
D.C.—the regular side and the privatized side.
The regular side is run by the city. They have a
unit where they put people with mental health
concerns. For some reason they kept shifting
me back and forth, back and forth between
the regular side and the privatized side.
They put me on some medications. I had
no idea what they were or what they woulddo to me. I ended up sleeping a lot and I was
kind of in a daze. I was wearing a paper
jumpsuit that was really just a piece of gauze
with a zipper.
I needed a shower. There was a sink and
a toilet and a bed in the room, but no shower,
and they weren’t letting me out of my cell.
Every time a new guard would come on shift,
I would ask for a shower. I was promised a
shower by guard after guard, but I never got
one.
One night, in the middle of the night,
this guard came into my cell and said I could
go take a shower. He had a towel and a fresh
paper jumpsuit and some shampoo. He led
me to a room with locked doors that had a
separate bathroom and a shower. He waited
out in the hallway.
The light was kind of hurting my eyes so
I turned it off. I got undressed and into the
shower, and he came in. The next thing I knew
he was standing in the shower stall and was
engaging in intercourse with me. He pulled
down his pants and turned off the shower
and raped me.
I couldn’t do anything. It was like I was
on a 30-second delay. I was heavily medicated
and it was 2:30 or 3:00 in the mor ning. He
had awoken me from a dead sleep.
I saw all this stuff about Abu Ghraib. People were outraged that
this was happening overseas, but this is also happening in our
nation’s capital. It’s happening to people who need drugtreatment. It’s happening to 19-year-old girls who have low self-
esteem. It’s happening to people who are arrested for the first time
after being completely strung out. This is happening in our country.
Hope Hernandez
is a 31-year-old
Washington, D.C.
woman who
was born to
drug-addicted
parents in a hippie
commune in Hawaii.
Repelled by her
parents’ addiction,
she swore that she
would never use
drugs, but took her
first drink at a party
at 14 and began
smoking marijuana
and using LSD a few
years later. She
began injecting
heroin at 19, and
stopped using
drugs at 23.
Ms. Hernandez is
now a married
mother of three
who recently
graduated from
college with highest
honors, and is
beginning a career
in social work.Testimony: Hope HernandezIntroduction    7After it was over, he led me back to my
cell. I felt myself screaming inside but the
sound wasn’t making it out of my throat. The
nurses were supposed to be on duty 24 hours
a day, but they were asleep in the station.
I think I was asleep for the whole next
day. The night after that, he led me to a bed.
After he had finished, he handed me a paper
jump suit. I was putting it on and still had an
arm and a breast exposed as the shift captain
walked in. He had already pulled his pants up
but the shift captain saw it and asked what
he was doing. He said he was helping me get
dressed after a shower.
The shift captain was suspicious, and they
took me to the hospital to do a rape kit, but
he had used a condom. I told the nurses what
had happened, but nothing ever came of it.
The jail people said I was nuts, because I had
been hallucinating for days. But I didn’t hallu-
cinate being raped.
They kept me there on a mental health
hold for eight months, and when I finally wentto court, they said it was a first offense and I
should only get probation. I spent eight
months in jail, I got raped, and I lost every-
thing I own, but my sentence was probation.
It’s been eight years now, and I can still
see him stepping into the shower with me. I
can look down and see the shine on his shoes.I can see a guard in a uniform and suddenly I
feel terrified. I feel panicked. For all I know,
he’s still a guard.
I think drug addicts need to get treat-
ment. That is all anybody needs. I can’t hon-
estly say that some people would get it
without jail, because some people don’t. Some
people don’t get it, period. But I do know that
a lot of people that are addicted just need a
way to get clean. There is a total lack of treat-
ment, a lack of proper mental health care. I
had been on a waiting list for a methadone
program, but I never got in.
I saw all this stuff about Abu Ghraib.
People were outraged that this was happen-
ing overseas, but this is also happening in our
nation’s capital. It’s happening to people who
need drug treatment. It’s happening to 19-
year-old girls who have low self-esteem. It’s
happening to people who are arrested for the
first time after being completely strung out.
This is happening in our country.I spent eight months in jail,
I got raped, and I lost
everything I own, but my
sentence was probation.Testimony (cont’d): Hope Hernandez8    Stories from InsideBackground
Sexual abuse behind bars is a wide-
spread problem. Reliable estimates
of its incidence are difficult to ob-
tain because of the lack of comprehen-sive research to date. The shortage of
information is in part the result of the
challenges of collecting data in a climateof fear of retaliation and stigma. The re-
search that has been completed, however,
suggests that as many as 20 percent ofmale prisoners have been pressured or co-
erced into sex, and ten percent have been
raped.
9 In one women’s facility, more
than a quarter of the women studied said
they had been pressured into sex.10 While
fear of future attacks causes many pris-oner rape survivors to remain silent about
their abuse, according to the Bureau of
Justice Statistics, more than 6,000 in-mates in adult prisons and jails filed re-
ports of sexual violence in 2005 alone.
11
Anyone can be a victim of rape behind
bars, but typical male victims are young,
non-violent, first-time offenders who aresmall, weak, shy, and gay or feminine.12
Among women, young and mentally ill
inmates and first-time offenders are par-
ticularly vulnerable.13 Marginalized
populations are among the most at risk
for abuse. A study of one institution re-
ported that 41 percent of gay inmates hadbeen sexually assaulted, a rate three times
higher than that for the institution over-
all.
14 In addition, gay and transgender
inmates often face even more institutional
apathy than other prisoners when they re-
port abuse. Many officers confuse homo-sexuality and transgender status for
consent to rape, and therefore trivialize
the claims by such inmates.
Although there are many different
prisoner rape scenarios, a majority of
male victims are assaulted by one or sev-eral fellow inmates, often with the com-
plicity of corrections staff. Survivors of
prisoner rape are frequently marked byother inmates as targets for further at-
tacks.
15 The abuse can be relentless,
sometimes occurring on a daily basis forweeks, months, or even years. Gang rapesSexual Violence Behind Bars
in the U.S.Sexual Violence Behind Bars in the U.S.     9are especially brutal, and can result in
permanent injury or death.16
In women’s prisons and jails, male staff
pose the greatest threat. Corrections of-ficials are frequently allowed to watch
female inmates when they dress, shower,
and use the toilet, and many routinelyengage in verbal degradation of prison-
ers under their supervision. Others abuse
their authority by offering privileges forsexual favors, coerce intercourse with
vulnerable inmates, or rape prisoners
whose safety they are supposed to protect.
17
Non-violent prisoners often find that
the techniques they used to protect them-
selves on the outside are of little use be-hind bars. One man convicted of dealing
drugs was sent to a high-security prison
because he was carrying a gun when ar-rested. Once in prison, he found that
without his gun, his small physical stat-
ure and homosexuality made him a tar-get for prison predators. He was beaten
and raped repeatedly.
18
Non-violent drug offenders and other
vulnerable inmates often find themselves
forced into so-called protective pairing—
submitting to an unwanted relationshipwith another, more powerful prisoner to
gain protection.
19 Although some in-
mates understandably find this arrange-ment preferable to facing violent attacks,
many report that they are forced to en-
dure what is essentially non-consensualsex for periods of months or even years
to remain relatively safe.
The Impact of Prisoner Rape
Sexual assault behind bars has devastat-
ing physical and psychological conse-
quences. During the beatings thatfrequently accompany prisoner rape,survivors suffer injuries ranging from torn
flesh to broken bones to rectal bleeding.
20
The physical harm suffered by sur vivors
is often compounded by their reluctance toseek medical care after an assault for fear of
ridicule or ret ribution.
21
Rape in prison creates emotional wounds
that can fester for years or even decades.
In the short term, survivors often experi-
ence shock, disbelief, panic, and fear.22
Long-term psychological prob lems, such
as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
anxiety, depression, exacerbation of pre-existing psychiatric disorders, and suicidal
feelings, are also common.
23
Adequate mental health counseling is
generally unavailable, particularly for
people suffering from PTSD. According
to psychiatrist T erry Kupers, an expert onmental health behind bars, “[b]ecause
PTSD is not on the correction depart-
ment’s list of ‘major mental illnesses,’which includes such disorders as schizo-
phrenia and bi-polar disorder, it is often
wrongly treated as undeserving of urgentattention.”
24
The relationship between sexual vio-
lence and drug abuse is notable. Manysurvivors of rape in prison are like T.J.
Parsell, who, after being gang raped in
prison at the age of 17, turned to drugsand alcohol as a way to cope with the pain
and trauma.
25 No study has documented the
extent to which prisoner rape increasesdrug abuse. However, rape survivors in
the community are more than three times
more likely than non-survivors to usemarijuana, six times more likely to use co-
caine, and ten times more likely to use
other hard drugs.
26 Thus, while the goal
of drug enforcement policies is to reduce
substance abuse, warehousing inmates in
unsafe facilities may, in fact, result inincreased levels of addiction.10    Stories from InsidePrisoner rape victims are especially
vulnerable to sexually transmitted dis-
eases, and risk being exposed to HIV and
hepatitis, among others. The rate of con-firmed AIDS cases is more than three
times higher inside U.S. prisons than in
American society overall.
27 Because in-
mates with non-violent drug convictions
are among the most vulnerable to rape in
prison, contracting HIV through sexualassault can transform a relatively short
time in prison for drug possession into
an un-adjudicated death sentence.
Bryson Martel is one such survivor. A
crack cocaine addict who was sent to
prison for writing a bad check, Mr. Martelwas raped repeatedly by more than 25 in-
mates at an Arkansas prison. He con-
tracted HIV , and in 2002 was diagnosedwith full-blown AIDS. “It’s awful that a
person would have to go in and pay that
price like that,” he said. “I paid doubleprice. That check I wrote cost me my
life.”
The Aftermath
As inmates return home, they bring their
violent experiences with them. The U.S.
Congress has recognized the societal vio-
lence fueled by prison violence. In thePrison Rape Elimination Act of 2003
(PREA),
28 the first-ever federal legisla-
tion addressing prisoner rape, Congressfound that, “[p]rison rape endangers thepublic safety by making brutalized in mates
more likely to commit crimes when they
are released.”
29 Additionally, Congress
stated, “[p]rison rape increases the levelof homicides and other violence against
inmates and staff, and the risk of insur-
rections and riots.”
30
The devastation caused by sexual as-
sault behind bars is dramatic. Marilyn
Shirley, a T exas mother who was incar-cerated for conspiracy to distribute drugs,
was raped by a corrections officer while a
fellow officer stood watch. In her testi-mony before the National Prison Rape
Elimination Commission, Ms. Shirley
explained how this assault has continuedto affect her, years after her release:
Now that I am out of prison, I am left
with the devastating impacts of the rape.… I haven’t been able to be intimate withmy husband since my rape. … I have para-lyzing panic attacks. I can’t even hold mygrandbaby because I’m afraid of having apanic attack and dropping her. I can’t dosome of the basic things, like watch certainTV shows, or go over high freeway over-passes because I start to panic.
I have awful nightmares and sometimes
I wet the bed as a result. Sometimes my hus-
band has to come and pull me out of the
closet, where I go when I have these at-tacks. At the request of my therapist, I weara rubber band around my wrist so that I can
‘snap’ my self back to reality when I have
panic attacks. I’m also on five differentmedications for these conditions.
And, although my boss was very under-
standing about my situation, it got to apoint where I could not work anymore. So I
am now unable to work.
31
Congress found that, “[p]rison rape endangers the public safety by making
brutalized in mates more likely to commit crimes when they are released.”Sexual Violence Behind Bars in the U.S.     11In Sacramento, the deputies were letting
inmates into my cell to have sex with me
against my will. The first time it happened,
I tried to tell the inmate no. He showed me
some autopsy photos. He said, ‘This is what
happens to people who fuck with me.’
I ended up submitting. I did what he told
me to do. I orally copulated him, and he
sodomized me. Thirty or forty minutes later,
the deputy came onto the speaker and asked
him if he was done. He said, ‘I’m done.’ The
door clicked and let him out.
They must have let 12 or 14 inmates into
my cell to have sex. One day, I said to a deputy,
‘If you’re going to make me do this, could I atleast have some condoms so I don’t get AIDS?’
He told me to shut the fuck up. The next day,
he came in and threw 15 condoms at me.
Where I am now, it’s just as bad. They
have me in general population. I’ve asked over
and over to be put on the unit with the gay
and transgender inmates, but I always get
denied.
In September 2004, it was so crowded
here that they had us sleeping on pads on the
floor of the day room. The inmate on the next
pad over told me to come to the shower with
him, or he was going to slice me. I was afraid,
so I went with him. He was fucking me in theshower when a deputy walked by. He just
started laughing.
Later, they moved me to a cell, and I was
so happy, because I thought I had escaped
this inmate. Then they moved him into the
cell with me. He did nothing but beat me and
rape me. When I finally got out of there, I had
two black eyes that were completely closed
up. I didn’t deserve this.
In September 2005, I was put into a ‘pro-
tective custody’ tank with five or six other in-
mates. Two of them jumped me right away.
They both made me suck them off. The deputy
walked by and saw me fighting and strug-
gling with them, but he didn’t do anything.
The next day, the deputy made jokes about
it. He asked me how much I charge for that.
Gay people, transgender people in this
jail—they put us in compromising positions.
They chain us to 12 inmates and throw us in
the back of a van with no supervision. People
get dragged into bathrooms. One of my
friends got dragged into a bathroom—shewalks with a walker now.
The deputies call me names—they call me
‘it,’ and ‘he/she,’ and ‘punk’, and ‘faggot’.
They whistle at me in the shower. They come
to my cell door asking to see my breasts.
Sometimes I want to die. I’m scared to
close my eyes at night.Jackie Tates is a
39-year-oldtransgenderwoman who iscurrently beingheld in a SanBernardino,Californiacounty jail. Whileincarcerated on aprobation violationin 1999, she wrotea threateningletter to thegovernor ofCalifornia. She wasfound not guilty byreason of mentaldefect and wascommitted to amental hospital in2003. A man whovisited her therewas found to be inpossession ofmarijuana, and Ms.Tates was charged
with smugglingdrugs into acorrectionalfacility, eventhough the drugswere not intendedfor her and thetwo never madecontact.[T]he deputies were letting
inmates into my cell to have
sex with me against my will.
Sometimes I want to die.
I’m scared to close my eyes
at night.Testimony: Jackie Tates12    Stories from InsideWhen I first went to prison, I was
approached—I was one of the
youngest inmates at the prison. The
majority of the inmates there were doing life
sentences. At that particular time, a lot of
people were getting viciously and seriously
hurt in the Texas prison system and even killed.
I was scared. I was 18 years old. So I felt
my only opportunity to survive was to pay for
protection so I wouldn’t get seriously hurt or
killed. I paid them my commissary as a means
to protect myself so I could eventually at some
point get out of prison.
It helped me get out. But then I violated
my parole and they sent me back to prison. I
was being pressured to perform sexual acts
or to pay for protection. I refused to pay for
protection. I thought they were bluffing.
One particular evening, when they
opened the cell doors to allow the inmates to
come out to the dining hall, I stayed in my cell
to eat food from the commissary. When the
officers opened my cell door, a muscle-built
guy who was doing a life sentence for aggra-
vated rape came into my cell and tried to get
me to jack him off. When I refused, he hit me
four or five times in my sternum, my ribs, and
my kidneys. Then, he raped me in the cell.
I did make an attempt to fight back, but
I was no match for this guy. I weighed about
165. He was about an inch or two taller than
me and I’d say he weighed about 220 or 230
pounds.
He gave me body blows that literally put
me to the ground. He grabbed me and put
his arms around me and slammed me up
against the bars and forced me down and
forced my pants off of me. At that point, my
sternum was cracked and my ribs were
bruised. I felt like there was a possibility that
he might kill me if I resisted. I’d seen what he
had done to me at first when I resisted. I wasin a lot of pain and I was scared.
A few hours later, I took an overdose of
several hundred Tylenol. I refused to allow
them to pump my stomach. They took me to
the hospital. They forced me—there were four
or five officers that held me down while the
doctor gave me some kind of injection to make
me go to sleep. They pumped my stomach
while I was unconscious.
The next day I woke up in intensive care.
I felt really humiliated and disrespected and
embarrassed. I felt anger. I was still suicidal. I
told the doctor what had happened. The of-
ficers that were at the hospital were making
derogatory comments like, ‘Well, he should
have fought back if he didn’t want to get
raped.’
The doctor had me transferred to a psy-
chiatric prison. I went before this committee
which consisted of a psychiatrist and two psy-
chologists. They listen to your complaint and
determine if they are going to admit you into
the psychiatric prison hospital or not. They
decided not to admit me because they
thought that I was just making this up to get
attention or to get off that particular prison
unit. They discharged me from what they call
observation crisis management and trans-
ferred me back to the Huntsville unit.
At that point, I was pretty determined to
pursue my suicidal thoughts. Once I got to
the Huntsville unit and they placed me in a
cell, I took some razor blades and I tried to
cut an artery in my neck. I cut several times.
I intended to die. It was just too humili-
ating. It just hurt too much to have to deal
with it, not being able to get no counseling,
not being able to have anybody on the inside
to help me deal with it and being turned down
by people who had the position and the abil-
ity to help me. It just hurt.
An inmate who was sweeping in front of
Darryl Barnett is a
39-year-old Texas
man serving
a nine-year
sentence for drug
possession. His
drug use began at
13, when his  uncles
introduced him
to alcohol and
marijuana. By theage of 16, he was
injecting amphet-
amines. He began
stealing from
stores and commit-
ting credit card
fraud to support
his drug habit. His
trouble with the
law began at 16,
when he was
arrested for
receiving stolen
property. At 18, he
was convicted of
fraud and sen-
tenced to three
years in prison. He
bounced in and
out of prison on
parole violations
for the next 15
years before being
convicted of a new
drug possession
charge in 2003.Testimony: Darryl BarnettSexual Violence Behind Bars in the U.S.     13my cell saw me sitting on the commode with
razor blades in my hand just slicing my neck up.
Once again, they transferred me back to
the psychiatric prison hospital and I saw the
same doctor. He once again claimed that I was
doing this with the intention of trying to get
off that particular unit. He thought that I was
faking it or whatever even though he had seen
with his own eyes that I had stitches in my
neck and my neck was all cut up.
I feel at times they have given me a life
sentence for being addicted to drugs. I defi-
nitely want drug treatment because I acknowl-
edge and admit that I have a serious problem.
I feel like I’m trapped. I feel pressured.
I’ve only been here in this unit for two weeks,
but I’ve been approached. I’ve been ap-
proached about fighting to see if I’m going to
stay down. When confrontations happen, I
always cut it off. I’ll try to walk away, even
though it gives the predators, the violentinmates, reason to believe that I’m weak.
Inmates who are in prison for check writ-
ing, possession of drugs—these ain’t violent
offenders. These offenders that have drug
charges and seem not to be a violent type of
inmate or who are not in here on a violent
offense, they should not be housed with these
other inmates who have nothing to look for-
ward to besides preying on inmates like me,
because they are never getting out. These vio-
lent offenders are doing serious sentences, life
sentences, 99-year sentences, 65-year sen-
tences.
One of the things that they are notori-
ous for in Texas prisons is when an inmate
like me makes a complaint to the administra-
tion about certain inmates pressuring me, they
lock us up in a solitary confinement cell and
pull the individuals that we named out of their
cell blocks and say, ‘Hey, this inmate has made
complaints about you that you are trying to
pressure him in doing this and doing that.’
They expect those inmates to be truth-
ful. Of course, the inmates are going to deny
it. So they pull us out of solitary and put us
right back over there with them. Then we are
approached by these individuals and we’re
beat up or we’re forced to have to pay our
commissary to them.
I’ve tried to kill myself a couple of times
since then. I have never been in the same
frame of mind since the incident. It has
changed me dramatically. It has changed me
as far as how I feel about myself. It has
changed the way I interact with people. I’ve
been holding a lot of animosity in me for a
long time since this happened. I don’t trust
nobody.
This happens all the time in here every
day to people like me. It’s just out of hand.I intended to die. It was just
too humiliating. It just hurt
too much to have to deal
with it, not being able to get
no counseling, not being
able to have anybody on the
inside to help me deal with it
and being turned down by
people who had the position
and the ability to help me.Testimony (cont’d): Darryl Barnett14    Stories from InsideIn 1991, I was on a paint crew. It was a
big wide spread—it was miles long,
and they would drop certain prisoners off
in one spot and tell them to paint.
I was the last one, and the guard drove
me outside the work area and told me that if
I didn’t give him oral sex, he would report me
as an escapee.
I did what I was told to do, because I
wanted to go home. This was the first time I
was in prison, and I didn’t know anything. I
performed oral sex because I didn’t want to
be charged with escape. My mind was some-
where else the whole time. When I got back
to my unit, I cried and cried.
The next morning, I refused to go to
work—I couldn’t go back out there again. I
was afraid it was going to happen again. I
was afraid it was going to happen every day.
I was disciplined because I refused to go back
out and work on his crew.
Three years later, in 1994, an officer
would come into my room and he would grab
my breast and grab my ass and put his hands
on my pussy and squeeze. He did this every
day for about a week, until one day he went
down in my pants and was rubbing and grind-
ing himself against my ass with his privates.
He inserted his fingers in me. That was the
final straw.
I just couldn’t take it anymore, and we
fought. A witness came forward. I wasn’t
going to say anything because he kept telling
me, ‘You are the one locked up. It is my word
against yours.’ I was afraid. An officer shook
down my cell and he found my journal and
he read it. An inspector called me down to
the control center. Eventually, I told them what
happened.
They sexually assaulted the women all the
time coming out of chow hall. That was their
favorite pat down. They would grab yourboob. Every time I went to chow—breakfast,
lunch or dinner—I got singled out to be shook
down and my breasts were always squeezed
and my nipples pinched. It happened every
time I went to chow hall for years.
The officers would walk in on the girls
when they were taking showers because there
were no curtains. They would stand there and
watch girls in the shower. It made you feel
like a piece of meat.
There was a deputy who used to sell
drugs to the girls and then threaten to go to
the parole board if they didn’t suck his dick.
He knew if you were dirty, and if he turned
you in, you would have to spend another year
in prison.
There was a woman who was two doors
down from me—I used to see an officer go
into her room and shut the door behind him.
They had sex in her room—she would tell me
about it later.
For me, being sexually abused as a child
made me an easy target. It is in our file, and
the guards can see that. We are easy targets
because we learn from a young age to keep
our mouths shut. There are repercussions to
telling. It is brainwashed into us.
It was almost the norm because of how
I grew up. I just felt like ‘Well, here comes
another one.’ It’s hard to explain it unless you
have been there. I have known it all my lifeThere was a deputy who used
to sell drugs to the girls andthen threaten to go to the
parole board if they didn’t suck
his dick.
Robin McArdle is
a 41-year-old
Michigan mother
of two from an
upper-middle-
class home. She
was molested bya family member
from age six to
12. She began to
use powdered
cocaine at 19,
and quickly
turned to
freebasing and
then crack co-
caine. She was
sent to prison for
the first time at
26 for possession
of stolen goods.
She went in and
out of prison for
11 years, and was
sexually abused
by corrections
officials on
two separate
occasions.Testimony: Robin McArdleSexual Violence Behind Bars in the U.S.     15since I was six years old. I just reverted back
to being totally numb. It just made me feel
like I used to—like I wanted to use more drugs
to forget about it.
In prison, you can’t speak up about be-
ing abused. They get you in trouble, and they
call you a liar, and your grievance disappears.
The officers retaliate. They write you tickets.
You get charged with major misconduct. If
you get written up with major misconduct too
many times, you don’t go home.
Eventually, I testified in a lawsuit, and
after that, the retaliation was really bad. They
even told me, ‘You aren’t going home if we
can help it.’ One of the officers threatened
me over the loudspeaker. ‘You are never leav-
ing this prison. I am seeing to it that you are
never getting out of here.’ He was telling me
to watch my back, because he was coming
for me. That’s how blatant they were. He
didn’t care who heard, because there was no-
body to stop them. Nobody believed us.
Almost everybody was there on drug
charges. Probably 95 percent were drug us-
ers and doing time on drug charges. It is all
related to using drugs.
I feel there is a better alternative than
locking up drug users. It just makes it worse.
It is incarceration without rehabilitation. They
are not giving them understanding as to why
they do what they do. That’s what I needed—
I needed to know why I did what I did. Why
did I need drugs? I finally found that out, but
it wasn’t through incarceration.The prisons are so overcrowded, and the
officers take advantage of that. They see all
your weaknesses. Some of them are predators.
The gym is where I slept in and there were
120 women in there. There is no privacy. There
are no partitions. There are no doors. So where
do you change your clothes? What happens
when you kick the covers off in bed at night?
You have got officers walking by with flash-
lights looking at you.
Being locked up in that kind of environ-
ment was devastating—emotionally, physi-
cally, and mentally draining. It takes its toll.
I am angry, very angry, because they
didn’t have a right to do that to me. They had
no right to take my innermost feelings. It re-
ally makes me angry that they feel like they
can just do whatever they want.
It was like I was in a stable and I was
their animal to do whatever they chose to do
with it because they own it, and because they
can. I have feelings. I have emotions. I am a
person. And they took all of that, and they
didn’t care. They didn’t care.In prison, you can’t speak up
about being abused. They
get you in trouble, and they
call you a liar, and yourgrievance disappears.Testimony (cont’d): Robin McArdle16    Stories from InsideI was in medium  custody in a pod of 16
people—the locks had been removed
as ordered by the warden. Aryan gang
members resided in this 16-man pod; two of
them were top member enforcers. The in-
mate who attacked me was and still is the
top guy. I have a shaved head but I am not a
neo-Nazi.
I was attacked in my sleep around 11:30
at night. I woke with an inmate choking me.
Then he repeatedly hit me in the face until I
had two gashes under my eyes. He left and
came back with a toilet brush in his hand. He
had already pulled down my pants. He beat
my penis and testicles with the bristle end of
the toilet brush and then tried ramming thehandle in my anus. I was then coherent and
tried to fight back. They left only to come
back and five of them took turns telling me
what would happen if I told on them and
what would happen to members of my fam-
ily on the outside.
I was extorted by this group for three
months and forced into fighting someone
that was a group member.
Mentally, I cannot be in a prison multi-
dwelling. I have to be in a maximum lock-up
cell. I suffer from anxiety, depression, panic
attacks and OCD [obsessive-compulsive dis-
order]. I have to fight constantly with DOC
[Department of Corrections] to keep a max
cell.
When I entered protective custody,
I was placed in a three-man room,
with only one other inmate in it. On
January 1, 2006, he told me that I was going
to be his ‘New Year’s present.’ Even though
he was double my weight, I thought he was
just joking. My mind was just on going home.
Later on that day, he grabbed me by the
throat and threatened to kill me if I didn’t
give him oral sex. I was so scared, I started
crying and begging and pleading with him.
But, he wouldn’t stop. I tried telling the CO
[Corrections Officer] but he wouldn’t allowme to go near the door. So, when he went
to get a check-up, I told the CO what hap-
pened. And that’s when I got placed in the
SHU [segregated housing unit].
Emotionally, I have been so stressed out
that I have tried to kill myself several times. I
am on some medication for the depression,
but the pain never goes away.
Just because I’m in jail for drugs
shouldn’t mean that I should be subjected to
all of the things that I am going through.
Rather, nobody should go through what I’ve
been through and am going through.[F]ive of them took turns telling me what would happen if I told
on them and what would happen to members of my family on
the outside.
On January 1, 2006, he told me that I was going to be his ‘New
Year’s present.’John Cooks
is serving a
four-to-eight
year sentence at
Attica Correctional
Facility in New
York for attempted
possession
of a controlled
substance.“Oliver
Michaels” is a
45-year-old
man from
Kansas City,
Kansas, who
is serving
approximately
12 years for
possessing
marijuana and
methamphet-
amine and
selling
cocaine.Testimony: Oliver Michaels
Testimony: John Cooks
Sexual Violence Behind Bars in the U.S.     17
I was a model prisoner. I was the welder
there. If they needed bars built or they
needed a seclusion cage built, I did it. I
joked around with all the officers, and we all
got along. I trusted them.
I was asleep one night after all the head
counts had already happened. Miller was the
only officer on duty that night. He kicked my
door open and he shined the flashlight in my
face and he said ‘Shirley, get up. You’re
wanted at the officer’s station.’
I said, ‘Miller what’s going on? Did Doug
die? Did something happen to my kids?’ He
said, ‘Just shut up and git. Hurry up.’
We got to the officer’s station, and he
told me to sit down. The blinds were closed.
He picked up the phone and said, ‘If the Lieu-
tenant heads over here, give me the signal.’
The next thing I knew he had pulled me
to him and kissed me right on the mouth. I
pushed him back and I said, ‘Oh, no, this ain’t
happening.’ His eyes completely turned to
stone. He said, ‘Yes, it is going to happen. Do
you think you are the only one?’
He grabbed my hair and wrapped it
around his hand. He already had his pants
down. He was already hard. He shoved my
head down on his penis until it wouldn’t go
any farther.
He bent my arm around and shoved my
face into the wall. He started ripping my
sweatpants away. He reached down there and
opened me up and just shoved it in.
I was mad at first, but then I just went
numb. I had been trying to talk him out of
it—I said, ‘You know, I just had a hysterec-
tomy. I’m old enough to be your mom. I
thought we were friends.’ But he just turned
to stone.
I’m thinking he’s going to kill me or he’s
going to tell them that I assaulted him or tried
to run. I’m thinking, ‘I’m fixing to die.’When he was really working me over bad,
he got the signal. He must have had the vol-
ume turned up so loud on his police radio—
the officer looking out for him cleared his
throat over the radio.
He started freaking out. He was scream-
ing, ‘Get up, get up!’ He kicked me over. He
said, ‘Get your pants on and get the fuck out!’
He had to unlock the door and put all of his
belts and handcuffs and his uniform top back
on.
When he unlocked the door, he said,
‘Don’t try to say anything. It’ll be your word
against mine. Who do you think they’re go-
ing to believe?’
I wanted to tell right then, but I was afraid
if I did, they would ship me far away, and I
wouldn’t be able to see my kids. Ten thou-
sand things were going through my head.
Could I make it seven more months without
anybody finding out? Should I just forget
about this? Is this part of my punishment? Did
I make him think that I wanted this? You startblaming yourself. You start feeling guilty
yourself.
I went back to my room, where my room-
mates were sleeping. I put the T -shirt and the
sweatpants in a bag and rolled it up like trash
and shoved it up underneath my locker. I was
thinking that when everyone else was gone, I
would just throw them away. I lay awake all
that night, just crying and trembling, looking
at the wall.Marilyn Shirley is a
49-year-old Texasmother of two andstepmother of fivewho was sentencedto prison alongwith her husbandin 1998 forconspiracy todistribute drugs.The charges werebrought when acustomer at theirauto body shoptried to payhis bill withmethamphetamine.At the time, bothMs. Shirley and herhusband, Doug,had been drug-freefor 15 years.Neither she nor herhusband werefound to be inphysical possessionof any drugs.
I said, ‘You know, I just had a
hysterectomy. I’m old enough
to be your mom. I thought we
were friends.’ But he [theofficer] just turned to stone.Testimony: Marilyn Shirley18    Stories from InsideI was going to throw the sweatpants
away, but I started thinking, ‘There’s men’s
semen on my sweatpants. This is a women’s
prison. That’s going to be the proof. I’ve got
him red-handed.’
I kept the sweatpants until the day I got
released from prison seven months later, and
then I reported the rape. My probation of-
ficer took me to a rape crisis center. The FBI
came and picked me up, and took me to the
federal building in Dallas. They gave me a lie
detector test, which I passed.
It took a long time for the sweatpants
to come back from the FBI crime lab. The DNA
matched him. The jury convicted him of ag-
gravated assault, aggravated sodomy, sexual
abuse of a ward of the court, and abusing
and raping an inmate on federal property.
He got 12 years. He is serving his time now.
I sued Miller for damages, and a jury
awarded me $4 million. I haven’t seen apenny. Miller doesn’t have $4 million.
It’s not right that they’re putting so many
people in prison for drugs. Sometimes there
aren’t even any drugs found, and they put
people in for conspiracy. There were no drugs
found in my case. They never could connect
me with any type of drugs.
Most of the women there are doing time
because of a boyfriend. They won’t testify
against their boyfriends so they end up get-
ting 10, 15, 25 years on drug charges all be-
cause they’re being stubborn. They love their
man so much.
Half of the women in there were there
on conspiracy charges because they were
somebody’s girlfriend or husband. There are
older women in there in wheelchairs that look
like grandmothers. You ask them what they’re
in for, and they say, ‘It was my house that my
son dealt drugs out of. They tied me up in
this conspiracy, and I got 25 years.’Testimony (cont’d): Marilyn ShirleySexual Violence Behind Bars in the U.S.     19Before the actual rape, I fought the two
individuals nearly to the death. I con-
tinuously screamed for help. I begged
at the top of my lungs for someone to please
help me. I begged them to please stop and
please don’t do this. Eventually, they physi-
cally overpowered me and threw me on the
bed. While the knife was at my neck, one
penetrated me while the other one held my
legs. I struggled until I was initially penetrated;
after that I must have gone into shock and
went completely limp and numb. I felt like I
was hovering over my body, while they vio-
lated me. After the first individual finished,
the other individual raped me while the other
one held my legs. After they were both fin-
ished, the initiator urinated on me. The initia-
tor commenced to rape me again. At which
point, I came to and started fighting back. That
was when I was cut by the knife. While I
struggled, I heard one say, ‘Hit the Bitch … let
me go again.’ I was able to free myself and
escape the room.
The aftermath felt by a victim of rape is
indescribable. I have not and will never be the
same person I was before that horrific inci-
dent. To actually beg and plead with an indi-
vidual not to hurt you, to plead with someone
to not violate you, and to actually beg for your
life is very traumatizing. Everyday, I look into
the mirror to do everyday things like brush
my hair or teeth, and I see the scar on my
neck and I flash back to that incident. I have
been haunted by that incident. There is not a
night that goes by that I don’t have a night-
mare where I relive that horrific incident.The individual [who raped me] was
granted parole to the very area that I resided
in. The thing that haunted me the most was
[his] last statement to me as I was leaving [the
prison] to be transferred. He yelled this state-
ment from segregation for the whole recre-
ation yard to hear, as well as me. He stated, ‘Ha,
Ha, Bitch, I see they are transferring you!! …
This ain’t over, Bitch!! This is far from over!! I’ll
see you on the street!! Don’t forget that I’m
from around the way, Bitch!! We’ll finish this
on the Bricks!!’ When I close my eyes at night
I hear this in my head and in my nightmares.
I then fell into a serious state of depres-
sion and paranoia. The nightmares and flash-
backs were becoming more intense and
frequent. I was having many intense mood
swings. I would have uncontrollable fits of rage
instantaneously. I was highly emotional and
on constant edge. My sleeping and eating
habits seriously diminished, so I was starting
to suffer from sleep deprivation. I reverted
back to all the symptoms that I had right afterthe rape—like I had a relapse. The hallucina-
tions of seeing the two individuals that raped
me, I would sometimes hear their voices where
they would be laughing at me. It was basi-
cally as if I was reliving that event all over again.
All of the progress that I made trying to
heal and forget about the rape was lost the day
my perpetrator was released to my hometown.
I wish I could hear someone say that they
are sorry for what I had to go through, and
what I went through, and continue to go
through, because no one should have to go
through what I went through.“Daniel Sanford”
was convicted infederal court ofmail fraud thatwas motivatedby his drugaddiction. Hewas sentencedto three years inprison and threeyears supervisedrelease. He wasre-incarceratedduring hissupervisedrelease becausehe testedpositive fordrug use.
To actually beg and plead with an individual not to hurt you, to
plead with someone to not violate you, and to actually beg for
your life is very traumatizing.Testimony: Daniel Sanford20    Stories from InsideBackground
Although government efforts to
control drug use date back to the
late 19th century, drug control ini-
tiatives became particularly zealous in the
second half of the 20th century. The war
on drugs was formally declared by Rich-ard Nixon early in his first term as Presi-
dent.
32 Congress followed suit in 1970
when it passed the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act.
33
This Act centralized federal drug laws andplaced these laws under the federalgovernment’s expansive Commerce
Clause power, thereby giving the Attor-
ney General enforcement power over vir-tually all narcotics and other dangerous
drugs. The Drug Enforcement Admin-
istration (DEA) was established in 1973.
34
While, in March 1973, Nixon insisted
that “drug abuse was still public enemy
number one,”35 later that year he declared
that “[w]e have turned the corner on drug
addiction in the United States.”36 The
Ford and Carter administrations followedthis “success” with toned-down drug
crime rhetoric.37 However, President
Ronald Reagan took up the Nixon drum-
beat in the 1980s, when crack cocainebecame visible, particularly in poor and
minority communities.
38 As Nancy
Reagan urged schoolchildren to “Just SayNo” to drugs,
39 Congress enacted legis-
lation that included mandatory minimum
sentences for drug offenses,40 and created
federal sentencing guidelines that limited
judicial discretion in criminal cases.41
While the federal government started
the war on drugs, states and counties filled
its warrior ranks. In the 1990s, drug ar-
rest and imprisonment rates at the locallevel skyrocketed. A model of law en-
forcement developed, most notably in
New York City, in which public orderoffenses, including minor drug offenses,
were heavily prosecuted and punished
under the theory that combating minorcrimes will stave off more serious of-
fenses.
42 Among defendants convicted of
a drug offense, the proportion sentencedto prison increased from 79 percent inThe U.S. War on DrugsThe U.S. War on Drugs    211988 to 92 percent in 2003.43 Increased
enforcement was particularly notable for
marijuana. Since 1996, there have been
more drug arrests related to marijuanathan any other substance.
44 In 2004,
nearly 40 percent of all drug arrests were
for possession of marijuana, and anotherfive percent were for its manufacture or
sale.
45 During that year, marijuana arrests
outnumbered arrests for all violent crimescombined.
46
Harsh Sentencing Laws
As the political rhetoric initiated a war
on drugs, federal and state legislators fur-
ther criminalized addiction by imposingharsh penalties for drug offenses. The
length of sentences generally increased
over the past 20 years and jurisdictionsenacted stringent laws such as mandatory
minimum sentences, “truth-in-sentenc ing”
legislation and “three strikes and you’reout” initiatives.
Mandatory Minimum Sentences
Mandatory minimum sentences, as thename suggests, require judges to imposesentences of at least a certain length upon
conviction. New York developed the first
mandatory minimum sentences in 1973with its Rockefeller Drug Laws. Under
these laws, drug possession, particularly
in large quantities, was punished asharshly as a violent crime.
47 Since the
enactment of the Rockefeller Drug Laws,
mandatory minimum sentencing schemeshave become commonplace nationwide,
particularly for drug and handgun of-
fenses. By 1994, all 50 states and thefederal government had adopted at leastone mandatory minimum sentencing
provision.
48 New York’s Rockefeller Drug
Laws and Michigan’s so-called “650 li-
fer” statute (requiring a life sentence forpossession of more than 650 grams of a
controlled substance) were among the
harshest—imposing life sentences evenfor some first-time possession offenses.
49
Notably, both states have revised theirlaws and acknowledged that this sentenc-ing experiment failed.
50 While the pen-
alties have lessened, lengthy prison terms
for non-violent drug offenses are still re-quired in both states.
Mandatory minimum sentences have
overwhelmed prisons with people con-victed of non-violent drug offenses. Even
proponents of harsh sentences for drug
violations acknowledge that these lawshave dramatically increased incarceration
rates.
51 Without the judicial discretion to
factor in an individual’s history of abuse,parental responsibilities, and community
ties, even first-time, non-violent drug
offenders are required to serve lengthy
sentences, often without treatment or re-
gard for the welfare of their children.
As a result, a number of federal judges
have publicly expressed their objection
to mandatory sentencing, especially in
drug cases,
52 with a few senior judges
refusing to accept such cases on their
dockets.53
Mandatory minimum sentences typi-
cally lead to the incarceration of inmates
who are at great risk for prisoner rape.
Leah Atkinson is a case in point. Afterdeveloping an addic tion to a prescribed
Mandatory minimum sentences have
overwhelmed prisons with peopleconvicted of non-violent drug offenses.22    Stories from Insidepainkiller, she began trafficking cocaine
for a street drug dealer. With no history
of violence, and no prior convictions, she
was sentenced under the federal sentenc-ing guidelines for conspiracy to sell drugs.
While incarcerated, Ms. Atkinson was
sexually assaulted by one correctionsofficer and harassed by several others.
After pursuing administrative remedies
for this mistreatment, Ms. Atkinson be-came a target for humiliation, threats, and
insults.
“Truth-in-Sentencing” Provisions
Similar to mandatory minimum sen-
tences, “truth-in-sentencing” laws have
lengthened prison terms without regard
for individual accomplishments and re-habilitation. As an incentive for good
behavior and a means to minimize over-
crowding, prison terms have histori cally
been shortened through work release, pa-
role, and other credits for inmates who
complete programs and avoid disciplin-ary problems. However, under truth-in-
sentencing provisions, inmates are now
required to serve a larger portion of theirsentences (typically 85 percent) before
being considered for release.
In 1986, the federal government abol-
ished parole and probation for most drug
offenses, thereby ensuring that federal
prisoners serve more time for thesecrimes.
54 As part of the Violent Crime
Control and Law Enforcement Act of
1994,55 Congress encouraged states to do
the same by offering funds for prison con-
struction to states that adopted laws re-
quiring prisoners with prior violent orserious drug convictions to serve at least
85 percent of their sentences. While five
states had truth-in-sentenc ing laws before
the federal grant program, by 1998, 27states and the District of Columbia had pro-
visions that met the federal grant criteria
and 13 more states had developed other
truth-in-sentencing laws.
56
While primarily focused on prison
terms for inmates with violent convic-
tions, truth-in-sentencing laws are oftenapplied to drug offenses as well. In Ari-
zona, the state’s prison population has in-
creased by 65 percent since it passed atruth-in-sentencing law in 1993.
57 In
January 2004, Arizona’s prisons were
overstretched to 31,286 inmates—4,349above capacity—20 percent of whom
were incarcerated on drug charges, and
nearly three-fifths of whom were non-violent offenders.
58
“Three Strikes and You’re Out” Laws
America’s incarceration fervor is also ap-parent in the adoption of “three strikesand you’re out” legislation. Three strikes
laws swept the nation in the early 1990s,
when public fear of violent crime andcriminals was at a crest. Under these laws,
individuals with two or more prior con-
victions are subject to longer sentences.Often, the third conviction will result in
an automatic life sentence. Altogether, 23
states and the federal government haveenacted three strikes  laws.
The most draconian of these laws was
passed in California, where any seriousfelony—including any felony drug of-
fense or non-violent burglary—counts as
a strike. After the first strike, any subse-quent felony conviction results in double
the sentence. A third felony brings a sen-
tence of 25-years-to-life.
59 Because its
three strikes law is so broad, California
incarcerates four times as many people
under this law as all other states with threestrikes legislation combined.
60 WhileThe U.S. War on Drugs    23enacted with the promise that it would
put violent repeat felons away for life,
more than half of California prisoners
serving sentences under the three strikeslaw were convicted of non-violent of fenses
and 23 percent, nearly 10,000 people,
were sentenced for drug offenses.
61
Troy Bishop is serving a 25-years-to-
life sentence under T exas’s three strikes
law. Having served shorter sentences forlarceny offenses related to his drug ad-
diction, Mr. Bishop’s current sentence
was for cocaine possession. Placed in acell with a violent offender, Mr. Bishop
was repeatedly raped by his cell mate.
After reporting the abuse to a correctionsofficer, who did nothing, Mr. Bishop
made a knife and showed it to an officer
so that he could be placed in administra-tive segregation.
Questioning the Drug War
For all the effort poured into the current
drug enforcement regime, the cost/ben-
efit ratio is rather dubious. In 2005, thefederal government reportedly spent $7.6
billion on drug interdiction and federal
drug law enforcement, and only $5 bil-lion on prevention and treatment.
62
These figures do not include all of thefederal money spent on incarceration fordrug sentences. From 1982 to 2003, to-
tal justice spending at the federal, state,
and local levels increased more than 400percent, with corrections accounting for
the largest increase.
63
This increased spending resulted in
many needless minor drug arrests. Of the
734,000 people arrested for marijuana
offenses in 2000, only about 41,000—sixpercent—were convicted of a felony.
64Many of the others spent hours, days,weeks or months in pre-trial detention,where they risked being victimized by
sexual predators before being released.
The zeal to prosecute drug-related
crime sweeps up individuals barely con-
nected to the drug trade and subjects
them to a dangerous prison environmentand a lifelong classification as a criminal.
Many of those convicted of drug offenses
have only a peripheral connection withthe narcotics trade, if any at all. For ex-
ample, a possession conviction can arise
from merely being in a car or room wheredrugs are found.
65 Chance Martin was
arrested when he was 18 years old for
drugs found in the lobby of a hotel wherehe was attending a party. Young, non-vio-
lent, and new to the prison culture, Mr.
Martin was brutally gang raped by sixinmates.
The harsh sentencing laws developed
under the war on drugs disproportion-ately impact the most vulnerable, non-
violent low-level offenders. Without
judicial discretion at sentencing, the pros-ecutors’ power to decide what offense to
charge takes on increased significance. As
the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals rec-ognized in United States v. Anthony
Brigham , mandatory minimum sentenc-
ing laws create an inverted sentencingscheme:From 1982 to 2003, total justice spend-
ing at the federal, state, and local levelsincreased more than 400 percent, withcorrections accounting for thelargest increase.24    Stories from InsideThe ‘mandatory’ minimum is manda-
tory only from the perspective of judges.To the parties, the sentence is negotiable.
... A prosecutor may charge a lesser crime,if he offers something in return. Let’smake a deal. Does the participant have
valuable information; can he offer other as-
sistance?
The more serious the defendant’s crimes,
the lower the sentence—because thegreater his wrongs, the more informationand assistance he has to offer to a pros-ecutor. Discounts for the top dogs have thevirtue of necessity, be cause what makes the
post-dis count sentencing structure topsy-
turvy is the mandatory minimum, bindingonly for the hangers on.
66
Some of the most severe sentences are
imposed on spouses or girlfriends of drug
dealers who are pressured to transport or
sell drugs for their partners. At the bot-tom rung of the drug trade, these non-
violent individuals lack any bargaining
power to obtain a favorable plea offer
from the prosecution. As a result, they
are subject to lengthy mandatory mini-mum sentences in dangerous facilities.
67
The war on drugs has continued, de-
spite signs that it is increasingly unpopu-lar with the American public. One study
in 2001 found that nearly three-quarters
of Americans surveyed viewed the drugwar as a losing cause.
68 In 2002, a major-
ity of Americans thought that mandatory
sentencing laws should be eliminated.69
A November 2005 Gallup poll confirmed
that most Americans do not believe that
marijuana should be treated as a criminalmatter.
70
As the pendulum of public opinion
about today’s drug enforcement policiesbegins to swing, more and more Ameri-
cans are also recognizing drug addiction
as a disease that calls for compassionatetreatment. In a 2001 survey, 63 percent
of Americans described drug abuse as a
medical problem to be addressed with
counseling and treatment, while only 31percent considered it a serious crime that
should be handled by the courts and
prison system.
71
The enthusiasm for U.S. drug enforce-
ment policies has further eroded on both
ends of the political spectrum, particu-larly as overcrowding and the cost of
building new prisons gain attention. Edi-
tors at the conservative The National Re-
view concluded, “that the war on drugs
has failed, that it is diverting intelligent
energy away from how to deal with theproblem of addiction, that it is wasting
our resources, and that it is encouraging
civil, judicial, and penal procedures asso-ciated with police states.”
72 Judge Rich-
ard A. Posner, a Reagan appointee to the
Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, simi-larly concluded that the drug war was lost
just before he became Chief Judge of that
court in 1993.
73 More than 500 econo mists,
including Nobel laureates Dr. Milton
Friedman, Dr. George Akerlof, and Dr.
Vernon Smith, endorsed a report calling
for legalization and taxation of marijuana,
essentially arguing that it should be regu-
lated similar to alcoholic beverages.74
Despite agreement among many
Americans—including politicians, law
enforcement professionals, and pundits—that current drug enforcement laws are a
waste of national resources, police offic-
ers and prosecutors continue zealously topursue the war on drugs. The price of this
war goes beyond dollars and cents, how-
ever. The cost is ultimately measured inthe war’s human toll, when non-violent
offenders fall prey to a culture of brutal-
ity behind bars.The U.S. War on Drugs    25
Three weeks into my prison sentence,
my mother visited me at Atwood
Federal Prison Camp in Kentucky. Dur-
ing the visit, I began to shiver, and my mother
wrapped her shawl around me. The officer
supervising the visiting room told me that I
can never wear clothes brought by a visitor.
She instructed me to go into a tool room for
a visual search.
I went into the tool room and started to
strip, as the officer instructed. My disability
prevented me from taking my clothes off
quickly. Clearly frustrated with my limitations,
the officer put on rubber gloves and patted
me down by running the palms of her hands
over my breasts and touching my nipples. Her
rubber gloves pulled out pubic hair as she
“patted down” my genitals.
I was shocked by her aggressive actions,
and asked her why she was acting that way.
She told me to be quiet. I pleaded with her to
unlock the door and let me out of the tool
room. Finally satisfied with the search, she al-
lowed me to return to the visiting room.
When the visit ended, it was time to be
searched again by the same officer. I told the
officer that although I was not refusing to be
searched, I would like to have another officer
be present. I was given a ticket for disobeying
a direct order.
I reported the incident through the ad-
ministrative remedy process. By doing so, I
learned that nine other women had filed com-
plaints against the officer who strip-searched
me. She was suspended during the month ofOctober 2002, and my strip search took place
on the first weekend she returned to work.
Another officer made sexual advances to-
ward me in April 2003. When I rejected his
advances, he became very angry and aggres-
sive. When I witnessed him in a sexually com-
promising position with another inmate, he
began threatening me and following me ev-
erywhere.
Since I began pursuing administrative
remedies, I have become a target for humilia-
tion and harassment, including verbal threats
and aggressive insults. I was denied visits for
two years, and when I tried to appeal, I was
moved to segregation. The final retaliation was
a transfer to a high-security prison in Danbury,
Connecticut—more than 1,000 miles from
home.
This prison is dirty, dangerous, and horri-
bly overcrowded—many inmates are forced
to sleep on the floor upon arrival. Danbury’s
reputation for sexual misconduct is even worse
than Atwood’s—I am being subjected to it
daily. I never knew such treatment existed in
our country—especially sanctioned by the gov-
ernment. I have done nothing to deserve this
abuse, and I am powerless to stop it.Leah Atkinson is a
41-year-oldKentucky womanwho grew up in adeeply religioushome. A violinistand former beautypageant contestant,she was very activein her church’syouth group. Aftergraduating fromcollege with dualdegrees in businessand education, sheworked as a fitnesstrainer and substi-tute teacher. Shewas disabled by a1998 snowmobileaccident, andbecame addicted tothe powerfulpainkiller Oxycontin.
After her medicalbenefits ran out,she started obtain-ing the drug froma street dealer, andeventually begantrafficking cocainefor him. In 2002,she was sentencedto seven years infederal prison forconspiracy todistribute cocaine.Since I began pursuing
administrative remedies, I have
become a target for
humiliation and harassment…
I never knew such treatment existed in our country—especiallysanctioned by the government.Testimony: Leah Atkinson26    Stories from InsideIn 1992, I was put in the same cell with
[someone convicted of murder]. They
made a movie on this guy, and he made
me watch it one night. After I watched this
movie, I did not want to be in his cell no more.
We were in the cell one night and he said,
‘Hey, Troy, have you ever done it with a guy?’
I said, ‘No way, what do you think I am?’ He
said, ‘This is another world. Nobody really
knows what we do in here. I’ve been with
punks before, and no one knows it.’ I said,
‘Well, I do now, because you just told me. It
must not be too much of a secret.’
He gave me this look, and I got scared,
because I had a catheter in my heart—I had
osteomyelitis from shooting drugs. I also had
a bone infection in my ulna—I had these metal
rods sticking out of my arm. He said, ‘Those
can come out real easy.’
I picked up my Bible—I was thinking,
‘God help me. Please.’ I had my Bible, and he
said, ‘That isn’t going to help you.’ He knocked
it on the floor. He told me to get on my stom-
ach on the floor. I did what he told me, and
he put it inside me.
I did what he wanted, but then he
wanted me to suck his dick. I said, ‘No, I don’t
want to do that. Please don’t make me do
that.’ He said, ‘OK, will you let all of my home-
boys do you like this?’ I said yes.
I said that so he wouldn’t beat me up.
The next day, I went and told the sergeant,
and he said, ‘What are you doing here, any-
way? You shouldn’t be over here with these
guys.’ All those guys in that whole wing were
life sentences or came off death row. They all
killed people. They were murderers and rap-
ists. They were all gang members.
I don’t know what I was doing there. I
guess they put me there because I was com-
plaining about the other unit, so they said,
‘Put him here and see how long he lasts.’I was in that cell with him for a week,
and it went on all that week. It happened ev-
ery night, and during the day when he was
working in laundry he would come and tell
me to put the towel up and close the door
and tell his homeboys to watch out for him.
He let two of his homeboys do it too.
I told the sergeant that [my cellmate] was
in there raping me. The sergeant did not want
to hear me, so I told the chaplain that I was
being raped by my cellmate. Nothing hap-
pened. I told another inmate that my cellmate
was forcing me to have sex, and he said, ‘If
you’re not doing anything about it, you must
want it.’
I was so mad at myself because I did not
fight the guy. I should have hit him in his
mouth and been a man. I was sick, and I used
that as an excuse.
I wasn’t raised to be a fighter. I was raised
in a ‘Leave it to Beaver’ neighborhood in a
nice little town where everyone keeps their
lawns nice. I never learned how to fight. One
day [my cellmate] and those other guys beat
me up so bad my nose cracked and I couldn’t
breathe any more.
I never thought this would happen to me,
because I considered myself a badass, but
these guys were hard core. They can cut your
throat and watch you bleed and sit there and
eat a sandwich.
The only way I could get out of there
was to rip out my catheter and the rods in my
I feel like I’m less than a man. I
get reminded every day by
these inmates and officers—they tell me that I’m a whore,
that I’m a punk.
Troy Bishop is a
39-year-old man
who grew up in a
working-class
home in Illinois. He
began smoking
marijuana at age
nine or ten and
continued to use
marijuana and
barbiturates
as a way to
self-medicate his
epilepsy. He began
using cocaine at 16
and later injected
heroin and
cocaine. He startedstealing to support
his habit, and
served several
short jail and
prison sentences.
In 1993, he was
sentenced to 25
years in prison for
possession of
cocaine under
Texas’ habitual
offender law.Testimony: Troy BishopThe U.S. War on Drugs    27arm. I ripped them out, and blood started
squirting everywhere, and they took me to the
hospital. A little later, they let me out early
because the prison was so overcrowded.
I kept thinking about what happened in
the cell with [my cellmate]. I was doing drugs
as soon as I got out. I got busted again within
six months, and before long I was back in
prison.
When I went back in, everyone knew
what happened before. One day I was in the
day room and these guys came in and held a
welding rod to my throat. They said, ‘You’re
either going to ride, or you’re going to pay us
to protect you.’ I told the sergeant about it,
and he said I should make an equalizer. He
meant I should make a knife.
I made a stainless-steel double-blade
knife out of a receptacle cover. It was a seven-
inch blade and when they came back, I came
out of my cell with it—I did that so I could be
seen with it. Ever since then, for seven years,
I’ve been in administrative segregation.
I had to do something. It was either me
or them. Otherwise, I knew it was never go-
ing to stop.
I still have dreams about this crap. I wake
up stressed out—I feel like I have to get out
of my cell, because the walls are closing in.
My head is full of pressure. I don’t have a
cellmate, so I don’t have to worry about him
getting me, but I’m still living this nightmare
of these guys beating up on me. That’s when
I start cutting my arms.Every time I cut myself real bad they send
me off for a psychiatric evaluation. They ask
me what’s wrong, and I tell them again that I
was raped. They say there is no medicine to
cure that, and I need to get over it. They say I
have an anger problem and I need to watch
my temper.
I feel like I’m less than a man. I get re minded
every day by these inmates and officers—they
tell me that I’m a whore, that I’m a punk.
This is my first drug charge in my whole
entire life, and it was only four-fifths of a gram,
and they gave me 25 years. I had a job and I
was a taxpayer, and they gave me 25 years
for a little bit of cocaine.
They use the drug laws to incarcerate mi-
norities. The prison system is a warehouse with
a revolving door, because there is no rehabili-
tation. They don’t give us any help. I have sat
there for seven years, and I’ve gotten no help
at all.The prison system is a
warehouse with a revolving
door, because there is norehabilitation. They don’t give
us any help. I have sat there for
seven years, and I’ve gotten nohelp at all.Testimony (cont’d): Troy Bishop28    Stories from InsideI had a lot of different cellmates. They
would put you in a cell with anyone.
They put me in a cell with this one guy, I
don’t know what he was in for. For the first
couple of days, everything was okay, but one
night I woke up because he was holding a
razor blade attached to a toothbrush to my
neck.
He was a big guy, and he had me pinned.
There was nothing I could do. He forced him-
self on me. He sodomized me.
I didn’t report it. I didn’t want to keep it
to myself, but I felt like I had no choice. Noth-
ing was going to be done about it. The dam-
age was already done. I was going to prison.
I didn’t want to make things worse for me in
there.
The first couple of years were the hard-
est. I was trying to deal with it the best way I
knew how. I smoked weed in here. I listened
to music. I did whatever I could to block it
out. It messed with my head. I pride myself
on being a man. I pride myself on being ableto meet all physical challenges.
I sit and I wonder what I could have done
differently. That’s when the dark side comes
out. That’s when the monster rears its ugly
head. I used to think about what I would do
to him if I saw him again. I would think about
beating him. I would think about killing him.
But when my thoughts go way out there, I
rein them in. I don’t want to throw my life
away. I want to get out of here.I served time at another prison where
they kept people in dorms that used to be
gyms and rec rooms. That kind of thing hap-
pened all the time. It doesn’t matter if you’re
affiliated [with a gang]. There was this guy,
and they moved a youngster into his dorm, a
young Crip, and that guy didn’t care that he
was affiliated. He sodomized him. If they can
get the drop on you in a confined situation,
with no retaliation, they’re going to do it.
I knew what I was doing [when I sold
drugs], but the crime doesn’t fit the time. I got
14 years, and I never even touched the drugs.
I’m not a violent person. You can look at my
history and see that it’s wrong. It doesn’t fit.
These drug laws aren’t there to help so-
ciety. If they wanted to stop drugs from com-
ing into the country, they would stop them.
They’re creating jobs for a whole class of
people by locking up a whole other class of
people. You build a prison, you’re helping an
entire community. We’ve given them job se-
curity with our stupidity.
I didn’t report it. I didn’t want to keep it to myself, but I felt like I
had no choice. Nothing was going to be done about it. The
damage was already done.These drug laws aren’t there to
help society. If they wanted to
stop drugs from coming into thecountry, they would stop them.“Frank Johnson” is a
39-year-old man
who grew up in Long
Beach, California, as
one of eight children
in a household
headed by a single
mother and a series
of stepfathers. He
began running the
streets and smoking
marijuana at age 13.
Eventually, he was
introduced to PCP,
and began breaking
into houses to
support his drug
habit. As a teenager,
he was sent to the
California Youth
Authority twice for
burglary and, once
released, began
selling crack cocaine.
He was arrested
twice for selling
crack, and was sent
to county jail and
state prison. In 1997,
he was arrested
again after a
girlfriend sold a $20
rock of cocaine.
To avoid being
sentenced to
25-years-to-life
under California’s
three-strikes law, he
accepted a plea
bargain and is
currently serving a
13-year sentence in
a California
state prison.Testimony: Frank JohnsonThe U.S. War on Drugs    29
I was a few weeks from graduating high
school. I attended a party at a local hotel,
celebrating a friend’s birthday.
Another birthday guest initiated our ar-
rests that evening when he unwittingly
dropped a lump of hashish in the hotel’s lobby,
witnessed by a security officer. The security
officer followed our friend up to our room,
and then summoned police. Everyone of age
was arrested.
Taken to the county jail for processing, I
imagined I could call my parents there to ar-
range my release.
I was wrong. It was three days before I
could call my parents.
‘General pop’ was a large cage holding
about 40 men. It was the dead of the night
when I got there. My cellmates were all await-
ing trial or serving county sentences. One was
a blond man with a mustache whose face was
beaten to a pulp—and who kept strictly to
himself.
Finding me sitting hopelessly on my bunk,
a trustee insisted that I join a card game to
‘cheer me up.’ The game only lasted three
hands. It then became a demand for sex.
Threats were made pointing out the example
of the cellie with the battered face.
Driving their point home, four other trust-
ees jammed my ribs with broomsticks and
mop handles. I tried to call for help. Repeat-
edly I had my breath beat from my lungs.
Curled up on the floor, my arms protected
my head.
Dark memories recall being dragged to a
bunk obscured by army blankets at the far-
thest end of the cell from the turnkey’s office.
One guy said, ‘Now you have to give me
head.’
I had never even heard the term before.
The scariest part was I lacked the first clue
what was going to go down until it alreadyhappened. I’m glad that there were only six
guys. Six is only the best of my recollection. It
might have been more. I don’t recall their
faces, except a couple.
I didn’t even see most of their faces.
There was near-zero supervision in that
jail. No guard had line of sight into that cell.
The guards’ office was at the end of a hall-
way at the cellblock’s end, and their TV was
blaring 24/7.
The only time I ever saw a guard was
when they brought a prisoner in or took one
out, or when they inspected the cell in the
morning to ensure their trustees had swept it
with those brooms and mops.
Released—and a deal was made to ex-
punge my arrest if I enlisted in the military.
That’s how I became a Vietnam era veteran.
In the service I abused alcohol and drugs at
every opportunity. I felt worthless, and I only
further reinforced this feeling—trapped in a
self-fulfilling prophecy.
I’ve made so many poor decisions trying
to cope with a nearly inextinguishable sense of
shame, I’ve never really forgiven myself. I have
recurring issues with guilt and trust today. IChance Martin is
a 52-year-oldSan Francisco manfrom a working-class home inGary, Indiana.University-bound,instead hewas forced tovolunteer formilitary serviceduring theVietnam War
because of a drugarrest beforegraduating fromhigh school. Fornearly threedecades after that,Mr. Martinstruggled withmental illness,drug abuse,suicidal ideation,and homelessness.Today, Mr. Martin
works days at alaw office, andnights as residentmanager in alow-incomehigh rise inSan Francisco.
I’ve made so many poor
decisions trying to cope with anearly inextinguishable sense
of shame, I’ve never really
forgiven myself. I have
recurring issues with guilt and
trust today. I can easily
conjure feelings ofworthlessness.Testimony: Chance Martin30    Stories from Insidecan easily conjure feelings of  worth lessness.
These traits have truly come to define me.
Being raped in that cell permanently dam-
aged my being. I can imagine if it happened
minus the rape I might have moved on sooner.
I’m overcoming it now, but it took me until I
was in my 40s to find any real perspective.
Being raped took 20 years from my life.
And I learned the law hurts Americans a
lot more than drugs hurt Americans.
We live in a country at war with itself.
America’s drug war has now created a
prison industrial complex that seems unableto fill its own insatiable need. It dispropor-
tionately exploits poor people and people of
color. It’s become its own grand addiction—
locking up America’s poor.
Today’s drug users are so stigmatized by
America’s failed War on Drugs, and lawmak-
ers are so intent to punish, rather than reha-
bilitate non-violent drug offenders, that
society somehow manages to overlook pris-
oner rape as the unspoken status quo in our
correctional institutions.
I was fortunate. It didn’t kill me.
Instead, it shaped the person I’ve become.
America’s drug war has now created a prison industrial
complex that seems unable to fill its own insatiable need. Itdisproportionately exploits poor people and people of color. It’s
become its own grand addiction—locking up America’s poor.Testimony (cont’d): Chance MartinThe U.S. War on Drugs    31Prison was something new for me. I
was kind of scared. It was okay at
first, and then they sent me to [another
facility]. That’s where everything started hap-
pening.
An officer on the second shift gave me
extra duty cleaning the bathrooms. He came
in and looked at me while I was in the bath-
room. I got this real funny feeling—a nasty
feeling. I came out and went to my cubicle.
He said he needed to see me. Instead of him
calling me to the desk, he called me to the
back, to the storage room.
He pulled up to me and I cringed and I
pushed him away. He said, ‘You got some big
tits.’ I pushed him and I ran out the room. I
ran back to my cubicle and my heart was beat-
ing so fast. I heard about stuff like that hap-
pening, but it had never, ever happened to
me. I was really scared and I was so far away
from home. I was all by myself.
So I told [two other inmates]. Then he called
me back. After I told [one inmate], she said,‘Don’t go talk to him. You don’t have to talk
to him.’ I asked her if she would go with me,
and she said yes. He wanted me to come back
to the storage room, but I stayed at the desk.
I said, ‘If there is anything you want to
say to me, you can say it right here in front of
[her].’ He said, ‘Well, you know you are on
sanction, and I could write you up a major
ticket.’ In other words he was telling me that
if I said anything to anybody that I would get
written up for a violation.Later on, after everybody went to sleep,
he was still around. He said, ‘Don’t forget
about that ticket.’ I never told anybody. I never
said anything else about it.
Later, when I took my shower and I got
dressed in my cubicle, I felt somebody watch-
ing me. When I looked up, he was standing
up there. He said, ‘You don’t have nothing to
be ashamed of. You have a nice set of hoot-
ers on you.’
They should leave their personal feelings
and desires at home. They should screen them
and they should listen when the inmates
scream rape or assault or abuse.
They are supposed to be there to protect
us from each other, so no one gets hurt. We
are not put there for their convenience. We
may have crossed the wrong side of the street
and have done something we shouldn’t have
done. We are there to do our time. We are
not there for their abuse, for them to violate
us and do what they please with us. I never
want to go back to prison. Never, becausethere is so much corruption.“Sue Linez” is a
44-year-old womanwho was raised byher father andgrandparentsafter her motherabandoned thefamily when Ms.Linez was threeyears old. She spenther childhoodriding in the cab ofher father’s bigrig or attendingchurch with hergrandfather, whowas a minister.She turned toprostitution in herteens and begansmoking marijuanain her early 20s. Sheeventually becameaddicted to crackcocaine. In 1999,she was sentencedto two-to-fiveyears in prison forpossession of a $20rock of cocaine.While imprisoned,Ms. Linez wasdiagnosed withparanoidschizophrenia.
We are there to do our time.
We are not there for their
abuse, for them to violate us
and do what they pleasewith us.Testimony: Sue Linez32    Stories from InsideThey came and arrested me at work.
I had a couple of pills on me. Then
they took me back to my house, and
found a marijuana plant. They took me to the
[jail]. I was charged with possession of pills
and cultivation of marijuana.
They put me in a cell with five other guys
in a four-man cell. There were not enough
beds, so I had to lay on the floor. They were
kicking me around. They started to make com-
ments that really scared me. They said, ‘you’re
going to play poker with us, and whoever loses
gets the ‘brown eye’ [gets sodomized]. We
played a hand, and they said, ‘you lose.’
The guy who raped me was the size of
Arnold Schwarzenegger. He was in there for
raping a college girl at gunpoint, but I didn’t
know that at the time. He pulled me onto his
bunk and told me to turn over, but I refused.
He said he had a shank under his bed. I never
saw it, but I believe he had it. He hit me so hard
in the face it sounded like a gun going off.
He raped me. Then he told two other
guys to rape me too. They only did it because
they were scared of him.
There were people being raped in the cell
next to me, they were screaming for help, and
the guards never came back to see what was
going on.
When they were done, he said, ‘Okay,
we’re going to do this again tomorrow night.’
The trustee came by a few hours later, and I
told him I feared for my life. Later, they took
me to the office, and I reported the rape.
The police said it was my fault for taking
drugs, and they hoped I had learned my les-
son. My parents said it was my fault, too.
I didn’t realize the damage until later.
When I got home, I took a shower, and Icouldn’t get out for an hour. I felt so filthy
and disgusting.
I feel like I didn’t fight hard enough, but
it wouldn’t have been much of a fight. I was
just paralyzed with fear.
It destroyed my life. It destroyed my ca-
reer as a singer and a musician. I couldn’t go
up and sing in front of people any more. The
pain was so bad from the rape, I turned to
alcohol and drugs. I ended up in the street. I
lived in a car for ten years. I was in the gutter
for 20 years. The pain was so bad that I wanted
to kill myself every day. I still do.
This rape came at a time when I was try-
ing to feel like a man. I lost all of the natural
joy I was born with. My emotions were dam-
aged so bad. I lost all my confidence. I with-
drew. I hid from people. Everyone knew about
the rape. People asked cruel questions and
said cruel things.
When you’re picked up for a crime, I don’t
care what it is, I feel it’s unfair to add sodomy
to the punishment. Doing the time is punish-ment enough.
The pain was so bad from the
rape, I turned to alcohol and
drugs. I ended up in the street.I lived in a car for ten years. I
was in the gutter for 20 years.
The pain was so bad that I
wanted to kill myself every day.
I still do.“David Smith”
is a 53-year-old
man who grew up
in an upper-
middle-class home
in Riverside County,
California. His first
experience with
drugs at age
14 ended in a
hospital emergency
room when he
overdosed on
asthma medication.
He began smoking
marijuana and
abusing prescrip-
tion drugs at 16.
At 19, he was
working in a factory
and pursuing a
promising music
career, but felt
he had ventured
too far into the
drug scene. After
a bad LSD trip,
he called his
parents for help,
and they called
the police.Testimony: David SmithThe Impact of the War On Drugs on Sexual Violence    33Prison Overcrowding
The war on drugs and its sentencing
laws have resulted in rampant incar-
ceration nationwide. Until the
1970s, the U.S. incarceration rate re-
mained relatively stable.75 However, in
the past three-and-a-half decades, thegrowth in the prison population has far
outstripped population growth as a
whole, primarily due to the increasedimprisonment for drug offenses.
76  The
U.S. inmate population has quadrupled
since 1980, to 2.27 million people in2004,
77 and the imprisonment of people
convicted of drug offenses has accelerated
at an even faster pace. The number ofstate prisoners serving drug sentences in-
creased more than tenfold, from 19,000
in 1980 to 256,000 in 2002.
78 The incar-
ceration rate for drug offenses is the most
dramatic in federal prisons—from 4,900
in 1980 to 86,972 in 2003.79
This massive prison population growth
affects more and more Americans. Ac-
cording to the U.S. Department of Jus tice,one in 140 people living in the United
States was incarcerated in 2004,80 and one
in 15 Americans will serve time in prison
during his or her lifetime if current in-carceration rates remain unchecked.
81
For men of color, imprisonment is evenmore likely—one in ten Latino men andone in three black men are estimated to
serve time during their lifetime.
82
The capacity to build and operate pris-
ons has simply not kept pace with these
skyrocketing incarceration rates. Federal,
state, and local expenditures for correc-tions increased between 1982 and 2003
from $9.5 billion to $60 billion.
83 None-
theless, overcrowding has continued toThe Impact of the War on
Drugs on Sexual Violence
The number of state prisoners serving
drug sentences increased more thantenfold, from 19,000 in 1980 to 256,000in 2002.  . . .  in federal prisons—from4,900 in 1980 to 86,972 in 2003.34    Stories from Insideplague facilities across the country. Ac-
cording to the Bureau of Justice Statis-
tics, the prison systems of 24 states and
the federal government were operatingabove capacity in 2004.
84 In that year,
California housed nearly 158,000 prison-
ers in state facilities designed to hold ap-proximately 80,000—operating at 195
percent capacity.
85 In 2003, Illinois pris-
ons were operating at 138 percent capac-ity.
86 Federal U.S. prisons were operating
at 140 percent capacity in 2000.87
The density of the prison population
and the lack of inmate space directly im-
pacts inmate misconduct and violence.88
Overcrowding makes services less avail-
able to inmates, while increasing noise,
heat, and tension. This dangerous com-
bination caused Roderick Hickman,then-Secretary of the California Depart-
ment of Corrections and Rehabilitation,
89
to conclude that overcrowding was the
most significant factor contributing to
prison violence.90
Double celling—where two inmates
are placed in a cell designed for one per-
son—is a common solution for over-
crowding that increases the risk for sexualviolence. As researchers from Human
Rights Watch noted:
Inmates frequently find themselves placed
among others whose background, criminal
history, and other characteristics makethem an obvious threat. In the worst cases,
prisoners are actually placed in the same
cell with inmates who are likely to victim-ize them—sometimes even with inmates
who have a demonstrated proclivity for
sexually abusing others.
91
In addition to increasing tensions,
overcrowding prevents corrections offi-cials from appropriately classifying in-
mates and effectively watching everyoneunder their guard. In Prison Masculinities ,
psychiatrist and prisoner rape expert
Terry Kupers relays an incident in which
a young man was raped by two gangmembers after all three were placed in
protective custody in an overcrowded fa-
cility. One officer was responsible for theentire unit, which included a day room, a
dining area, and two floors of cells with
open doors. Dr. Kupers concluded:
The victim should not have been housed
with the men who raped him. But in an
overcrowded system, it is unlikely that pris-oners of different security levels who areidentified as being in need of protectivecustody will be further segregated—staffmembers are so far behind classifying the
new pris oners that the assignment to pro-
tective cus tody is considered classification
enough.
92
Lack of Appropriate
Classification
The connection is clear between increas-
ing prison populations due to the war ondrugs, the failure of prison officials to
properly classify inmates, and the preva-
lence of rape behind bars. With manyprisons and jails operating well above ca-
pacity, predators have more opportuni-
ties to victimize non-violent prisonerswithout detection from corrections staff,
and officials have fewer opportunities to
make arrangements that would reduce thelikelihood of rape.
The non-violent individuals convicted
of drug possession and low-level dealingcomprise a large proportion of the
nation’s burgeoning prison population,
and are among the most vulnerable toThe Impact of the War On Drugs on Sexual Violence    35prisoner rape.93 Often unschooled in the
ways of prison life, inmates convicted of
non-violent drug offenses may lack the
street smarts to protect themselves be-hind bars. In assessing prisoners’ “poten-
tial for violence index,” researcher Daniel
Lockwood found that only 25 percent oftargets of violence were incarcerated for
a threat or act of force, compared to 58
percent of non-targets and 79 percent ofaggressors.
94
In its report, No Escape: Male Rape in
U.S. Prisons , Human Rights Watch noted
that many of the prisoner rape survivors
interviewed for the publication were in-
carcerated for drug offenses or pettycrime commonly associated with un-
treated addiction.
[A] striking proportion of [rape victims]
were nonviolent felons, many of them con-victed of crimes such as burglary, drug of-fenses, passing bad checks, car theft, etc. Ofthe minority of victims who were aware ofthe criminal history of the perpetrator ofabuse, many reported serious and violentcrimes. This general pattern is consistent, ofcourse, with the idea that perpetrators ofrape tend to be more violent people thanvictims, both inside and outside of prison.
95
The characteristics of likely perpetra-
tors and potential victims are known, butthese factors often are ignored when mak-
ing housing decisions. Despite efforts to
adopt an objective, uniform system ofclassification in U.S. prisons and jails,
many state departments of corrections do
not maintain the data needed to assess aninmate’s risk of harming others. Nearly
40 percent of corrections departments do
not collect information on whether aweapon was used during the offense.
96
Twelve of the nation’s 52 departments
of corrections do not gather informationon inmates’ history of violence and 17do not collect information on gang
membership.
97
San Francisco County jails, in contrast,
have used an effective classification sys-
tem since the 1980s. Originally createdto protect the city’s gay inmates, correc-
tions staff interview, assess, and assign
housing based on each inmate’s likelihoodof victimizing others.
98
Even where a proper system of classi-
fying inmates is in place, overcrowdinghas led many corrections officials to aban-
don their previous practice of at least seg-
regating vulnerable prisoners frompredators. A 19-year-old University of
Florida college student arrested in 2002
for possession of about an ounce of mari-juana serves as a telling example of a non-
violent drug offender who was victimized.
The teenager, who had no criminalrecord, was violently raped after being
placed in a cell in the Alachua County
jail with a 35-year-old career criminalawaiting trial for sexual battery. Jail and
city officials acknowledged that the two
should never have been placed in a celltogether, and attributed the mistake to
overcrowding and a flawed inmate clas-
sification system.
99
By housing non-violent prisoners with
violent ones, corrections officials have
created environments that virtually guar-antee assault. For example, Senior Judge
Donald P . Lay of the Eighth Circuit
Court of Appeals described meeting aThe characteristics of likely perpetrators
and potential victims are known, but thesefactors often are ignored when makinghousing decisions.36    Stories from Inside19-year-old who was convicted of mari-
juana possession and placed in a cell with
11 other inmates. Only after two days in
this housing arrangement was he given apsychological assessment. All he wrote on
the test was, “Help me, help me.” He had
been raped for nearly 48 hours.
100
Insufficient Rehabilitative
Services
While the war on drugs has punished
drug use, it has not assured that those whosuffer from a debilitating drug addiction
receive treatment. Fewer than 40 percent
of corrections facilities nationwide pro-vide drug treatment.
101 Even whereprograms do exist, the number of inmates
seeking treatment far outnumber the
available slots. While enduring long
waiting lists, prisoners remain idle and
frequently immerse themselves in the
violent culture of prisons.
Services are also scarce for inmates
who have been sexually assaulted. Men-
tal health counseling behind bars is rarely
confidential. On the contrary, counselorsare obliged to report to prison adminis-
trators any crime within their facility. In
many facilities, a corrections official ispresent for all post-rape counseling.
Inadvertently, then, a prisoner seeking
mental health assistance becomes a“snitch,” risking serious retaliation from
the perpetrator of the assault, and
possi bly others.
102The Impact of the War On Drugs on Sexual Violence    37
They put me in a day cell with five
other inmates. We were watching
‘Dragnet’ through the bars when one
of them started to stroke my hair and tell me
how pretty I was. He said he had been up-
state for two years, and I looked real sweet.
I pushed his hand away and tried to fo-
cus on the TV. He got really upset. He said,
‘You can’t push me away.’ He stroked my hair
again, and I pushed him again. He threw a
right cross that hit me in the right eye and
crushed my eye socket.
Even after all that, he was still intent on
raping me. I fell on the floor and pretended I
was having a seizure. He hit me pretty hard. I
was in enough pain that feigning a seizure
wasn’t that hard.
I must have convinced the other inmates
that I was dying. One of the other inmates
called for a guard. He said, ‘I’m not doing no
murder rap just so you can get your dick wet.’
The guards finally came and got me out of
there before he could do any more damage.
After I got hit I was interrogated by the
sheriffs and the detectives for hours without
medical attention. I refused to tell them what
happened. I didn’t know what they were go-
ing to do. I didn’t know if they were going toput me back in that cell with that guy. I didn’t
want to be labeled as a snitch.
Finally, they took me to a hospital. I was
in the hospital for a week, and eventually un-
derwent two surgeries. I still have wires in my
skull that show up in X-rays. I can still feel it.
One of my eyes doesn’t close all the way. My
face got shattered because I had a quarter-
gram of pot in my pocket.
The funny thing is, they were going to
release me after that, and I had to talk the
judge into giving me enough time so they
would be forced to fix the damage to my face.
The whole thing was ridiculous. The guy
who tried to rape me was in for armed rob-
bery. I hadn’t been convicted of anything, and
I was in a cell with a pretty violent guy.
I think the drug war is ridiculous. I think
it’s the height of American fascism. The drug
war makes criminals out of people who don’t
need to be criminals.Michael Piper is
a 50-year-oldadvertising agencynetwork managerwho lives on hissailboat in PortWashington, near
New York City.In 1974, he wasarrested forpossessing amarijuana cigarettebutt early on aSunday morningwhile out walkingin Tempe, Arizona.
The drug war makes criminals
out of people who don’t need
to be criminals.Testimony: Michael Piper38    Stories from InsideIt was just so common for stuff to happen
that it wasn’t called abuse. It was like
they’d walk in the showers and stand there
and have a conversation with us. You never
realized that was not allowed. We were
abused without even knowing we were be-
ing abused. It was so normal. It was just a
part of prison.
It was overcrowded so they closed down
the day rooms and put beds up. It’s always
been overcrowded. You usually have one of-
ficer for about 120 women. They can’t keep
an eye on everybody.
The warden let us sleep in our underwear
and bras if it got too hot in the dormitories,
even though it was against the rules. Stuff
went on that was just crazy. It made things
easier for them and for us as far as doing
something that you wanted to do.
One officer had a crush on me. He had
me lay down on the floor and gave me a back
rub with all my bunkies around. I was so un-
comfortable with him. I would wait for an-other officer to come in before I would get
up and go to the bathroom because I knew
he would try something. He would come and
tuck me in at night and tell me dirty jokes all
the time. I didn’t tell anyone, but other women
in the unit did. They called me up to a build-
ing on the night shift and asked me about it.
I said yes. They pulled him out of the unit. I
think he lost his job. I don’t know what hap-
pened.
Also, a [civilian] kitchen supervisor pulled
his dick out on me and told me to suck it.
That was in 1995. I had to go ask him to go
get us some bananas out of the storage area.
He called me back there with him. He said,
‘Look at it, look at it, ain’t it pretty?’ He tried
to kiss me. He told me I had soft lips.
I was so shocked. I didn’t know what to
do. He was so well-liked with all the inmates.They all liked him. So you couldn’t go and tell
on him because then you would have had
problems with inmates. He was one of their
favorites. I just said, ‘Oh my God.’ Then I left.
After that I stayed out of the kitchen be-
cause every time I would go in the kitchen he
would come up behind me and say, ‘You got
the softest lips,’ and would whisper in my ear.
So I would wait until he went home before I
would go in the kitchen. I skipped breakfast
and lunch for a couple of years.
Then there was the [civilian] quartermas-
ter. I was the seamstress, and he was my boss.He would feel up all the girls. I was in the
quartermaster room all the time and he would
have the girls come in wearing a skirt with no
panties on and have them sit on the desk. I’d
have my back to him. He would bring me
Vicodin if I wouldn’t say anything. ‘Look what
I got, I got a little present.’
He ended up getting fired in 1997 or
1998. The nursing staff seen him grabbing
the girls and told on him. Prior to that, he
was caught—he had this one girl come in with
a skirt on and to sit on a desk. He was all
excited because she wasn’t going to wear any
panties.
I was sewing and she came in and when
she was sitting on the desk, he was down on
his knees in front of her and the counselor
walked in and caught him and turned around
and went and got the lieutenant to come backThen there was the [civilian]
quartermaster. ...He would
feel up all the girls. ...He
would bring me Vicodin if Iwouldn’t say anything.“Hedda Lowry” is
a Midwestern
woman from a
middle-class
background who
started using
drugs at 16 when
her parents
divorced. She
began injecting
heroin with her
ex-husband at
27, and went to
prison for the
first time a year
later. She has
gone to prison
ten times for
drug offenses,
parole violations,
and other crimes
related to her
addiction.Testimony: Hedda LowryThe Impact of the War On Drugs on Sexual Violence    39in. The lieutenant came back in and escorted
the girl out. So they knew what was going on.
It was always there. I mean, there was
always some officer that was having sex with
somebody. They would bring us stuff in. It was
real open. It was like a soap opera. I had a
boyfriend then. We all had boyfriends that
were officers.
I didn’t have sex with him in prison, I had
sex with him after I got out. I wouldn’t. I wasnot bending over a box. He got fired for mess-
ing around with another inmate.
If an officer liked you, you could get away
with anything. Officers would give you their
phone numbers and tell you to call them. It
was like their lives were so intertwined with
ours when they shouldn’t have been. It was
like we were a part of their lives just like they
were a part of ours. They knew our families.
They told us everything about themselves. But
there was always the possibility that they
could write you up. They didn’t have to say it.
It was understood. You knew they had that
power.
It seems like everybody was in there for
something drug-related. They used drugs so
they went out and wrote checks or shoplifted.
I know it’s not everybody, but probably 80
percent of the women were in there for some-
thing drug-related.
To me, the women sell themselves short.
They lowered themselves. Officers would
bring them a piece of gum and they wouldshow them their breasts. I felt like they de-
graded themselves. I felt like it made all of us
look bad.They knew our families.
They told us everything about
themselves. But there was
always the possibility that
they could write you up. They
didn’t have to say it. It was
understood. You knew they
had that power.Testimony (cont’d): Hedda Lowry40    Stories from InsideMy roommate grabbed me by my arm
and told me I was going to be his. I
pulled away and told him I was in a
relationship with someone else, and was go-
ing to be faithful to that person. He said okay,
and I thought everything was fine.
The next night, we were on institutional
lockdown because of a riot on another unit.
After dinner, my roommate grabbed me by
the arm and tried to pull me from the top
bunk. Once my feet hit the floor, he shoved
me face-down onto his bed and grabbed my
neck like he was going to break it.
He said, ‘Nobody turns me down.’ He
pulled my pants and underwear from my waist
to my knees. He said if I made any loud noises,
he would hurt me. He raped me for about 30minutes. When he was done, he slapped me
on the butt and told me to go clean up.
I went to the sink and used tissue to clean
myself up. I realized I was bleeding.
When an officer came in with the mail, I
tried to tell him what happened, but I real-
ized that my roommate knew him from the
street, so I knew it wouldn’t do any good to
tell him. I sat in the doorway the rest of the
night. Not one officer made a security check.
At 5 a.m., when the doors opened, I went
to an officer and tried to get medical atten-
tion. He said no. When the shift changed at 7
a.m., I tried to talk to anyone I could, but they
were all too busy.
That afternoon, I spoke with a sergeant,
who contacted the unit administrator, a ma-
jor, and the warden. When those three were
questioning me, they actually made fun of me.
The major said that because I am gay, the sex
must have been consensual. He said I got what
I deserved.
Since that day, I’ve been harassed by
other officers. The system did nothing to pro-
tect me or help me after it happened.The major said that because I
am gay, the sex must have
been consensual. He said I got
what I deserved.“Carl Shepard” is
a gay Mississippi
man who was
sent to prison
twice for charges
related to his
drug addiction.
He was first
incarcerated in
1990 for writing
a bad check. In
2000, he was
sentenced to five
years in prison
for grand larceny.
During that
incarceration, he
was placed in a
locked-down
drug and alcohol
rehabilitation
unit.Testimony: Carl ShepardThe Impact of the War On Drugs on Sexual Violence    41“James Davis”
is a 43-year-oldgay man fromFlorida who wassentenced in 1996to five years in aVirginia federal
prison for con-spiracy to possesscocaine. Whilethere, he becameupset aboutprison conditionsand beganwriting letters topoliticians andhuman rightsorganizations.He alsocomplained aboutbeing sexuallyharassed byanother prisonerwho was a knownsexual predator. Ifiled two sexual harassment claims against
another inmate in January 1999. I was then
placed in segregation for 30 days. I was
told this was for my own protection.
When the 30 days were up, I was placed
in the cell of the inmate who had been sexu-
ally harassing me. I was told that the warden
ordered this cell assignment, even though sev-
eral staff members recommended that we be
separated. I believe I was put into a cell with
this predator in retaliation for the complaints
I made.
I was sexually assaulted that same night.
The man who assaulted me was a known
sexual predator who was serving a 20-year
sentence for sexual battery of a child.
The next morning, I reported the assault
and asked for medical attention. Instead, I was
thrown back into segregation for another ten
days. My file shows that the doctor called the
segregation unit several times asking to treat
me, but all requests were denied. After being
released from segregation, I was finally al-
lowed to see a doctor.
Although I reported the assault, nothing
ever happened. I hold the warden responsiblefor my attack, even more than the assailant.
I have since been released, and suffer
from post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety,
and depression as a result of this assault.
My assault was an example of the collu-
sion between guards and rapists behind bars.
Letting this attack go unpunished sends a
message to prison staff and guards that it’s
okay to use prison rape as a punishment and
a tool to control inmates.
My assault was an example of
the collusion between guards
and rapists behind bars. Letting
this attack go unpunishedsends a message to prison
staff and guards that it’s okay
to use prison rape as a
punishment and a tool to
control inmates.Testimony: James Davis42    Stories from InsideI am a first-time, non-violent drug offender
who began transitioning from a male to a
female gender identity in 1999 by under-
going hormone therapy and adopting a femi-
nine voice and mannerisms. When I was sent
to a men’s prison in 2002, I had long hair and
36-DD saline breast implants.
When I arrived at the reception center in
Orlando, I stepped off the bus and was strip-
searched in front of two guards and about a
dozen male inmates.
A sergeant yelled, ‘Look at the tits on that
one! Those are the best-looking tits I’ve ever
seen on a man.’ He pointed me out to a six-
foot, three-inch inmate and said to him, ‘You
like that one, don’t you? I’m going to put you
in a cell with that one.’ Another sergeant
called me ‘tits’ and ‘titty man.’
Normally, you go through the reception
process dressed only in boxer shorts. They gave
me a white T-shirt that you could see through.
While the rest of my group went through the
intake process, I was left sitting on a benchuntil the afternoon so that all the other in-
take inmates could see me. It was humiliating
to be placed on display for a hundred or more
inmates.
My head was completely shaved, and my
sports bra was taken away, because ‘males’
don’t need bras in prison.
I was placed in a locked-down ‘protec-
tive management’ unit with murderers and a
predator who had a prior ‘relationship’ with a
transsexual before my arrival.
That predator befriended me, and I
thought I could trust him.My stress had gotten the best of me. My
back hurt, and when the predator offered to
rub it, I agreed.
It happened in my room. I was lying on
my stomach wearing shorts and a t-shirt. He
kept rubbing lower and lower, and I started
to get up. He had already unfastened his pants
and pulled them down.
I might have been able to stop him if I
had realized what he was up to even seconds
earlier. One of his arms was on my shoulders,
pressing me into a pillow. He used the other
arm to pull away my shorts and insert his penis.
I yelled for him to stop, but nobody heard
me. He kept saying, ‘Yeah, you like that, bitch.
I knew you wanted it.’
When he was done, he left, and I closed
and locked my door. I cried all night. I was
ashamed of feeling so helpless.
I questioned what I was even doing at
the second-worst prison in the state. How
could this happen? Why wouldn’t anyone
help me?
I distrusted the sergeant on the midnight
shift, so I didn’t tell anyone what happened
until morning. I placed my boxers and shorts
into a plastic bag and gave it to an officer.
They took me to the medical office, and then
to the North Florida Reception Center to do a
rape kit and blood test. I was never given the
results of either. I gave a statement to a lieu-
tenant, who called the man who raped me a
predator.
I asked for an update on the investiga-
tion and prosecution of the man who raped
me, but I never got an answer. I requested
I was placed in a locked-down ‘protective management’ unit with
murderers and a predator who had a prior ‘relationship’ with atranssexual before my arrival.“Sophia Brooks”
is a 34-year-old
transgender
prisoner currently
serving a seven-
year sentence in a
Florida state
prison for drug
trafficking. A U.S.
Army veteran,
she was arrested
outside a
drugstore after
getting into
the car of an
acquaintance who
she later learned
was a police
informant.
Ms. Brooks was
convicted for
possessing 1,000
pills that were
in another
acquaintance’s car
and which she
said she never
touched or knew
existed. Her story
was compiled
from a series
of letters she
wrote to SPR.Testimony: Sophia BrooksThe Impact of the War On Drugs on Sexual Violence    43the rapist’s HIV and STD test results, but got
no response.
I wasn’t allowed to shower or get any
psychological counseling. I was driven hours
away to another prison. I was placed in con-
finement for more than a week, then assigned
to a better, but very similar, unit as before.
I fought long and hard to get out of that
unit. I am now at an adjoining work camp.
My living conditions are better now. This is
the type of prison I should have come to in
the first place.
In addition to being placed into a locked-
down unit with murderers and a predator who
raped me, I’ve been threatened, sexually ha-
rassed, and humiliated by Florida Department
of Corrections staff. I’ve been transferred six
times, placed in confinement five times, de-
nied medical treatment, and denied work op-
portunities, all due to my appearance.It took me months to become, once
again, the person I was before I began my
gender transition. With the exception of my
implants, I could pass for just another man in
prison. Unfortunately, not all transsexuals can
once again become who they were before
transition.
The Florida Department of Corrections
needs to acknowledge the problem of plac-
ing minimum-custody transsexuals into
locked-down protective management areas
with mixed custody levels.
Enough is enough. This must never hap-
pen to anyone else, ever again.
Enough is enough. This must
never happen to anyone else,ever again.Testimony (cont’d): Sophia Brooks44    Stories from InsideAt the time I was working in the
kitchen, but he got me assigned to
a one-on-one maintenance detail
with him. He approached me. He was very,
very subtle. If I was squatting down by the
tool bag, instead of grabbing the tool bag, he
would grab my leg or brush up against me. It
progressed from that to kissing and fondling.
We had sexual intercourse.
It was a very old prison. They had under-
ground tunnels that the maintenance had keys
to go through. Why they allowed him to be
with one female one-on-one—I don’t know,
because it wasn’t allowed.
He would always bring me a pack of ciga-
rettes. He would bring me doughnuts in the
morning; just the simplest things you take for
granted. You really tend to cherish things like
that. It went on for a couple of years.
I was really afraid of him. It went on until
he hit me on the side of my head and split my
eye open. I didn’t get any stitches. I have a
scar. We were down in the basement and he
was really forceful, really wanting to have in-
tercourse and me not wanting to. I thought Iheard somebody up the stairs. Sometimes
other officers act as a lookout for the ones
that have sex with the inmates, but I was
afraid it was someone who would get me in
trouble. I didn’t want to get into trouble and
I kept telling him no.
Somehow the administration found out
about it. They transferred me to another
prison at 11:00 at night.
They prosecuted him, but he only got
convicted of disorderly conduct. He owned
his own heating and cooling company in the
area and he did a lot of work for a couple of
judges and a couple of churches, so he knew
a lot of people.
I got released a few months later. He
contacted me after I was released, and we
had a physical relationship for another year
or so. My daughter was taken away by the
state and I was trying to get custody of her
again. He promised to help me, but when I
refused to have sex with him, he got me sent
back to prison.
Because I was sexually molested as a
child, I felt helpless. I guess it just inverted
me into a shell. I felt like I had no control over
my life.
I feel taken advantage of. I feel manipu-
lated. I am angry with the administration for
covering it up.
This is how it is in here—a world within
a world. You go with the flow. You just roll
with it because that is how it is. It is a no-win
situation. You have to do it for survival.Sometimes other officers act as
a lookout for the ones thathave sex with the inmates . . .
He would always bring me
a pack of cigarettes. He would
bring me doughnuts in the
morning; just the simplest
things you take for granted.
You really tend to cherish
things like that. It went on for
a couple of years.“Betty Vasquez” is
a 38-year-old
woman from an
upper-middle-class
Midwestern family
who was sexually
abused by her
uncle from the time
she was five years
old. Her uncle, an
anesthesiologist,
regularly drugged
her at bedtime
before sexually
molesting her. She
began using heroin
at age 12, and was
sentenced to prison
for the first time
at 19 after being
convicted of drug
possession and
burglary. In 1993,
after being
returned to prison
on a probation
violation, she was
sexually abused
by a civilian
maintenance
supervisor.Testimony: Betty VasquezThe Impact of the War On Drugs on Sexual Violence    45I was taken to jail, and two days later I found
myself in the drug rehabilitation program
offered by the county jail. It was the first
drug program I ever encountered that insisted
I go on drugs, and continue to take my myriad
prescribed controlled substances.
On Easter Sunday, while in my jail cell
during lights out, it happened. My cellmate,
‘Todd,’ pushed me down onto my cot, ripped
down my orange jumpsuit, and forced his
penis into my anus. It hurt so much. My
screams didn’t awaken the guards, and no one
came to the cell. I lay there, face-to-face un-
derneath Todd, crying and angry, with my nose
bloodied.
The next lights out, it happened again.
After the second rape, I knew I couldn’t live
at the mercy of the sexual attacks of this preda-
tor. I requested a transfer to protective cus-
tody, and awaited lights out with a quiet rage.
Todd came at me, as I expected, and with all
of my might and all of my will, I punched him
in the face. All six-foot-plus of him tumbledacross the cell. The other cellmate said nothing.
The guards came 20 minutes later, and I
was taken to solitary confinement. I was then
transferred to protective custody, where I met
a couple of other inmates who had facedTodd’s rapes. I lived there in a bubble for 32
days, confined to my cell for 23 hours a day.
I eventually was released from jail, feel-
ing several centuries older in my soul. My in-
nocence was lost. I eventually returned to
Boston, leaving my then-pregnant wife be-
hind, and started a new life. I am blessed to
have found a recovery program for my addic-
tion, loving friends, and a caring therapist.
I’m trying hard to deal with the emotional
fallout. Some days, it feels as though my life
is a nuclear wasteland, like I am a newcomer
to a strange, foreign planet. Some nights, I
almost feel as though the rapes are happen-
ing again.
The issues that confront me—the need
to stay away from alcohol and drugs, the con-fusion about my sexual orientation, the truth
that I may never see my own child—some-
times overwhelm me.
I’ve been diagnosed with post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). I still feel very fright-
ened, scared, and timid inside, although my
outward projection of myself is nothing like
that.
Perhaps the scariest part of being raped
is the desire to go on with life as if nothing
ever happened, the need for control in subse-
quent sexual encounters, the pain that I am
in this all alone.
The frightening and outrageous part of
this is that the correctional officers were aware
of both rapes, and did nothing to stop the
rapist. I’m as angry at the system, and the state
of Florida, as I am at the man who raped me.“William Kent” is a
Massachusettsman who leftNew England forFlorida seekingbetter economicopportunities forhimself and hisnow-ex-wife.Although theywere looking for anew life, the couplebrought theiralcoholism andaddiction withthem. During anencounter withpolice outside theirmotel, Mr. Kent’swife becamecombative,and despitehis attempts tocooperate, bothwere arrested. Heeventually postedbail, and wished toreturn to NewEngland, but wasforced to remain inFlorida to attend tohis court case. Thecouple went to liveat a homelessshelter, and Mr.Kent was arrestedagain after a scufflewith the pastorwho ran theshelter.
Perhaps the scariest part of
being raped is the desire to go
on with life as if nothing ever
happened, the need for control
in subsequent sexual
encounters, the pain that I am
in this all alone.I eventually was released fromjail, feeling several centuries
older in my soul.Testimony: William Kent46    Stories from InsideThe relationship between drug policy
and rape behind bars is clear—and
it is a dangerous connection that has
been ignored for far too long. The fol-lowing policy changes would help end the
sexual abuse of people convicted of non-
violent drug offenses.
1. Employ standardized classification
systems that effectively separatelikely rape victims from likely sexualpredators.
An effective inmate classification system
that identifies vulnerable prisoners and
predators is an essential element in keep-ing prisons and jails safe. Simply put,
likely victims should never be housed
with likely sexual predators. A well-de-veloped classification system requires
maintaining critical data about inmates
and ensuring that corrections staff aretrained in assessing incoming prisoners
through a combination of sound judg-
ment and standardized tests. Staff mustalso be responsive to the need to re-clas sifyinmates if they are preyed upon or are
victimized by another inmate, or if they
prey upon or victimize others.
2. Provide vulnerable inmates with
voluntary, non-punitive protective
housing.
Inmates should not have to endure abuse
in order to be protected. Any time after
the initial classification, vulnerable in-
mates should have the opportunity to re-quest and receive protective housing that
effectively separates them from likely
perpetrators. Those who request protec-tive housing should not be penalized for
this decision through a loss of privileges
and programs. Subjecting vulnerable in-mates—or worse, recent rape victims—
to 23-hour-a-day lock-down is no way to
protect them. It is psychologically diffi-cult to endure such isolation, it discour-
ages inmates from seeking help, and it
effectively punishes the vulnerable. T rueprotective custody must ensure that pris-
oners with a history of violence areRecommendationsRecommendations    47housed separately from non-violent
inmates.
3. In the aftermath of an assault,
immediately separate perpetrators
from victims.
Once an assault has occurred, corrections
officials must act swiftly and decisively to
protect the victim and prevent further
attacks. Perpetrators must immediatelybe separated from victims. Victims should
be protected without isolation or punish-
ment; punitive segregation should be re-served only for perpetrators. In addition,
classification determinations should be
re-examined to account for the violentbehavior of perpetrators and the vulner-
ability of victimized inmates.
4. Train corrections officials on
how to prevent and respond to
prisoner rape.
When allegations of sexual assault are made
by a non-violent drug offender or otherprisoner, action must be taken in a timely
and professional manner. All corrections
officials, particularly those who interactdirectly with inmates, must be educated
about how to protect vulnerable prison-
ers and how to respond when an inmatehas been threatened or sexually assaulted.
5. Ensure that victimized inmates
have access to safe and effectivemedical and mental health servicesthat are not contingent upon filing
a report.
An inmate who has been victimized
should be provided with acute trauma
care, including treatment of injuries,medical examination, STD testing, andemergency mental health counseling.
There should also be physical and men-
tal health care follow-up with monitor-
ing for post-traumatic stress disorder,depression, and other mental health con-
sequences. As non-violent survivors are
often targeted for future attacks, theconfidentiality of these services is vital to
protecting these inmates’ safety. Aftercare
treatment should never be dependentupon a victim’s willingness to press
charges against the perpetrator, and
medical and mental health professionalsshould be able to provide treatment with-
out filing a report against an inmate’s will.
6. Establish a confidential complaint
system that encourages reportingsexual violence without increasingthe risk of future attacks or any
other form of retaliation.
When an inmate who has been assaulted
chooses to file a complaint of sexualabuse, he or she should not be punished,
either directly or indirectly. Complaints
and reports of sexual violence should al-ways remain absolutely confidential. Fi-
nally, there should be multiple avenues
for filing a complaint so that an inmate isnever required to report grievances to an
abusive staff member.
7. Reduce incarceration rates for
people convicted of non-violent
drug offenses.
Reducing incarceration rates for drug
crimes would go a long way toward eas-
ing overcrowding and keeping non-vio-
lent offenders free from the dangers ofprison life. Harsh mandatory sentences,
truth-in-sentencing and three strikes laws48    Stories from Insideneither treat addiction nor prevent crime.
By increasing the availability of alterna-
tives to incarceration and allowing judi-
cial discretion in sentencing, people withnon-violent drug convictions can receive
appropriate treatment without enduring
the trauma of sexual violence in prison.For minor offenses, such as marijuana
possession, reducing the use of incarcera-
tion would lessen overcrowding, allowcorrections officials to focus on the more
dangerous inmates, and protect people
who are especially vulnerable to sexualviolence behind bars.8. Utilize diversion programs and
treatment services to address
drug addictions.
Providing quality drug treatment and re-
habilitation services would effectivelyaddress the disease of addiction and re-
duce the burden on the criminal justice
system by lowering rates of recidivismand overcrowding. In addition to offer-
ing treatment inside corrections facilities,
diversion programs should be establishedand used, allowing judges to sentence
non-violent offenders to drug treatment
as an alternative to incarceration.Recommendations    49As a person suffering from gender iden-
tity disorder, prison life has been even
harder. While it is tough for any non-
violent offender to be in any prison, it was
even worse for me to be perceived as a fe-
male by my all male peers. I cannot even
begin, or do not know where to start, as far
as the years of unwanted sexual assault, rape,
physical abuse, and games that prisoners and
staff have subjected me to in pursuit of their
own sexual release.
I can remember using the bathroom in a
temporary facility. Just sitting there using the
bathroom, a guy walks into the stall. I looked
up in surprise and asked what was he doing.
He told me to shut up, and told me his friend
was standing at the entrance to make sure
the coast was clear. With his friend’s assur-
ance, the man unbuttoned his pants, un-
zipped, pulled down his underwear and pulled
out his penis. When I asked him to leave me
alone, he pulled out a shank from his pocket
and told me to suck his dick. He also startedslapping my face with it and became more
aggressive with his verbal instructions. Simi-
lar events happened several hundred times
over the years.
Similarly, when taking a shower, men
would enter the shower with me and force
me to give them oral sex or sodomize me. On
some occasions two guys would sexually as-
sault me at once.
When inside Jackson, there was a guard
who liked to watch another prisoner have his
way with me. A lieutenant, a third shift guard
and my teaching supervisor, all have sexually
assaulted me under the pretext of segrega-
tion if I did not comply with their requests.
Finally in February of 2005 prison offi-cials diagnosed me as having GID (Gender
Identity Disorder). About a month later I was
given an individual cell, and the ability to take
private showers. Despite the positive change,
I still wake up in the middle of the night shak-
ing, looking around my cell to make sure that
no one is around to rape me.
Right now, an inmate somewhere is get-
ting raped. Right now, an inmate somewhere
is going through the same things I described.
Right now, as I often did before, an inmate is
contemplating suicide. Right now, an inmate
is quietly crying himself (or herself) to sleep.
Another inmate is waking up just having had
a nightmare about his attackers. Yet another
inmate is being carried to the infirmary after
being raped or beaten up. Meanwhile, rape
test kits sit on the shelf. Psychologists who
want to report the crimes to the state police
are sternly advised against it, relocated or ter-
minated for other reasons down the road.Jami Naturalite
is a 44-year-oldtransgenderwoman bornand raised inMichigan. Atthe age of 24,Jami wasincarcerated ina men’s prisonfor aiding andabetting, and
conspiracy todeliver 3.54grams ofcocaine. Jami isstill serving her10-to-40-yearsentence.
Right now, an inmate
somewhere is getting raped.Right now, an inmate
somewhere is going through
the same things I described.Right now, as I often did before,
an inmate is contemplating
suicide. Right now, an inmate isquietly crying himself (or
herself) to sleep.Testimony: Jami Naturalite
50    Stories from InsideIwas charged with presence in an ille-
gal establishment, possession of the
instruments of a crime, violation of the
1937 Marijuana Tax Act, and impersonating
a federal officer. The impersonating a federal
officer charge consisted of me having a joke
ID card in my wallet. That charge and the tax
act charge were dropped.
The other two charges remained. The
possession of the instruments of a crime
charge consisted of the claim that I had a
marijuana smoking pipe in my suitcase. I was
a hippie—I had a gas mask bag—I never
owned a suitcase, no self-respecting hippie in
1968 owned a suitcase. I had no drugs or
paraphernalia; it was simply a routine police
frame-up.
I got up in front of the judge, said I was
not guilty and was given a trial date some
three months down the line. Since I couldn’t
make bail, I had to go to the D.C. jail. I was
absolutely scared to death—an 18-year-old
white kid from middle class suburbia beingplaced in an inner-city, predominately black,
jail. There were remarks made on the bus on
the way to the jail: ‘White boy is gonna get
his ass reamed. You are in for it. You are go-
ing to be somebody’s bitch.’ When we got
there, we were all made to strip and we were
humiliated in front of everyone else, given ill-
fitting clothing and put in cells.
One day later, after lunch, I went back tomy cell. Instead of the small, white fellow that
had been in there, there was a very large black
man inside. I stood outside the door because
I was afraid to go in. One of the guards yelled,
‘Get the fuck in your cell.’ The black guy
grabbed me and pulled me inside. At that
point, the cell doors closed.
He sat me down and said we were go-
ing to play cards. I said I didn’t know how to
play cards. He said, ‘Fuck this shit, you gonna
suck my dick.’ I was just floored. I got up to
scream for help from the guards. The man hit
me in the gut, as hard as I’ve ever been hit in
my life. I nearly lost consciousness.
He pinned me down to the bars and had
his fist in front of my face. This guy probably
outweighed me by a factor of three. There
was no way in hell I stood a chance. He threw
me down onto the bunk, tore my pants off,
and anally raped me.
I was terrified and in tremendous pain.
People on the outside seemed to know what
was going on, and they were making a lot ofnoise to cover up my protests.
After he had finished abusing me, he lit-
erally lifted me up and sat me down, and said,
‘You’re my bitch. You belong to me and you’re
going to do anything I say. You’re going to
fuck anyone I tell you to.’
When they opened the cell doors, I was
frozen in place. It was lock-down time and
they began closing the doors. I stuck my ankle
The possession of the instruments of a crime charge consisted of
the claim that I had a marijuana smoking pipe in my suitcase. I
was a hippie—I had a gas mask bag—I never owned a suitcase,
no self-respecting hippie in 1968 owned a suitcase. I had nodrugs or paraphernalia; it was simply a routine police frame-up.
Venerable Kobutsu
Malone is a
56-year-old
American Zen
Buddhist priest
who has spent
most of the last two
decades teaching
meditation in
prisons, serving as
a volunteer
Buddhist Chaplain,
and ministering
to prisoners on
death row. As a
teenager in the
mid-1960s, he was
involved in the
“psychedelic
revolution.” In
1968, at the age of
18, he was arrested
during a raid
at a friend’s
Washington,
D.C. house.Testimony: Venerable Kobutsu MaloneRecommendations    51in the moving door and screamed as loud as I
could. They took me to the hospital, and I fi-
nally told an orderly what happened to me.
They made a report and a doctor arrived five
to six hours later to do a rectal examination.
A corrections captain then came in and
said: ‘You’re a homosexual, right? You asked
for this. You wanted this nigger with his tele-
phone pole up your ass? That is what you have
been going for, isn’t it?’
It was something beyond any horror that
I ever imagined—it gave me tremendous fear.
As a result of being so violently attacked,
I was forced to deal with issues of racism, with
issues of questioning my own masculinity in
terms of defending myself against that attack.
That work is not finished. I don’t think thatwork ever gets finished. It takes away some-
thing to be that humiliated, to be held so pow-
erless, and to have the knowledge that one
has not fought back with every shred of their
being to the death. At some point, I surren-
dered out of unmitigated terror.
It never goes away. Over time, I think I’ve
come to some understanding of the situation.
One of the things that has helped me tremen-
dously has been spending 16 years working
with prisoners—witnessing countless cases of
brutality, of dealing with rape and abuse vic-
tims, dealing with people who are being
bought and sold as sexual chattel in prison,
dealing with people who are being tortured,
and worst of all, witnessing the executions of
two of my students.Testimony (cont’d): Venerable Kobutsu Malone
As a result of being so violently attacked, I was forced to deal
with issues of racism, with issues of questioning my own mascu-
linity in terms of defending myself against that attack. That
work is not finished. I don’t think that work ever gets finished.52    Stories from InsideNotes
1. P AIGE M. H ARRISON  & A LLEN  J. B ECK, BUREAU
OF JUSTICE  STATISTICS , PRISONERS  IN 2004 (2005);
ROY WALMSLEY , KING’S COLLEGE  LONDON ,
WORLD  PRISON  POPULATION  LIST (6th ed. 2005).
2. Harrison and Beck calculated that 265,000
state prison inmates and 87,000 federal prisoninmates were serving drug sentences. H
ARRISON
& B ECK, supra note 1 . Their report did not
quantify the number of inmates in jails for drugoffenses, but an earlier report from the Bureauof Justice Statistics estimated that 155,900 jailinmates were held on drug charges. T
INA L.
DORSEY  ET AL., B UREAU  OF JUSTICE  STATISTICS ,
DRUGS  AND CRIME FACTS (2003).
3. D ORSEY  ET AL., supra  note 2.
4. H ARRISON  & B ECK, supra  note 1.
5. D ORSEY  ET AL., supra  note 2
6. Id. RYAN S. K ING & M ARC MAUER , THE
SENTENCING  PROJECT , THE WAR ON MARIJUANA :
THE TRANSFORMATION  OF THE WAR ON DRUGS  IN
THE 1990 S (May 2005).
7. D ORSEY  ET AL., supra  note 2.
8. F EDERAL  BUREAU  OF INVESTIGATIONS , CRIME IN
THE UNITED  STATES 2004 349, table 5.2.
9. Cindy Struckman-Johnson et al., Sexual
Coercion Reported by Men and Women in Prison , 33
J. S EX RES. 67 (1996); see also  Cindy Struckman-
Johnson & David Struckman-Johnson, Sexual
Coercion Rates in Seven Midwestern Prison Facilitiesfor Men,  80 P
RISON  J. 379, 383 (2000) (finding
that 21 percent of inmates surveyed reported tohave been forced or pressured into sex and 7
percent reported being raped in their currentfacility).
10. Cindy Struckman-Johnson & David
Struckman-Johnson, Sexual Coercion Reported by
Women in Three Midwestern Prison,  39 J. S
EX RES.
217, 220 (2002).
11. A LLEN  J. B ECK & P AIGE M. H ARRISON ,
BUREAU  OF JUSTICE  STATISTICS , SEXUAL  VIOLENCE
REPORTED  BY CORRECTIONAL  AUTHORITIES , 2005
(2006).
12. H UMAN  RIGHTS  WATCH, N O ESCAPE : M ALE
RAPE IN U.S. P RISONS  63  (2001) (hereinafter
“NO ESCAPE ”).
13. H UMAN  RIGHTS  WATCH, ALL TOO FAMILIAR :
SEXUAL  ABUSE OF WOMEN  IN U.S. S TATE PRISONS
(1996) (hereinafter “A LL TOO FAMILIAR ”).
14. W AYNE S. W OODEN  & J AY PARKER , M EN
BEHIND  BARS 18 (1982).
15. Christopher D. Man & John P . Cronan,
Forecasting Sexual Abuse in Prisons: The PrisonSubculture of Masculinity as a Backdrop for “DeliberateIndifference ,” 92 J. C
RIM. L. & C RIMINOLOGY  127,
153-54 (2001).
16. N O ESCAPE , supra  note 12, at 86.
17. A LL TOO FAMILIAR , supra note 13.
18. T erry A. Kupers , Rape and the Prison Code , in
PRISON  MASCULINITIES  111 (Don Sabo, T erry A.
Kupers, & Willie London eds., 2001).
19. Id. at 154-55.Notes    5320. N O ESCAPE , supra  note 12, at 85-86, 110-11.
21. D ANIEL  LOCKWOOD , PRISON  SEXUAL  VIO-
LENCE  93 (1980); see also  T erry A. Kupers, Mental
Health in Men’s Prisons, in  PRISON  MASCULINITIES
192, 194-95 (Don Sabo, T erry A. Kupers &
Willie London eds., 2001) (discussing reluctance
of prisoner rape victims to seek mental healthtreatment because it requires “snitching”).
22. Robert W. Dumond, The Impact of Prisoner
Sexual Violence: Challenges of Implementing PublicLaw 108-79—The Prison Rape Elimination Act of2003 , 32 J. L
EGIS. 142, 151 (2006).
23. Id.; Robert W. Dumond & Doris A.
Dumond, The Treatment of Sexual Assault Victims,
in PRISON  SEX POLICY  AND PRACTICE  67, 71, 81-
83 (Christopher Hensley ed., 2002); Kupers,supra  note 21, at 194, at 112-17.
24. Kupers, supra  note 21, at 194.
25. T .J. Parsell was raped in a Midwest prison in
the late ‘70s, where he was serving time forrobbing a photomat with a toy gun as a prank.Mr. Parsell is the former President of StopPrisoner Rape.
26. Crime Victims Research and T reatment
Center, Rape in America: Report to the Nation
(1992), cited in Wisconsin Coalition Against
Sexual Assault, Sexual Violence and SubstanceAbuse, available on-line at http://danenet.wicip.org/dcccrsa/saissues/alcohol.html.
27. L
AURA  M. M ARUSCHAK , U.S. D EP’T OF
JUSTICE , HIV IN PRISONS  2003 (2005).
28. Pub. Law 108-79, 42 U.S.C. §§ 15601-
15607. PREA mandates analysis of the incidentsand effects of prisoner rape, and authorizesfunding for information, resources and servicesto protect individuals from sexual violencebehind bars.
29. 42 U.S.C. § 15601(8).
30. 42 U.S.C. § 15601(10).
31. The Cost of Victimization: Why Our Nation
Must Confront Prison Rape , Hearing Before the
National Prison Rape Elimination Commission(June 14, 2005) (testimony of Marilyn Shirley).
32. In 1969, in a major address to Congress,
Nixon stated: “Within the last decade, the abuseof drugs has grown from essentially a localpolice problem into a serious national threat tothe personal health and safely of millions ofAmericans. A national awareness of the gravityof the situation is needed; a new urgency andconcerted national policy are needed at theFederal level to begin to cope with this growingmenace to the general welfare of the UnitedStates.” Pres. Richard M. Nixon, Special
Message to the Congress on Control of Narcot-ics and Dangerous Drugs (July 14, 1969)(transcript available at Richard Nixon LibraryResource Center).
33. Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and
Control Act of 1970, 21 U.S.C. § 801 et. seq.
34. Exec. Order No. 11,727, 3 C.F .R. 785 (1971-
1975), reprinted in  5 U.S.C. app. II (1973).
35. Pres. Richard M. Nixon, Radio Address
About the State of the Union Message on LawEnforcement and Drug Abuse Prevention (Mar.10, 1973) (transcript available at Richard NixonLibrary Resource Center).
36. Pres. Richard M. Nixon, Remarks at the
First National T reatment Alternatives to StreetCrime Conference (Sept. 11, 1973) (transcriptavailable at Richard Nixon Library ResourceCenter).
37. E
VA BERTRAM  ET AL., D RUG WAR POLITICS
THE PRICE OF DENIAL  108-09 (1996).
38. Id. at 111.
39. Upon signing the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of
1988, President Reagan acknowledged thestrong role of Nancy Reagan’s Just Say Nocampaign. “Nancy is the co-captain in ourcrusade for a drug-free America. … In everycorner of our society, people are fighting thepurveyors of this evil and are just saying no.”Pres. Ronald Reagan, Remarks on Signing theAnti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 (Nov. 18, 1988)(available on-line at The Public Papers ofPresident Ronald W. Reagan, Ronald ReaganPresidential Library, http://www.reagan.utexas.edu/archives/speeches/1988/111888c.html).
40. Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, Pub. L. No.
99-570. (1986); Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988,Pub.  L. No. 100-690 (1988).
41. Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, 18 U.S.C. §
3553; U.S. Sentencing Guidelines. In 2005, theU.S. Supreme Court held that the mandatoryprovision of the sentencing guidelines wasunconstitutional. United States v. Booker , 543
U.S. 220, 125 S.Ct. 738 (2005). While, intheory, federal judges now have discretion insentencing, the vast majority continue to followthe “suggested” guidelines.  See “A Year After
Booker: Most Sentences Still Within Guide-lines ,” 38(2) The Third Branch  (Feb. 2006). The
average federal sentence for a drug offense wasthe same length in 2005 as it was in 2004, and sixmonths to one-year longer than the averagedrug-trafficking sentence imposed in 2002 and54    Stories from Inside2003. Id.
42. R UDOLPH  W. G IULIANI  & W ILLIAM  J.
BRATTON , POLICE  STRATEGY  NO. 5: R ECLAIMING
THE PUBLIC  SPACES OF NEW YORK 6 (N EW YORK:
CITY OF NEW YORK POLICE  DEPARTMENT  1994);
George L. Kelling & James Q. Wilson, Broken
Windows: The Police and Neighborhood Safety ,
ATLANTIC  MONTHLY , March 1982.
43. D ORSEY  ET AL., supra  note 2.
44. Id.
45. Id.
46. F EDERAL  BUREAU  OF INVESTIGATIONS , supra
note 8, at 278, 280 (T ables 4.1 and 29).
47. N.Y. P ENAL  LAW §§ 220.00-220.65 (West
2000).
48. D ALE PARENT  ET AL., N ATIONAL  INSTITUTE  OF
JUSTICE , KEY LEGISLATIVE  ISSUES  IN CRIMINAL
JUSTICE : M ANDATORY  SENTENCING  1 (1997);
UNITED  STATES SENTENCING  COMMISSION ,
SPECIAL  REPORT  TO THE CONGRESS : M ANDATORY
MINIMUM  PENAL TIES  IN THE FEDERAL  CRIMINAL
JUSTICE  SYSTEM  9 (2001).
49. See M ICH. COMP. LAWS ANN. § 333.7403
(2000 & West Supp. 2001); N.Y. P ENAL  LAW §§
220.00-220.65 (West 2000).
50. 2003 Mich. Public Acts 665, 666, 670; N.Y.
PENAL  LAW § 70.71 (eff. January 13, 2005).
51. See, e.g.,  Jonathan P . Caulkins & Eric L.
Sevigny, How Many People Does the US Imprison
for Drug Use, and Who Are They?  32 C ONTEMPO -
RARY DRUG PROBLEMS  405 (2005) (noting that
“[i]ncarceration for drug-law violations hasgrown ten-fold since 1980”); Executive Office ofthe President, U.S. Office of National DrugControl Policy, Drug Fact Sheet 4 (March2003), available online at http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/pdf/drug_datasum.pdf (accessed October 10, 2006)(noting that drug sentences accounted for 20percent of the increase in incarceration between1990 and 2000).
52. The objections of seventeen judges are
available on-line at http://www.vcl.org/Judges/
Judges_speak.htm.
53. Joseph B. T reaster, 2 Judges Decline Drug
Cases, Protesting Sentencing Rules , N.Y. T
IMES,
Apr. 17, 1993, at A1.
54. 12 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1).55. Violent Crime Control and Law Enforce-
ment Act of 1994, 42 U.S.C. §§ 13701-13712(1994).
56. P
AULA  M. D ITTON  & D ORIS JAMES  WILSON ,BUREAU  OF JUSTICE  STATISTICS , TRUTH  IN
SENTENCING  IN STATE PRISONS  2-3 (1999).
57. F AMILIES  AGAINST  MANDATORY  MINIMUMS ,
ARIZONA ’S PRISON  CRISIS: A C ALL FOR SMART  ON
CRIME SOLUTIONS  6 (2004).
58. Id. (citing Arizona DOC Monthly Critical
Issues Report (January 2004)).
59. C AL. PENAL  CODE § 667.
60. V INCENT  SCHIRALDI  ET AL., JUSTICE  POLICY
INSTITUTE , THREE  STRIKES  AND YOU’RE OUT: 3-
STRIKE  LAWS 10 Y EARS AFTER  THEIR ENACTMENT
5 (2004).
61. L EGISLATIVE  ANALYST ’S OFFICE , STATE OF
CALIFORNIA , A P RIMER : THREE  STRIKES  – T HE
IMPACT  AFTER  MORE THAN A DECADE  17-18
(2005).
62. U.S. O FFICE  OF NATIONAL  DRUG CONTROL
POLICY , N ATIONAL  DRUG CONTROL  STRATEGY ,
2006: FY 2007 B UDGET  SUMMARY  (2006).
63. K RISTEN  HUGHES , BUREAU  OF JUSTICE
STATISTICS , JUSTICE  EXPENDITURE  AND EMPLOY -
MENT  IN THE UNITED  STATES, 2003 2 (2006).
64. K ING & M AUER , supra note 6, at 22 (2005).
65. See, e.g.,  N.Y. P ENAL  LAW 220.25 (McKinney
1999); V T. STAT. ANN. TIT. 18, §4221 (2005).
66. United States v. Brigham , 977 F .2d 317 (7th
Cir. 1992).
67. In 2000, then-Director of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons Kathleen Hawk Sawyertestified before Congress: “70-some percent ofour female populations are low-level, nonviolentoffenders. The fact that they even have to comeinto prison is a question mark for me. I think ithas been an unintended consequence of thesentencing guidelines and the mandatoryminimums.” Hearing of the Subcommittee onthe Departments of Commerce, Justice, State,Judiciary and Related Agencies, Committee onAppropriations (2000) (testimony of KathleenHawk Sawyer).
68. T
HE PEW RESEARCH  CENTER  FOR THE PEOPLE
AND THE PRESS, INTERDICTION  AND INCARCERA -
TION  STILL TOP REMEDIES  (2001).
69.  P ETER  D. H ART RESEARCH  ASSOCIATES , INC.,
THE OPEN SOCIETY  INSTITUTE , CHANGING
PUBLIC  ATTITUDES  TOWARD  THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE  SYSTEM  12 (2002).
70. Ann Pastore & Kathleen Maguire, eds.,
Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics  [Online],
at http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook (visited
July 10, 2006) (citing The Gallup Poll Organiza-tion, Inc (2005)).Notes    5571. P ETER  D. H ART RESEARCH  ASSOCIATES , INC.,
supra note 69, at 5.
72. The War on Drugs is Lost , THE NATIONAL
REVIEW , Feb. 12, 1996.
73. Randall Samborn, 7th Circuit Concludes Drug
War is Lost Cause , N ATIONAL  LAW JOURNAL  June
7, 1993, at 6.
74. J EFFREY  A. M IRON , THE BUDGETARY  IMPLICA -
TIONS  OF MARIJUANA  PROHIBITION  (2005).  The
complete list of endorsers is available on-line athttp://www.prohibitioncosts.org/endorsers.html.
75. Alfred Blumstein & Allen J. Beck, Population
Growth in U.S. Prisons, 1980-1996 , 26 C
RIME &
JUST. 17, 17-18 (1999).
76. Id. at 20-21.
77. H ARRISON  & B ECK, supra  note 1
78. Id. at 9; A LLEN  J. B ECK & D ARRELL  K.
GILLIARD , BUREAU  OF JUSTICE  STATISTICS ,
PRISONERS  IN 1994 at 10 (1995); see also
Blumstein & Beck, supra note 75, at 20-21, 54
(observing ten fold increase in incarceration ratefor drug offenses).
79. B
ECK & G ILLIARD , supra  note 78 at 10;
HARRISON  & B ECK, supra  note 1 at 10.
80. H ARRISON  & B ECK, supra  note 1.
81. T HOMAS  P.  B ONCZAR , U.S. D EP’T OF JUSTICE ,
PREVALENCE  OF IMPRISONMENT  IN THE U.S.
POPULATION , 1974-2001 7 (2003).
82. Id.
83. H UGHES , supra  note 63, at 3.
84. H ARRISON  & B ECK, supra  note 1, at 7.
85. C AL. DEP’T OF CORRECTIONS  & R EHABILITA -
TION , CALIFORNIA  PRISONERS  AND PAROLEES  2004
at 7 (2005).
86. R OGER  E. W ALKER , ILL. D EP’T OF CORREC -
TIONS , 2003 S TATISTICAL  PRESENTATION  passim
(2004).
87. J AMES  J. S TEPHAN  & J ENNIFER  C. K ARBERG ,
BUREAU  OF JUSTICE  STATISTICS , CENSUS  OF STATE
AND FEDERAL  CORRECTIONAL  FACILITIES , 2000 4
(2003).
88. Christopher Hensley, Introduction: Life andSex in Prison in PRISON  SEX PRACTICE  & P OLICY
1, 5 (Christopher Hensley ed., 2002).
89. Roderick Q. Hickman served as the first
Secretary of the California Department ofCorrections and Rehabilitation from July 2005to March 2006.
90. C
ONFRONTING  CONFINEMENT : A R EPORT  OF
THE COMMISSION  ON SAFETY  AND ABUSE IN
AMERICA ’S PRISONS  23 (2006).
91. N O ESCAPE , supra  note 12, at 148.
92. Kupers, supra note 18, at 113.
93. Man & Cronan, supra  note 15, at 173
(reviewing prior research that showed that thecriminal history of prisoner rape victims wasgenerally non-violent).
94. L
OCKWOOD , supra note 21, at 34.
95. N O ESCAPE , supra  note 12, at 73.
96. A SSOC. OF STATE CORRECTIONAL  ADMINS .,
CORRECTIONS  PROGRAM  OFFICE , OJP , B UREAU  OF
JUSTICE  STATISTICS  & N AT’L INST. OF JUSTICE ,
STATE AND FEDERAL  CORRECTIONS  INFORMATION
SYSTEMS  29 (1998).
97. Id. In addition to the 50 states, the federal
Bureau of Prisons and the District of ColumbiaDepartment of Corrections were included in thestudy.
98. Daniel Brook, The Problem of Prison Rape ,
L
EGAL  AFF., March/April 2004, at 24, 29.
99. Tim Lockette, Jail Gets Flak Over Policy ,
GAINESVILLE  SUN, June 14, 2003.
100. H ON. JAMES  P.  G RAY,  W HY OUR DRUG
LAWS HAVE FAILED  AND WHAT W E CAN DO
ABOUT  IT  134-135 (2001) (citing Chief Judge
Donald P . Lay, U.S. Court of Appeals for theEighth Circuit, Our Justice System, So-Called ,
T
HE NEW YORK TIMES, October 22, 1990).
101. Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, U.S. Dep’t Health &Human Services, Substance Abuse Treatment in
Adult and Juvenile Correctional Facilities: Findingsfrom the Uniform Facility Data Set 1997 Survey ofCorrectional Facilities 10-11 (2000).
102. See, e.g.,  Kupers, supra  note 18, at 113.STOP PRISONER RAPE
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340, Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel: (213) 384-1400  •  Fax: (213) 384-1411
Email: info@spr.orgwww.spr.orgI’m trying hard to deal with the emotional fallout. 
Some days, it feels as though my life is a nuclear 
wasteland, like I am a newcomer to a strange, foreign 
planet. Some nights, I almost feel as though the 
rapes are happening again. The issues that confront 
me—the need to stay away from alcohol and 
drugs, the confusion about my sexual orientation, 
the truth that I may never see my own child—
sometimes  overwhelm me. I’ve been diagnosed 
with post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD). I still feel 
very frightened, scared, and timid inside, although 
my outward projection of myself is nothing like that. 
Perhaps the scariest part of being raped is the desire 
to go on with life as if nothing ever happened, the 
need for control in subsequent sexual encounters, 
the pain that I am in this all alone. The frightening 
and outrageous part of this is that the correctional 
officers were aware of both rapes, and did nothing 
to stop the rapist. I’m as angry at the system...as I 
am at the man who raped me.STOP PRISONER RAPE
STOP PRISONER RAPE
3325 Wilshire Blvd. Suite 340, Los Angeles, CA 90010
T el: (213) 384-1400  •  Fax: (213) 384-1411
Email: info@spr.org
www.spr.org
