 
 
 
Submission to Ms. Rashida Manjoo,  
U.N. Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women  
 
Violence Against Women in Custody in the United States  
-- A Nationwide Human Rights Crisis  
 
January 25, 2011  
 
 
 
Contact:  Melissa Rothstein, Senior Program Director  
  mrothstein@justdetention.org ; +1-202-506-3374   1  
 
Just Detention International (JDI) welcomes the opportunity to make this submission, addressing 
the serious problem of violence against women and girls in  U.S. custody. JDI is an international 
human rights organization dedicated to ending sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
Specifically, JDI work s to ensure government accountability for prisoner rape; to transform ill -
informed public attitudes about sex ual violence in detention; and to promote access to resources 
for those who have survived this form of abuse. All of JDI’s  work rests on the conviction that the 
international human rights framework is an essential, but often  neglected, tool for promoting 
social justice in the U.S. generally and inside prisons in particular.  
 
Prisons, jails, and other detention facilities across the U.S. maintain dangerous policies and 
practices that have resulted in widespread sexual violence.  While recent studies have esta blished 
trends that need to be further examined – in particular inmate -on-inmate abuse in facilities for 
women and girls and the targeting of non -heterosexual and gender non -conforming women -- 
basic measures proven to prevent abuse are well-known. Unfortu nately, such measures have 
neither been implemented by officials nor ratified as binding regulation by the Attorney General 
as required by statute. To make matters worse, few jurisdictions empower an oversight entity to 
monitor their corrections facilities , and federal law drastically limits the ability of the courts to 
intervene even in the most egregious  cases  of abuse of prisoners.  
 
I. Background on Sexual Abus e of Women and Girls Detained in the U.S.  
In 2008 -2009, the U.S. Department of Justice’s Bureau  of Justice Statistics (BJS)  
conducted anonymous surveys about sexual victimization with inmates1 in prisons, jails, 
and juvenile facilities nationwide, which  confirmed that sexual abuse in detention is a 
serious problem, particularly for women and girls. Based on these surveys, the BJS 
estimated that 88,500 adult inmates and 3,220 youth were assaulted at their current 
facility in the previous year.2 As these surveys only account for people detained on a 
particular day – and the annual number of admissions to county jails is many times higher 
than the average daily jail population – these data represent just the tip of the iceberg.  
 
The BJS surveys identified troubling trends in facilities holding women and girls. Among 
girls who participated in the youth s urvey, m ore than nine percent reported forced sexual 
activity with other youth, a rate that was more than four times that reported by surveyed 
boys, and almost five percent reported sexual activity with staff.3 In adult facilities, 
women were more than twi ce as likely as men to report inmate -on-inmate abuse and, of 
the facilities selected for the survey, women’s prisons had the nation’s highest rates of 
both inmate -on-inmate and staff -on-inmate abuse.4  
 
Women and girls targeted for abuse in detention are t he same individuals who are most 
vulnerable to abuse in the community . In particular, inmates with a history of abuse were 
more than twice as likely to be victimized again while incarcerated as their peers.5 This 
risk factor is particularly relevant for incarcerated women and detained girls, for whom 
studies have shown rates of prior abuse as high as 90 percent.6  
  2 Women and girls  who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or questioning 
(LGBTQ) are also exceptionally vulnerable.7 At Fluvanna Corre ctional Institution in 
Virginia – which the BJS adult inmate survey identified as having the highest rate of 
inmate -on-inmate abuse for all facilities and the second highest rate of staff sexual 
misconduct among women’s prisons – the previous warden had pu rportedly established a 
“butch ward,” where women who identified as or were perceived to be lesbian or gender 
non-conforming were subject to ongoing harassment and punitive conditions.8 
 
Transgender women and girls  are often tormented by constant sexual ha rassment  and 
abuse , as they tend to be placed in men’s and boys’ facilities in accordance with their 
birth gender .9 According to Dr. Robert Bidwell, a pediatrician at the Hawaii Youth 
Correctional Facility, an institutional anti -LGBTQ sentiment was among t he most critical 
factors in creating a dangerous environment at that facility .10 
 
The sexual assault of prisoners, whether perpetrated by corrections officials or by inmates 
with the acquiescence of corrections staff, is a crime an d an internationally recog nized 
form of torture. Victims of prisoner rape are left beaten and bloodied, contract HIV and 
other sexually transmitted diseases, become pregnant, and suffer severe psychological 
harm. The failure of corrections officials to take appropriate steps to pre vent and address 
this abuse  amounts to state acquiescence.  
 
Despite the widespread nature of sexual violence behind bars, relatively few cases of this 
type of abuse are reported. The fear of retaliation and the often well -founded perception 
that reporting sexual abuse is futile  cause  many survivors to suffer in silence, often 
enduring sexual abuse over long periods of time. Those who do file a complaint 
frequently find that they are denied assistance and accused of fabricating reports in order 
to manipulate  the system to their benefit. In fact, BJS data on formal complaints lodged 
with officials show that even in substantiated cases of staff sexual misconduct, abusive 
officials are rarely arrested or referred for prosecution and many are  allowed to keep thei r 
jobs.11  
 
The widespread failure of corrections officials to take seriously reports of sexual abuse, 
and to put into place simple preventive measures, contribute to a corrections environment 
in which perpetrators of sexual abuse are able to act with impun ity. This in turn, increases 
the prevalence of all forms of violence against women and girls in custody . Once released 
– and 95 percent of inmates do eventually return home – survivors bring their emotional 
trauma and medi cal conditions back to their comm unities.  
 
II. International and Federal Law Addressing the Sexual Abuse in Detention  
In their 2006 reviews of U.S. compliance with the Convention Against Torture  
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (C AT) and the  
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICC PR), the Committee Against 
Torture (CAT Committee) and the Human Rights Committee identified sexual violence 
as a serious problem in the U.S.12  
  3 Each Committee’s report explicitly noted the need to improve protect ions for those 
vulnerable to sexual abuse. The CAT Committee pointed to the failure to prevent sexual 
abuse of gay and transgender inmates, to separate detained children from adult inmates, 
and to investigate instances of prisoner rape in a prompt and tran sparent manner.13 The 
Human Rights Committee expressed concern that male officers continue to have full 
access to women’s detention quarters and noted its concern about widespread hate crimes 
committed against LGBTQ individuals, including by law enforcement .14  
 
The Committees recognized the enactment of the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 
(PREA) as a positive development.15 Among other things, PREA requ ired the 
development of binding national standards addressing sexual violence in detention. 
Recommended national standards, developed in accordance with PREA by the National 
Prison Rape Elimination Commission, were released in June 2009 and are currently 
before the U.S. Attorney General .16 The U.S. Attorney General had one year from the 
Commission’s release ( or until June 23, 2010) to publish a final rule adopting binding 
national standards, but he has yet to do so.  
 
III. The National Standards  
As mandated by PREA, the Commission’s standards focus on the prevention, detection, 
response to, and monitoring of se xual abuse behind bars. They address core safety and 
management issues, such as: screening and classification; staff training and inmate 
education; investigations; and the provision of medical and mental health care in the 
aftermath of a sexual assault. The standards  are the product of several years of research 
and extensive consultation with corrections professionals, researchers, advocates, and 
survivors of sexual abuse in detention.  
 
If fully implemented, the Commission’s standards would significantly r educe violence 
against women and girls in detention and address many of the concerns highlighted by 
the CAT Committee and the Human Rights Committee. For example, the standards limit 
cross -gender viewing and searches, so that male officials cannot view or touch women’s 
breasts, buttocks or genital areas absent an emergency.17 While many state systems are 
slowly moving toward this practice, the federal Bureau of Prisons insists that cross -
gender pat searches are necessary.  
 
The Commission’s standards represen t a compromise between the fiscal and security 
concerns of officials and the basic right of inmates to be free from abuse. To achieve this 
balance, the Commission already reduced some protections to below international norms.  
Thus, for example, the Commis sion’s standard on cross -gender viewing and searches still 
allows male officers to work in the housing and bathing areas of women’s facilities. In 
addition to ratifying the standard without further delay, the Attorney General should be 
cautioned against fu rther weakening these provisions.  
 
IV. Oversight   
Once the Attorney General ratifies binding national standards in accordance with PREA, 
compliance must be monitored for their full import to be realized. Such external oversight is 
arguably the greatest cha llenge to full implementation of PREA. Few U.S. jurisdictions empower  4 an external entity, such as an Inspector General or ombudsperson, to respond to inmate 
complaints and/or to audit corrections and detention facilities. Private accreditation 
organization s, such as the American Correctional Association, have their own standards but only 
review prisons at request of the corrections administrators and generally charge a fee for this 
service.  
 
The striking lack of transparency of U.S. detention systems has be en a major contributing factor 
to prisoner rape and other violence -- the kinds of abuses that international monitoring systems 
are put in place to eliminate.18 Without external monitoring, officials who participate or 
acquiesce in sexual violence behind ba rs wield tremendous unchecked power over detainees. An 
incident that took place in May 2010 at the T. Don Hutto Residential Center, an immigration 
detention facility in Texas, highlights the vital need for sensible corrections practices paired with 
externa l oversight. A Department of Homeland Security (DHS) investigation revealed that a male 
officer at the Hutto facility transported female detainees by himself -- a breach of Department 
protocol – and sexually abused several detainees.19 While these detainees  were assaulted over a 
period of time, the breaches in protocol only came to light when one woman reported it to the 
police after she was released from DHS custody.   
 
Traditionally, civil rights litigation has been a strong component of external oversight  of U.S. 
detention facilities – allowing those whose rights have been violated to seek redress and demand 
reforms in court.20 However , prisoner rape survivors and other incarcerated women and girls  
whose rights have been violated are virtually barred from t he courthouse, due to the complex 
procedural requirements and substantive demands of the Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA).  
According to the PLRA, prisoner rape su rvivors who fail, for whatever reason, to file a grievance 
within deadlines imposed by thei r facilities are unable to have a judge review the merits of their 
claims.21 The PLRA also requires a “physical injury” 22 in order for damages to be awarded – 
and, shockingly, some courts have found that some forms of sexual assault do not constitute a 
phys ical injury.23 While the vast majority of prisoner lawsuits are brought by adult men, the 
PLRA’s requirements are equally applicable to girls and other youth.  
 
Women and girls who have been raped by officials have unquestionably been harmed by the 
PLRA’s pr ovisions. Two recent cases illustrate these concerns. In Amador v. Andrews ,24 women 
in New York State prisons who complained to the Inspector General about widespread sexual 
abuse by male officers were deemed not to have properly “exhausted administrative r emedies” 
because they did not use the inmate grievance procedure at their facility. The district court 
refused to consider the women’s claims, even though they had been told to complain to the 
Inspector General and all internal grievances about staff sexua l abuse are referred to the 
Inspector General as a matter of course. In B. v. Duff,  25a teenage girl who was raped by a male 
employee at a juvenile detention facility in Illinois had her case dismissed on the same grounds. 
The girl provided a written statem ent to investigators, and explained that she did not file a formal 
grievance because she was afraid of retaliation; nonetheless, she was afforded no judicial 
protection. Reform of the PLRA is urgently needed to ensure government accountability for the 
sexual abuse of inmates.  
 
PREA compliance and PLRA reform would be enhanced by U.S. participation in international 
oversight mechanisms established by the CAT. In particular, the U.S. has not signed the Optional  5 Protocol to the Convention Against Torture (OPCA T),26 and refuses to recognize Article 22 of the 
CA T. Through the OPCA T, the U.S. would create a system of oversight for all facilities, by 
establishing a national preventive mechanism. Permitting Article 22 communications -- which 
would require the U.S. to  report in writing the steps it has taken in response to individual 
communications to the CA T Committee -- would likewise help address abuse that often remains 
unresolved by the U.S. legal system.  
 
V. Additional Research  
As identified in the aforementione d PREA standards, many of the solutions to end sexual 
violence in detention are known but need to be implemented. However, as with most 
aspects of incarceration, these solutions have largely derived from examining the 
dynamics of sexual abuse in men’s faci lities. Further examination of violence against 
women and girls in detention is urgently needed.  
 
Contrary to common perceptions, recent studies show that women and girls in detention 
frequently are abused by other inmates.27 Women prisoners are often descr ibed as 
seeking to foster a family dynamic behind bars; no attention has been paid to whether 
abusive familial relationships are being mirrored --  and, if so, what can and should be 
done to address it. Detained girls have the highest rates of victimizatio n but remarkably 
little is known about how their experiences may be different from women in adult prisons 
and boys in youth facilities.  
 
The unique dangers facing lesbian and bisexual women, transgender men held in 
women’s facilities, and gender -nonconform ing women also warrant attention. The PREA 
standards provide protections for LGBTQ inmates, seeking to ensure that they are 
protected from abuse while not subject to punitive conditions based on their sexual 
orientation or gender identity.28 However, in its  provisions on screening, the Commission 
that drafted the PREA standards only recommends that these factors be considered in 
men’s facilities. While preliminary data suggest that lesbian, bisexual, and transgender 
inmates in women’s facilities are as vulne rable as gay and transgender inmates in men’s 
facilities,29 this Commission did not believe that there were sufficient quantifiable data to 
support such protections for LGBTQ women and girls.  
 
VI. Conclusion  
The widespread sexual abuse of women and girls i n detention is not inevitable; it is the result of 
poor corrections management, bad policies, and dangerous practices. In 2003, Congress took the 
pivotal step of unanimously passing the Prison Rape Elimination Act. To ensure that the full 
intent of that key law is realized, JDI urges  the Special Rapporteur to include the following 
recommendations in her report:  
• The Attorney General should adopt swiftly and fully the national standards for 
addressing sexual abuse in detention, as recommended by the National Prison Rape 
Elimination Commission;  
• Congress should r eform the Prison Litigation Reform Act so that inmates who are 
sexually abused in prisons, jails, and juvenile facilities can seek relief through the 
courts;   6 • The U.S. should embrace international oversig ht mechanisms, such as the Optional 
Protocol to the Convention Against Torture and Article 22 communications with the 
Committee Against Torture; and,  
• Further research about the dynamics of sexual violence in women and girls’ facilities, 
particularly with r espect to non -heterosexual and gender non -conforming women, 
should be conducted.  
 
 
                                            
1 Generally  in the U.S. , youth in juvenile facilities are referred to as residents while adults in prisons and jails are 
referred to as  inmates. For simplicity, this submission will use the term “inmates” for both adult and juvenile 
detainees.  
2 ALLEN J. BECK  & PAIGE M. HARRISON , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION IN PRISONS AND 
JAILS  REPORTER BY INMATES  2008 -2009  5 (2010 ) (hereinafter “ ADULT SURVEY ”); ALLEN J. BECK, PAIGE M. 
HARRISON & PAUL GUERINO , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION IN JUVENILE FACILITIES 
REPORTER BY YOUTH 2008 -2009  1 (2010)  (hereinafter “YOUTH SURVEY ”). 
3 YOUTH SURVEY , supra  note 2, at 1 . Among boys who participated in the survey, two percent reported sexual 
activity with another youth; 10.8 percent reported sexual activity with staff. Id. 
4 ADULT SURVEY , supra note 2, at 8 -9. Taycheeda Correctional Institution in Wisconsin and Fluvanna Co rrectional 
Center in Virginia had rates of inmate -on-inmate abuse of 11.9 and 11.4 percent, respectively.  The jail with the 
highest rate of inmate -on-inmate abuse (7.5 percent) was also a women’s facility, Orleans Parish – South White 
Street Jail in Louis iana. The highest rate of inmate -on-inmate abuse in a men’s prison (Hughes Unit in Texas) was 
8.6 percent. Regarding staff -on-inmate sexual abuse, Bayview Correctional Facility in New York had prevalence 
rate of 11.5 percent; the worst -performing men’s pri son and jail had rates of 8.2 percent (Crossroads Correctional 
Facility in Missouri) and 10 percent (Caroline County Jail in Maryland), respectively.  
5 ADULT SURVEY , supra note 2, at 14 -15; YOUTH SURVEY , supra note 2, at 11.  
6 Physicians for Human Rights, Unique Needs of Girls in the Juvenile Justice System, available on -line at 
http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/juvenile -justice/factsheets/girls.pdf  (last visited Ma rch 9, 2010) ; A. Browne,  B. 
Miller & E. Maguin, Prevalence and Severity of Lifetime Physical and Sexual Victimization Among Incarcerated 
Women, 22(3-4) INT’L J.L.  & PSYCHIATRY  301 (1999).  
7 ADULT SURVEY , supra note 2, at 14; YOUTH SURVEY , supra note 2, at 1 1; Cindy Struckman -Johnson & David 
Struckman -Johnson , A Comparison of Sexual Coercion Experiences Reported by Men and Women in Prison , 21  J. 
OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE 1531 , 1599 (2006) . For more information about the severe danger of sexual abuse 
facing LG BTQ detainees, see JDI Fact Sheet, LGBTQ Detainees Chief Targets for Sexual Abuse in Detention 
(October 2007).  
8 Va. women's prison segregated lesbians, others  ,ASSOCIATED PRESS , June 11, 2009, available on -line at 
http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2009/jun/11/womens -prison -said-to-have -segregated -lesbians -oth/ (last 
visited Jan. 24, 2011).  
9 Valerie  Jenness et al., Center for Evidence -Base d Corrections,  Violence in California Correctional Facilities: An 
Empirical Examination of Sexual Assault (2007) (finding that 59 percent of transgender women incarcerated in 
men’s prisons in California  reported being sexually abused, a rate 13 times higher than that reported by the general 
population).  
10Elimination of Prison Rape: Focus on Juveniles , Hearing Before the National Prison Rape  Elimination 
Commission ( June 1, 2006) (testimony of  Robert Bidwell, M.D., Physician, Hawaii Office of Youth Services ), 
available on -line at 
http://www.cybercemetery.unt.edu/archive/nprec/20090820160337/http://nprec.us/docs/boston_natureof problem_bi
dwell.pdf  (last visited Jan. 24, 2011).  
11 ALLEN J. BECK  & PAUL GUERINO , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION REPORTED BY ADULT 
CORRECTIONAL AUTHORITIES , 2007-2008 (2011); ALLEN J. BECK, DEVON  B. ADAMS  & PAUL GUERINO , BUREAU OF 
JUST ICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VIOLENCE REPORTED BY JUVENILE CORRECTIONAL AUTHORITIES , 2005-2006 (2008). 
12 Committee against Torture, 36th  Session, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States parties under article  
19 of the Convention, CAT/C/USA/CO/2; Human Rig hts Committee, 87th Session, Consideration of Reports 
Submitted by States Parties under Article 40 of the Covenant, CCPR/C/USA/CO/3/Rev.1.   7                                                                                                                                              
13 Committee Against Torture, supra note 10, at ¶¶ 32, 34.  
14 Human Rights Committee, supra  note 10, at ¶¶ 25, 33.  
15 Committee Against Torture, 36th Session, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 19 
of the Convention , CAT/C/USA/CO/2, at ¶ 9; Human Rights Committee, 87th Session, Consideration of Reports 
Submitted by States Parties under Articl e 40 of the Covenant, CCPR/C/USA/CO/3/Rev.1, at ¶ 33.  
16 The NPREC report and the recommended national standards are available at: 
http://www.cybercemete ry.unt.edu/archive/nprec/20090820154816/http:/nprec.us/publication  (last visited Dec. 10, 
2009).  
17 National Prison Rape Elimination Commission, Standards for the Prevention, Detection, Response and 
Monitoring of Sexual Abuse in Adult Prisons and Jails, St andard PP -4 (2009).  
18 For example, in 2007, a scandal at the Texas Youth Commission uncovered more than 1,000 cases of sexual abuse 
of teen detainees. Subsequent external investigations revealed that hundreds of these complaints were ignored or 
egregiously  covered up, sometimes by high -ranking officials. See, David Kaiser & Lovisa Stannow, NEW YORK 
REVIEW OF BOOKS , The Rape of American Prisoners , March 11, 2010 (available at 
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/mar/11/the -rape-of-american -prisoners/  (last visited June 14, 
2010.))  
19 See William Fisher, INTERPRESS NEWS SERVICE , Female Migrants Charge Sexual Abuse In Detention , June 7, 
2010, available at http://www.globalissues.org/news/2010/06/07/5906  (last viewed June 14, 2010).  
20 For example, in July 2009, a class of 500 female prisoners who had been sexually abused by male guards while 
incarcerated in Michigan state prisons during the 1990s was awarde d $100 million in a settlement of their claims. 
One of the lead plaintiffs was raped by prison guards eight times during her incarceration; thirty percent of the male 
staff at the prison she was housed at was estimated to have taken part in sexual assaults  of female inmates.While this 
group of prisoners was able to pursue their claims in court, litigation of prisoner rape claims is not a viable option in 
most instances. The resolution of the Michigan case came more than a decade after the lawsuit was filed,  and a 
settlement of this magnitude in a case involving prisoner rape is virtually unprecedented.   See Jeff Siedel & Dawson 
Bell, $100 Million Ends Prison Sex -Abuse Suit , DETROIT FREE PRESS , July 16, 2009, available on -line at  
http://www.freep.com/article/20090716/NEWS06/101250006/ -100-million -ends-prisoner -sex-abuse -suit (last 
visited June 14, 2010).  
21 42 U.S.C. §1997e(a); for more information, see Just Detention International, Fact Sheet, The Prison Litigation 
Reform Act Obstructs Justice for Survivors of Sexual Abuse in Detention (2009).  
22 42 U.S.C. §1997e(e).  
23 See Hancock v. Payne , 2006 WL 21751 at *1, 3 (S.D. Miss. January 4, 2006) (holding t hat prisoners’ allegations  
that a staff member “sexually abused them by sodomy” did not qualify as a physical injury); Moya v. City of  
Albuquerque , No. 96 -1257 DJS/RLP, Mem. Op. and Order (D.N.M. Nov. 17, 1997) (holding that male officers’  
strip-searche s of women prisoners did not result in physical injuries, even where one woman allegedly attempted  
suicide due to the trauma of the search).  
24 No 03 Civ. 0650, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 89648 89648 (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 5, 2007), pending on appeal sub nom. 
Amador v.  Superintendents of the Department of Correctional Services,  08-2079 (2d Cir.).  
25 B. v. Duff , No. 06 -C-4912, 2009 WL 2147936  (N.D.Ill. 2009).  
26 Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishme nt (“OPCAT”), G.A. Res. 57/199, U.N. Doc. A/RES/57/199 (Dec. 18, 2002). See also Just Detention 
International, Fact Sheet, U.N. Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture (OPCAT) (2009).  
27 See infra notes 3 -4. 
28 National Prison Rape Elimination Co mmission, supra note 17, at Standard SC -2. 
29 See infra note 7.  