 
 
 
 
 
Improving Prison Oversight to Address Sexual 
Violence in Detention 
 
By Melissa Rothstein and Lovisa Stannow 
July 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The American Constitution Society takes no position  on particular legal or policy initiatives. All exp ressions of opinion 
are those of the author or authors. ACS encourages its members to express their views and make their v oices heard in 
order to further a rigorous discussion of important  issues. 1 
 Improving Prison Oversight to Address Sexual Violen ce in Detention 
Melissa Rothstein * and Lovisa Stannow **  
I.  Introduction 
 
Sexual abuse in detention is a human rights and a p ublic health crisis.  Prisoner rape 
survivors endure physical scars, contract HIV and o ther sexually transmitted diseases, and suffer 
severe psychological harm.  As they return home – a nd more than 95% of all inmates are 
eventually released 1 – they bring their experiences and medical and men tal health conditions 
with them. 
 
Congress finally brought the problem of sexual viol ence in detention to the forefront of 
the public debate by passing the Prison Rape Elimin ation Act of 2003 (PREA). 2  PREA called 
for the development of national standards addressin g prisoner rape, the gathering of nationwide 
statistics about the problem, the provision of gran ts to states to combat it, and the creation of a 
review panel to hold annual public hearings with th e best and the worst performing corrections 
facilities.  As a result of PREA, corrections offic ials can no longer deny that sexual violence is a 
problem in their facilities, and leading agencies a re developing best practices to improve inmate 
safety. 
 
PREA in general, and the national standards develop ed under the law in particular, have 
the potential to dramatically improve the safety of  corrections facilities nationwide for officers 
and inmates alike.  On June 23, 2009, the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission 
(NPREC), which was also created by PREA, released r ecommended national standards along 
with a final report documenting the findings from i ts comprehensive study.3  The NPREC’s 
report discusses the systemic problems underlying m ost instances of sexual abuse behind bars.  
The standards address core prison management issues  – such as staff training, inmate education, 
housing, and investigations in the aftermath of an assault – that directly affect the levels of 
sexual abuse in a facility.  In accordance with PRE A, Attorney General Eric Holder has until 
June 23, 2010, to publish a final rule adopting nat ional standards. 4  At that time, the standards 
will be immediately binding on all federal detentio n facilities; state officials will have one year 
to certify their compliance or they will lose 5% of  their federal corrections-related funding. 5 
 
                                                 
* Melissa Rothstein is the East Coast Program Direct or of Just Detention International (JDI), an intern ational human 
rights organization committed to ending sexual viol ence in all forms of detention.   
**  Lovisa Stannow is JDI’s Executive Director.   
1 TIMOTHY HUGHES & DORIS JAMES WILSON , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , REENTRY TRENDS IN THE  
UNITED STATES (2003),  available at  http://ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/reentry.pdf. 
2 42 U.S.C. §§ 15601 et seq.  
3 The National Prison Rape Elimination Commission, R eport (2009) [hereinafter “NPREC Report”], available at  
http://nprec.us/files/pdfs/NPREC_FinalReport.PDF; N ational Prison Rape Elimination Commission, Standar ds for 
the Prevention Detection, Response and Monitoring o f Sexual Abuse in Adult Prisons and Jails (2009) [h ereinafter 
“NPREC Standards”], available at http://nprec.us/files/pdfs/NPREC_PrisonsJailsStanda rds.PDF. 
4 42 U.S.C. § 15607 (a)(1). 
5 42 U.S.C. § 15607 (b), (c)(2). 2 
 This Issue Brief discusses the urgent need for nati onal standards addressing sexual abuse 
in detention and for a strong monitoring system to improve safety in detention facilities.  In the 
next section, we describe the problem of sexual vio lence in detention and its systemic and 
managerial underpinnings.  We then discuss the NPRE C’s standards, and examine the need for 
improved corrections oversight and the vital role t hat the national standards can play.  Finally, 
we conclude by urging the Attorney General to ratif y the NPREC’s standards and establish a 
strong, independent mechanism for measuring complia nce. 
 
II.  The Problem of Prisoner Rape  
 
“When I went to prison, I was 28 years old, I weigh ed 123 pounds, 
and I was scared to death.  I was right to be afrai d. … As soon as I 
got there, inmates started acting like they were my  friends so they 
could take advantage of me.  I told them I wasn't g oing to put up 
with that.  I didn't want to be robbed of my manhoo d.  But they 
jumped on me.  They beat me.  Within two weeks, I w as raped at 
knife point.” 6 
 
According to the best available research, 20% of in mates in U.S. men’s institutions are 
sexually abused at some point during their incarcer ation. 7  The rate for women’s institutions 
varies dramatically from one facility to another, w ith one in four inmates being victimized at the 
worst prison. 8  In an inmate survey mandated by PREA and publishe d in December 2007, the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) found that 4.5% (or 60,500) of the more than 1.3 million 
inmates held in federal and state prisons had been sexually abused in the previous year alone. 9  A 
subsequent BJS survey in county jails was just as t roubling:  nearly 25,000 jail detainees reported 
having been sexually abused in the past six months.10   These surveys are snapshots, reaching 
only inmates present on a particular day.  As the a nnual number of admissions to county jails is 
17 times higher than the jail population on any day , 11  the BJS data represents just the tip of the 
iceberg.  
 
These troubling statistics do not portray an inevit able byproduct of incarceration.  Rather, 
sexual violence behind bars is largely the result o f mismanagement, deficient policies, and 
dangerous practices.  For example, inmates who are vulnerable are frequently housed with 
known predators, abused relentlessly, and marked as  fair game for future attacks. 12   Incarcerated 
                                                 
6 At Risk:  Sexual Abuse and Vulnerable Groups Behind  Bars: Hearing Before the National Prison Rape Elim ination 
Commission  (Aug. 19, 2005) (testimony of Kendall Spruce). 
7 Cindy Struckman-Johnson et al., Sexual Coercion Reported by Men and Women in Prison , 33 J.  SEX RES . 
67 (1996); see also Cindy Struckman-Johnson & David Struckman-Johnson, Sexual Coercion Rates in Seven 
Midwestern Prison Facilities for Men, 80 P RISON J. 379, 383 (2000). 
8 Cindy Struckman-Johnson & David Struckman-Johnson,  Sexual Coercion Reported by Women in Three 
Midwestern Prison, 39  J.  SEX RES . 217, 220 (2002). 
9 ALLEN J.  BECK & PAIGE M.  HARRISON , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION IN STATE AND 
FEDERAL PRISONS REPORTED BY INMATES , 2007  (2007). 
10  ALLEN J.  BECK & PAIGE M.  HARRISON , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION IN LOCAL JAILS 
REPORTED BY INMATES , 2007  (2008)  [hereinafter “BJS  JAIL SURVEY ”]. 
11  WILLIAM J.  SABOL & TODD D.  MINTON , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , JAIL INMATES AT MIDYEAR  2007 (2008). 
12  THE COMMISSION ON SAFETY AND ABUSE IN AMERICA ’S PRISONS , CONFRONTING CONFINEMENT  29-30 (Vera 
Institute of Justice 2006), available at http://www.prisoncommission.org/pdfs/Confronting_Co nfinement.pdf; 3 
 survivors of sexual violence who are brave enough t o report their abuse are frequently not 
believed, and in some cases punished. 13   Overcrowded facilities burden staff, making it ne arly 
impossible to monitor everything that may be happen ing in any given area. 14  
 
The most marginalized detainees are also the most v ulnerable to abuse.  In particular, 
inmates who identify as, or are perceived to be, le sbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT) 
are disproportionately targeted for attacks. 15   Young inmates are also at heightened risk, whethe r 
housed with adults or in juvenile facilities. 16   Inmates who have a physical disability, a mental 
illness, or are developmentally delayed are likewis e exceptionally at risk. 17  
 
Survivors can be abused relentlessly, sometimes for  long periods of time, and marked as 
fair game for attacks by other detainees.  One stud y found that nearly 75% of male and 57% of 
female prisoner rape survivors were sexually abused  more than once, and 30% endured six or 
more assaults. 18   In some cases, prisoners are treated like the per petrators’ property and sold 
within the facility.   
 
Inmates who are sexually abused rarely have adequat e options for reporting their 
assault. 19   In the worst facilities, corrections officials fa cilitate or participate in sexual violence, 
respond to inmates’ cries for help with laughter or  derision, and grant perpetrators impunity.  
Many corrections grievance systems lack mechanisms for serious redress, and tend to impose 
procedural requirements that inmates are unable to meet. 20   As a result, a complaint of sexual 
abuse in detention typically never reaches the cour ts, precluding any independent assessment of 
                                                                                                                                                             
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH , NO ESCAPE :  MALE RAPE IN U.S.  PRISONS  148-49 (2001) [hereinafter “Human Rights 
Watch”], available at http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2001/prison/repor t.html. 
13  See, e.g. , NPREC Report 102-06; H UMAN RIGHTS WATCH , supra note 12, at 130-33. 
14  NPREC Report at 80-81; C OMMISSION ON SAFETY AND ABUSE IN AMERICA ’S PRISONS , supra  note 12, at 23-27. 
15  See, e.g. , Valerie Jenness et al., Center for Evidence-Based C orrections, Violence in California 
Correctional Facilities: An Empirical Examination o f Sexual Assault (2007) (in study funded by the California 
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR)  and conducted at six California men’s prisons, 59%  of 
transgender women reported having been sexually abu sed by another inmate – a rate that was 13 times hi gher than 
for the inmate population overall); BJS  JAIL SURVEY  at 6 (“Inmates with a sexual orientation other tha n heterosexual 
reported significantly higher rates of sexual victi mization.  An estimated 2.7% of heterosexual inmate s alleged an 
incident, compared to 18.5% of homosexual inmates, and 9.8% of bisexual inmates or inmates indicating ‘other’ as 
an orientation.”); see also  NPREC Report at 73-74. 
16  ALLEN J.  BECK , DEVON B.  ADAMS & PAUL GUERINO , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VIOLENCE 
REPORTED BY JUVENILE CORRECTIONAL AUTHORITIES , 2005-06  (2008) (calculating that more than 4,000 reports of  
sexual abuse were reported to juvenile corrections authorities in 2005 and 2006, resulting in nearly 1 7 allegations of 
sexual violence per 1,000 youth held in juvenile fa cilities); A LLEN J.  BECK & PAIGE M.  HARRISON , BUREAU OF 
JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VIOLENCE REPORTED BY CORRECTIONAL AUTHORITIES , 2005 (2006); see also  NPREC 
Report at 140-48. 
17  NPREC Report at 72-73. 
18  Cindy Struckman-Johnson & David Struckman-Johnson,  A Comparison of Sexual Coercion Experiences Reporte d 
by Men and Women in Prison, 21  J.  INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE 1591,  1599  (2006). 
19  NPREC Report at 100.   
20  See generally  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH , NO EQUAL JUSTICE : THE PRISON LITIGATION REFORM ACT IN THE UNITED 
STATES  11-22 (2009) (discussing the technical requirement s that make it nearly impossible for prisoners to 
successfully navigate many facilities grievance sys tems), available at 
http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/us06 09webwcover.pdf. 4 
 its merits by a judge. 21   To make matters worse, beyond the risk of retalia tion from officials and 
other inmates, survivors who report abuse may thems elves be subject to disciplinary sanctions, 
based on their forced participation in prohibited s exual activity. 22  
 
Survivors of sexual violence behind bars experience  the same devastating repercussions 
as other rape survivors, and the physical and emoti onal scars can last for years. 23   During the 
beatings that frequently accompany prisoner rape, s urvivors suffer injuries ranging from torn 
flesh to broken bones to rectal bleeding.  Sexually  transmitted infections, such as HIV, syphilis, 
and hepatitis, are significantly more common in pri sons and jails than on the outside 24  – and 
prisoner rape survivors are at particularly high ri sk.  The physical harm is often compounded by 
a reluctance to seek medical care for fear of ridic ule or retribution.   
 
In most cases, prisoner rape survivors are forced t o suffer in silence because they have 
limited resources available to them, their physical  safety concerns are often disregarded, and they 
are restricted from seeking legal recourse.  In the  short term, survivors experience shame, fear, 
anger, an exaggerated startle response, impaired me mory and concentration, and/or rapid mood 
swings. 25   The absence of mental health counseling in the wa ke of a sexual assault places 
survivors at especially high risk of developing ser ious long-term problems, such as post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, suici dal feelings, and alcohol and drug addiction.   
 
Despite the shocking conditions that exist in some facilities, sexual abuse in detention is 
almost wholly preventable, as made clear by the fac t that some U.S. facilities are plagued by this 
type of violence, while others are not.  And it is clear that safe facilities are led by officials who  
have a dedication to a zero-tolerance standard, who  ensure proper planning, prevention, 
detection, and response, and who allow their instit utions to be monitored internally and 
externally. 
 
                                                 
21  Id.; Deborah M. Golden, The Prison Litigation Reform Act – A Proposal for C losing the Loophole for Rapists , 1 
ADVANCE : J.  ACS  ISSUE GROUPS  95 (2006). 
22  See, e.g. , N.Y.  COMP . CODES R.  & REGS . tit. 7, § 202.2, Standards of Inmate Behavior:  R ule 101.10 (“An inmate 
shall not engage in or encourage, solicit, or attem pt to force another to engage in any sexual act.”).  
23  NPREC Report at 126-30. 
24  See, e.g. , Susan Okie, Sex, Drugs, Prisons, and HIV, 356 N EW ENG . J.  MED . 105 (2007) (finding that, in 2004, the 
HIV prevalence rate inside U.S. prisons was more th an four times higher than in society overall); Scot t A. Allen et 
al., Hepatitis C Among Offenders – Correctional Challeng e and Public Health Opportunity , 67  FED . PROBATION  22 
(Sept. 2003) (finding that Hepatitis C rates are 8 to 20 times higher in prisons than on the outside, with 12 to 35% of 
prison cases involving chronic infection); Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, U.S. Dep’t Health  & Hum. 
Svcs., Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance 2007 at 89 (2008), available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/std/stats07/Surv2007-SpecialFocu sProfiles.pdf. 
25  JUDITH HERMAN , TRAUMA AND RECOVERY :  THE AFTERMATH OF VIOLENCE FROM DOMESTIC ABUSE TO 
POLITICAL TERROR  (1997); Jenny Petrak, The Psychological Impact of Sexual Assault , in  THE TRAUMA OF SEXUAL 
ASSAULT : TREATMENT , PREVENTION AND PRACTICE  19 (Jenny Petrak & Barbara Hedge, eds., 2002). 5 
 III.  The NPREC Standards for Adult Prisons and Jails 
 
The NPREC is a bipartisan commission mandated by PR EA to develop recommended 
binding national standards to protect inmates from sexual abuse in prisons and jails. 26   The 
development of the NPREC standards was a five-year process that included holding public 
hearings around the country, engaging the work of e xpert committees, and obtaining feedback 
from people, groups, and organizations nationwide. 27  
 
The NPREC standards are divided into four categorie s, representing important 
components in the effort to end sexual abuse in det ention:  prevention and response planning; 
prevention; detection and response; and monitoring.   The standards are bold in that they address 
the broad spectrum of issues that underlies most in stances of sexual abuse behind bars, and basic 
in their identification of systemic issues long kno wn to create problems.   
 
A.  Prevention and Response Planning 
 
“I was on a paint crew. … [T]he guard drove me outs ide the work 
area and told me that if I didn’t give him oral sex , he would report 
me as an escapee.   
I did what I was told to do, because I wanted to go  home.  This was 
the first time I was in prison, and I didn’t know a nything.  I 
performed oral sex because I didn’t want to be char ged with 
escape.  My mind was somewhere else the whole time.   When I got 
back to my unit, I cried and cried.” 28  
 
Sound corrections administration requires significa nt planning and strong leadership.  
Corrections staff are the ultimate enforcers of hum an rights in detention and, as such, must 
adhere to the highest possible professional and eth ical standards.  If the agency head is not 
committed to ensuring safety at any cost, dangerous  conditions pervade.  In such settings, 
officials who participate or acquiesce in abuse are  able to act with impunity, sending a strong 
message that such behavior is acceptable. 
 
At the outset, facilities must have a zero-toleranc e standard for sexual abuse, which 
prohibits all sexual contact between staff and inma tes and all forced or coercive sexual activity 
among inmates. 29   Agencies also need corresponding written policies  and practices to ensure that 
such a standard can be enforced – what the Director  of the Rhode Island Department of 
Corrections A.T. Wall described to the NPREC as “ze ro tolerance with teeth.” 30    
                                                 
26  The NPREC was charged with developing standards fo r all forms of detention, including immigration det ention, 
juvenile facilities, lockups, and community correct ions.  This issue brief focuses exclusively on the standards for 
adult prisons and jails.   
27  NPREC Report at 26-27. 
28  Stop Prisoner Rape, Stories from Inside:  Prisoner Rape and the War on Drugs 14 (2007), available at 
http://www.justdetention.org/pdf/StoriesFromInside0 32207.pdf (testimony of Robin McArdle).  In Septemb er 2008, 
Stop Prisoner Rape changed its name to Just Detenti on International. 
29  NPREC Report at 54; NPREC Standards PP-1, PP-2. 
30  NPREC Report at 53. 6 
 To provide the needed “teeth,” the NPREC standards require supplementing a written 
zero-tolerance policy with basic provisions that en sure appropriate supervision and evidence 
collection, sound hiring decisions, and collaborati on with agencies in the community. 31   
Cumulatively, these provisions promote the professi onalism and expertise needed to maintain 
safe facilities and take advantage of available com munity resources. 
 
B.  Prevention  
 
“[O]ne of the things that disturbs me the most is t hat before the 
abuse began, I told the officials that I felt vulne rable in the open 
dormitory unit, and I told the officials that I fel t threatened by the 
assailant.  My assailant was a leader in a gang…and  he was known 
for being violent.  When he began to threaten and h arass me, I told 
the prison officials, but the prison officials did nothing.” 32  
 
Ultimately, the goal of all PREA-related efforts is  to prevent sexual abuse from 
occurring.  For preventative efforts to be effectiv e, they must begin with educating staff and 
inmates about the problem and include thorough mech anisms for ensuring that housing and 
classification decisions promote safety.   
 
Corrections administrators, line staff, contractors , and volunteers all need training on how 
to detect sexual violence and on their responsibili ties in preventing and responding to such 
abuse.  Similarly, inmates must be aware of their a bsolute right to be free from sexual abuse, and 
of their responsibility not to engage in predatory behavior.  “A strong educational program on 
sexual abuse sends the message that an agency will not tolerate sexual abuse by staff or prisoners 
and that preventing abuse and holding perpetrators accountable are top priorities.” 33   The 
standards identify some of the most basic informati on that must be conveyed to employees, 
volunteers, contractors, and inmates, and mandate s pecialized training for key staff such as 
investigators and medical and mental health profess ionals. 34  
 
Proper classification is critical to ensuring that potential predators and potential victims 
are not housed together.  A good classification sys tem is objective, dynamic, and recognizes that 
individual safety needs are more unique than the ge neral traits that may place someone at risk. 35   
The standards mandate that each phase of classifica tion (intake, full classification, and 
classification reviews) include a screening for the  risk of victimization and abusiveness, which 
includes consideration of the traits that are known  to place someone at risk as well as an 
individual’s own perception of vulnerability. 36   Importantly, a sound classification system should  
help break the insidious and common prison practice  of automatically placing someone who has 
been victimized, or is at heightened risk for abuse , in protective custody.  While seemingly for 
the inmate’s own benefit, protective custody is a f orm of segregation that results in a loss of 
                                                 
31  NPREC Standards PP-3, PP-4, PP-5, RP-1, RP-2, RP-3 , RP-4, RP-6. 
32  The Cost of Victimization: Why Our Nation Must Conf ront Prison Rape: Hearing Before the National Priso n 
Rape Elimination Commission  (June 14, 2005) (testimony of Keith DeBlasio).   
33  NPREC Report at 58. 
34  NPREC Standards TR 1-5. 
35  NPREC Report at 74-77; C OMMISSION ON SAFETY AND ABUSE IN AMERICA ’S PRISONS , supra note 12, at 29. 
36  NPREC Standards SC-1; NPREC Report 70-74. 7 
 services and programs, which is punitive by default . 37   The NPREC standards require that 
segregated housing be used only as a last resort an d a temporary option, without limiting access 
to programs, education, and work opportunities. 38    
 
C.  Detection and Response  
 
“The guards knew what had happened.  The prison doc tors knew 
as well.  When I saw the proctologist for my bleedi ng, I raised 
concern about the size of his rectal scope, and his  reply was, ‘Well, 
it’s not any larger than what’s been going up there .’” 39  
 
Rape and sexual assault are highly underreported cr imes in communities outside of 
prison, as well as behind bars. 40   Prisoner rape survivors who report their abuse fr equently 
endure retaliation, punitive conditions, and the hi gh likelihood that their allegations will not be 
investigated or otherwise acted upon. 41   “[S]uccessful efforts to enhance reporting depend  both 
on the accessibility and safety of mechanisms to re port and on serious and timely responses once 
reports are made.” 42  
 
The national standards recognize the need to make a vailable multiple reporting channels 
to inmates, including external ones, and the import ance of protective measures that will prevent 
retaliation. 43   Like other inmates, prisoner rape survivors who a re still incarcerated are often 
precluded from seeking relief in court due to the P rison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA).  Among 
the barriers to litigation posed by this law, the P LRA requires that an inmate fully exhausts 
administrative remedies, including the often harsh and detailed procedural requirements of the 
facility’s grievance system. 44   Sexual assault often results in trauma that hinde rs the survivor’s 
ability to navigate the grievance process, particul arly within the short deadlines many prisons 
impose.  The standards require corrections agencies  to adopt a policy with more reasonable 
requirements for complaints of sexual violence to b e considered exhausted. 45  
 
Responding to a report of sexual abuse requires mul tiple prompt actions by facility staff, 
including initiating criminal and administrative in vestigations and ensuring that the survivor is 
protected from further abuse and can access needed medical and mental health services. 46   The 
standards require that such a response include the coordination of:  security staff; forensic, 
medical, and mental health practitioners; investiga tors; and facility management. 47   Such an 
                                                 
37  NPREC Report 78-80. 
38  NPREC Standards SC-2. 
39  At Risk:  Sexual Abuse and Vulnerable Groups Behind  Bars: Hearing Before the National Prison Rape 
Elimination Commission  (August 19, 2005) (testimony of T.J. Parsell).  
40  MICHAEL R.  RAND , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , CRIMINAL VICTIMIZATION , 2007 at 7 (2008) (finding that less 
than 42% of all rapes and sexual assaults were repo rted to the police).   
41  See, e.g., HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH , supra note 12, 130-33. 
42  NPREC Report at 102. 
43  NPREC Standards RE-1, OR-5 
44  42 U.S.C. § 1997e(a); see also supra  notes 21-22. 
45  NPREC Standards RE-2. 
46  NPREC Report at 114. 
47  NPREC Standards OR-4. 8 
 approach is aligned with a proven best practice in the community – the development of an 
interdisciplinary sexual assault response team (SAR T). 48  
 
Sexual abuse in detention is a crime 49  and a breach of prison rules.  The NPREC 
standards require that every report of sexual assau lt be thoroughly investigated in a uniform 
manner by an investigator who has received training  specific to sexual assault cases, and that 
compelled interviews during an administrative proce ss do not jeopardize any potential criminal 
prosecution. 50   The standards further mandate corrections authori ties to develop a written policy 
about sanctions for staff and inmates who perpetrat e sexual abuse, including a presumptive 
sanction of termination for perpetrating staff. 51   Such measures will help ensure that sexual 
violence in detention is taken as seriously as othe r crimes. 
 
In addition to the investigative response, official s must ensure that survivors can access 
appropriate medical and mental health care.  “[P]ro viding appropriate treatment often is the most 
effective way to promote recovery and reduce the ch ance that the trauma of sexual abuse will 
lead to lasting or life-threatening medical or ment al health problems.” 52  
 
The standards seek to provide incarcerated survivor s with the same quality of care 
generally required in the community, including acce ss to emergency services and on-going 
mental health and medical evaluation and treatment.53  
 
D.  Monitoring 
 
“Few correctional facilities are subject to the kin d of rigorous internal monitoring and 
external oversight that would reveal why abuse occu rs and how to prevent it.” 54   The NPREC 
standards require incident reviews, data collection , and independent audits as means to ensure 
internal accountability and external scrutiny. 55   The audits and data collected must be made 
available to the public, with identifying informati on redacted to protect the safety and privacy of 
any individuals named, so that outside advocacy gro ups and other stakeholders can serve as 
community watchdogs and make sure that the standard s are properly implemented.   
 
IV.  Improving Oversight with the PREA Standards 
 
“While I was in prison, the fear of retaliation by staff or other 
prisoners haunted me and prevented me from reportin g the rape 
                                                 
48  See, e.g. , U.S.  DEP ’T OF JUSTICE , OFFICE ON VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN , A NATIONAL PROTOCOL FOR SEXUAL 
ASSAULT MEDICAL FORENSIC EXAMINATIONS , ADULTS /A DOLESCENTS (2004) (cited in NPREC Standards OR-4 
discussion). 
49  In addition to the penal laws applicable to sex cr imes in the community, every state and the District  of Columbia 
now criminalizes staff-on-inmate sexual activity, r egardless of consent.  See  JUST DETENTION INTERNATIONAL , 
STATE -BY-STATE COMPARISON OF CUSTODIAL SEXUAL MISCONDUCT LAWS  (2007), available at 
http://www.justdetention.org/pdf/state_chart.pdf. 
50  NPREC Standards IN-2; see also NPREC Report 106-14 
51  NPREC Standards DI-1, DI-2. 
52  NPREC Report 131. 
53  NPREC Standards MM-2, MM-3. 
54  NPREC Report 82. 
55  NPREC Standards DC-1, DC-2, DC-3, AU-1; NPREC Repo rt 84-88. 9 
 right away.  My fear led me to attempt suicide just  to escape the 
pain of my situation.  Because my previous complain ts to prison 
officials resulted in sharp rebukes, and the prison  psychologist’s 
assistance was limited, I felt hopeless.” 56  
 
The NPREC kept firmly within its mandate under PREA  in placing the responsibility on 
corrections officials to meet the basic requirement s of the standards and limiting its consideration 
of the larger societal responsibilities for address ing the problem to nonbinding 
recommendations. 57   As a result, the only oversight mandated by the s tandards is the monitoring 
done by corrections officials and by the auditors w ith whom they contract.  While such measures 
will help administrators identify and correct syste mic problems, further external scrutiny is 
essential to provide a credible, objective assessme nt of a facility’s safety.   
 
Comprehensive oversight encompasses various functio ns, such as regulation, audit, 
accreditation, reporting, investigation, and monito ring. 58   No one method of oversight can serve 
all of these functions.  A combination of internal and external oversight measures is essential to 
putting an end to the sexual abuse that continues t o plague U.S. detention facilities.  According 
to Michelle Deitch, an expert on prison oversight, “[e]xternal scrutiny is essential any time that a 
closed institution is responsible for the control o f individuals; it is a linchpin in any effort to 
ensure the safety of prisoners.” 59  
 
The historical lack of transparency of U.S. prisons  and jails has been a major contributor 
to the widespread human rights abuses that the stan dards seek to eliminate. 60   Without external 
monitoring, officials who participate or acquiesce in sexual violence behind bars are placed in 
powerful positions and are able to act with impunit y.  Even the most outstanding officials often 
cannot identify problems within their own system – shortcomings that an outsider often is able to 
recognize – and may not be aware of best practices from other jurisdictions.   
 
Despite the clear advantages to letting outsiders i n, few jurisdictions empower an external 
entity, such as an inspector general or ombudsperso n, to respond to inmate complaints and/or to 
audit facilities. 61   As U.S. Department of Justice Inspector-General G lenn Fine has noted, “There 
is tremendous pressure within an institution to kee p quiet.” 62  
 
Traditionally, civil rights litigation has served a s a strong component of external 
oversight – allowing those whose rights have been v iolated to seek redress and demand reforms 
in court.  As mentioned previously, the PLRA virtua lly bars prisoner rape survivors and other 
                                                 
56  Review of the Prison Litigation Reform Act: A Decad e of Reform or an Increase in Prison and Abuses, He aring 
before the House Judiciary Committee, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism and Homeland Security  (Nov. 7, 2007) 
(testimony of Garrett Cunningham), available at  http://judiciary.house.gov/hearings/pdf/Cunningham 071108.pdf. 
57  See NPREC Report, App. C. 
58  Special Topics In Preventing and Responding to Pris on Rape:  Medical and Mental Health Care, Community  
Corrections Settings, and Oversight, Hearing before  the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission  (Dec. 6, 
2007) (testimony of Michele Deitch). 
59  Id. 
60  THE COMMISSION ON THE SAFETY AND ABUSE IN AMERICA ’S PRISONS , supra  note 12, at 77-84. 
61  See id.  at 79. 
62  Id.  at 82. 10 
 inmates whose constitutional rights have been viola ted from obtaining federal review of their 
claims because of the law’s complex procedural requ irements and substantive demands. 63   While 
the NPREC standards seek to minimize the impact of the PLRA’s exhaustion requirement, they 
propose only a relatively small fix to one of vario us barriers imposed by the law on incarcerated 
survivors who seek assistance from the courts.  Oth er provisions – such as the requirement that 
an inmate must prove a physical injury in order to receive monetary damages – must be 
amended.  
 
PREA established clear parameters for how the stand ards would be developed and 
ratified; the law is less clear on how the standard s will be monitored or enforced.  The Attorney 
General is charged with publishing an annual report  listing each state that does not comply with 
the standards and reducing the amount of federal fu nds that state would receive “for prison 
purposes” by 5%. 64   How the Attorney General is to measure compliance  is not discussed. 
 
For the standards to be accorded the meaning and im pact that Congress intended in the 
passage of PREA, the Attorney General must do more than rely on the assurances of state 
officials that their systems are in compliance.  Th e NPREC recommends that the Attorney 
General establish a PREA Advisory Council to assist  with promulgating the standards, assessing 
their implementation, and proposing amendments as n eeded, and create a full-time Special 
Assistant for PREA to have primary responsibility o ver the implementation of the standards. 65    
 
Whether the Attorney General follows the NPREC’s re commendations, or develops an 
alternate structure, he must create a strong system  for independently measuring whether written 
policies are sound and whether such policies are pu t into practice in ways that protect inmates 
and respond to the conditions within a specific fac ility.  In doing so, information from current 
and former inmates, advocates, and other stakeholde rs should be considered along with the 
assessment of corrections insiders.   
 
V.  Conclusion 
 
“After I was released from jail, I tried to live a normal life, but the 
rape haunted me.  I had flashbacks and nightmares.  I was 
diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder.  My marriage and 
my business failed.  I have been arrested over and over again for 
acting out.  I’ve had sexual problems.  I’ve been f illed with anger 
for nearly 40 years.” 66  
 
When the government removes someone’s liberty, it i ncurs the absolute responsibility to 
protect that person’s safety and dignity.  With nea rly 2.4 million people in detention at any given 
time in the United States, 67  often held for long periods of time and in overcro wded facilities, 
                                                 
63  See id. at 7 and citations therein. 
64  42 U.S.C. § 15607(c)(2)-(3). 
65  NPREC Report at 237. 
66  The Cost of Victimization:  Why Our Nation Must Con front Prison Rape: Hearing Before the National Pris on 
Rape Elimination Commission  (June 14, 2005) (testimony of Tom Cahill). 
67  WILLIAM J.  SABOL & HEATHER COUTURE , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , PRISON INMATES AT MIDYEAR 2007  
(2008)  (reporting that, on June 30, 2007, there were 1,595 ,034 people incarcerated in a federal or state pris on); 11 
 keeping each inmate safe is a formidable task.  Far  too often, corrections officials are failing at 
that task.  That is why we urge the Attorney Genera l to adopt the carefully crafted NPREC 
standards, and to develop an oversight mechanism th at will ensure that prisons and jails 
effectively address the problem of sexual assault.   
 
As the NPREC notes, “PREA represents a sea change i n public consciousness and in 
national commitment to protecting individual under correctional supervision from sexual 
abuse.” 68   The standards addressing sexual violence behind b ars have the potential to transform 
U.S. detention facilities.  If the final standards codified by Attorney General Holder remain 
strong and are effectively monitored, corrections o fficials nationwide will be compelled to 
implement policies and practices that dramatically increase safety in their facilities, benefiting 
inmates and staff alike.   
                                                                                                                                                             
WILLIAM J.  SABOL & TODD D.  MINTON , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , JAIL INMATES AT MIDYEAR 2007  (2008)  
(finding that, on June 29, 2007, there were 780,581  people detained in a county jail). 
68  NPREC Report at 24. 