FAIRNESS
More than 70% of people on Ohio’s death row are there for a murder of 
a white person, even though more than half of all homicide victims are 
black. Of the 138 inmates on Ohio’s death row, more than half are people of 
color even though they only make up 16% of Ohio’s population. Data shows 
that 87% of black exonerees who were sentenced to death were victims of 
official misconduct compared to 67% of white death row exonerees. FACTEvery person who commits a capital crime receives a fair and just punishment 
regardless of race, gender, or socioeconomic statusMYTH
Severity of the crime does not determine who gets a death sentence. 
Access to adequate defense counsel, the county where the crime was 
committed, and the county prosecutor’s personal views and approach 
to the death penalty are the biggest factors in determining whether 
or not someone receives a death sentence. Just five counties in Ohio – 
Cuyahoga, Franklin, Hamilton, Lucas, and Summit are responsible for 68% 
of Ohio death cases.FACTPeople are on death row because they committed the worst crimesMYTH
DETERRENCE
There is no evidence that having a death penalty in place deters violent 
crime. Indeed, the FBI Uniform Crime Report has repeatedly showed 
that the South, which accounts for over 80% of executions, has the 
highest murder rate.FACTThe death penalty deters crimeMYTH
Many victims’ family members oppose the death penalty. Some of 
the most vocal and active members of OTSE have lost a loved one to 
homicide. Even those who favor the death penalty have expressed 
frustration with the lengthy and high-profile nature of capital cases. 
Instead of investing millions of dollars and decades of energy into a few 
death penalty cases, we could ensure all Ohio victims’ families get the 
healing support they need.VICTIM FAMILY MEMBERS
FACTMYTH
All victims’ family members want the death penalty 
WRONGFUL CONVICTIONS
Since 1973, more than 185 death row inmates have been exonerated of 
all charges and released. 11 of those were in Ohio, which means for every 
five executions, one person has been exonerated in our state. Some of the 
factors leading to wrongful convictions include (1) eyewitness mistake; 
(2) inadequate representation; (3) perjury by witnesses; (4) prosecutorial 
misconduct; or (5) jurors who did not understand the process.FACTWe only sentence people to death when we are 100% certain they  
committed the crimeMYTH
PUBLIC OPINION 
In 2020, 59% of Ohioans supported replacing the death penalty with  a 
sentence of life in prison without the posibility of parole. Death penalty 
repeal is a bipartisan issue, with 69% Democrat and 53% Republican 
support in that same survey.FACTOhioans support the death penaltyMYTHCOST
The death penalty is the most expensive part of our criminal justice system. 
Studies across the nation have found that death penalty cases cost up to ten 
times more than non-death penalty cases. Without the death penalty, these 
resources could be used to help survivors, support mental health initiatives, 
and promote new initiatives to keep communities safe.FACTExecutions save moneyMYTH
Most of the cost - 70% - is wrapped up in the trial phase of a 
capital case. The death penalty process is more complicated 
because a life is on the line. Capital cases involve more lawyers, 
witnesses, experts, pre-trial motions, a longer jury selection 
process, and countless other expenses that rack up exorbitant 
costs before even a single appeal is filed.FACTThe appeals process makes the death penalty more expensiveMYTHThe death penalty is a complex and irreversible punishment 
that is plagued by common misconceptions. OTSE assembled 
this list of the myths we hear most often in meetings and 
conversations, and the facts that debunk them. 
For more info, visit www.otse.org.