Essential Needs of Murder Victim Families  
Compiled by the OTSE Murder Victim Family Services Project  
Co-Chairs: Ms. LaShawn Ajamu , Ms. Melinda Elkins Dawson  & Rev. Dr. Jack Sullivan Jr.  
 
The suggestions listed here are based on the experiences of homicide survivors. They are not listed in a 
particular order. Every situation is unique and some murder victim family members have more needs while 
others have fewer needs. Ideally, it would be  a victim advocate’s job to review a check list and to attempt to 
secure that which is needed with regard to each case. When a case is new, the police should not leave before 
handing victim survivors a standard set of information, per the below. In a best case scenario, a victim 
advocate begins an initial consultation  within 24 hours of a primary family member learning of the murder, as 
appropriate.   
 Trained Grief Counselors for families seeking support ; 
 Experienced assistance in getting a loved one’s body  released from the hospital ; 
 Assistance in  paying for funeral expenses  including a burial plot, and in planning the actual 
funeral service;  
 Court -provided  advocate s for the murder victims families, so that they do not have to depend 
on services from law en forcement offices  (including county prosecutors) ; 
 Independent victim service providers who focus  on those impacted by the crime regardless of  
allegations against the victim  or past unrelated history of the victim’s family ; 
 A complete list of resources that victim families can access, and someone who regularly visits 
victim families to talk through the possibil ities and assist with applications ; 
 Assistance to understand and apply for crime victim compensation;  
 Personalized assessment of immediate, interm ediate, and long -term victim family issues and 
needs, followed by supportive services that address the unique situations of each victim family ; 
 Immediate and long -term psychological examinations and treatment for victim families, 
particularly for those who  witnessed the murder of their loved ones or were in close proximity 
to the crime ; 
 Economic advice and financial planning services  for those who upon the murder of their loved 
ones find themselves suddenly responsible for giving financial leadership;  
 Short term immediate assistance with maintaining mundane tasks like paying bills on time, 
alerting employers and securing time off, and with creditors when payments dates are missed 
or income is lost as a result of the homicide of a loved one;  
 Financial a ssistance when a primary wage earner is murdered.  
 Assistance in se curing employment, to include sk ill assessment and resume building , when the 
homicide victim is a primary wage earner;  
 Relocation assistance, particularly for those whose loved on es were mur dered in their homes;  
 Sensitive professionals and/or clergy to assist victim family when they learn they must identify 
the bodies of their loved ones . 
 
 
