Dozens of comprehensive studies have been done about the cost of the death penalty, 
and each one has shown that the death penalty far exceeds the cost of a life without the 
possibility of parole sentence. But where do these costs come from?Nationally, the death penalty costs taxpayers an average of  $1 million than a life without 
parole sentence, making it the most expensive part of our criminal justice system on a per 
offender basis. In one of the most comprehensive studies, the Urban Institute looked at the 
cost of Maryland’s death penalty in 2008 and found the average cost per case — including 
investigation, trial, appeals and incarceration — was $3 million, compared to $1.1 million for 
a capital-eligible case where prosecutors didn’t seek the 
death penalty.
Ohio has 138 people on Death Row. If each inmate cost the 
state $3 million during their lifetimes, the total cost would 
be $414 million. 
The Akron Beacon Journal, in 2017, compared expenses 
between a death penalty case and a non-death penalty case.
The reporting on Summit County costs are incomplete and 
do not account for all the additional costs of capital cases. 
Even so, the figures reveal that death penalty cases cost in 
excess of ten times the amount of non-death penalty cases. 
Applying the Akron Beacon Journal cost analysis to recent 
Summit County cases and we can see the tremendous 
burden the death penalty had in this county.LEGAL COSTS:  Almost all people who face the death penalty cannot afford their own attorney. The 
state must assign public defenders or court-appointed lawyers to represent them and pay for the 
costs of the prosecution as well.
PRE-TRIAL COSTS:  Capital cases are far more complicated than non-capital cases and take longer to go 
to trial. Experts will be needed on forensic evidence, mental health, and the background and history of 
the defendant. County taxpayers pick up the costs of added security and longer pre-trial detention.
JURY SELECTION:  Because of the need to question jurors thoroughly on their views about the 
death penalty, jury selection in capital cases is much more time consuming and expensive.
TRIAL:  Death-penalty trials can last more than four times longer than non-capital trials, requiring 
juror and attorney compensation, in addition to court personnel and other related costs.
INCARCERATION:  Most death rows involve solitary confinement in a special facility. These require 
more security and other accommodations as the prisoners are kept for 23 hours a day in their cells.
APPEALS:  Multiple layers of review are required for people sentenced to death. The costs of 
these mandated appeals are borne at taxpayers’ expense. These appeals are necessary as at least 
185 individuals have been exonerated from death rows, some within hours of execution before 
evidence was uncovered proving their innocence.
PIKE COUNTY
Pike County’s total budget is $10 million / year. The high profile Rhoden family murder 
trial is expected to surpass $4 million, almost half of their county’s budget. The county 
has been forced to seek aid from the state budget to help cover these outrageous costs 
solely for the trial.
The Dayton Daily News did an in-depth study in 2014 on the cost of the death penalty in 
2014. Here’s what they found:
• It costs taxpayers atleast $17 million annually to keep Ohio’s death penalty, and 
that number is a fraction of the total cost: county prosecutors, the courts, and the 
state prison system do not specifically track expenses associated with death penalty 
cases. These expenses, which would surely total millions, weren’t included in their 
$17 million annual price tag. 
Here’s a further breakdown:
• $842,000 a year for seven attorneys and two paralegals in the Ohio Attorney General’s 
capital crimes unit;  
• $1.35 million a year for 14 attorneys and four other staff in the Ohio Public Defender’s 
death penalty division;  
• $2.5 million a year paid to appointed defense attorneys to represent indigent Ohioans 
in capital cases;  
• $3.88 million budgeted for public defender attorneys on capital cases in federal court;  
• $8.3 million in prison costs for 138 Death Row inmates, though the actual figure is 
likely higher since they are held in single cells and under tight security protocol.
With all these millions spent on Ohio’s death penalty, what is our return on investment? 
The death penalty does not deter violent crime or help law enforcement more effectively 
solve crime. As of 2/5/20, there are 2,138 unsolved homicides in Ohio. That’s 2,138 victims’ 
families left without answers. There are 478, 714, and 41 unsolved homicides in Hamilton, 
Franklin, and Cuyahoga county, respectively. These three counties represent nearly 58% 
of the total unsolved homicides in an 88 county state. These counties are also known for 
their aggressive use of the death penalty. Can you imagine if all the resources spent on 
death cases were instead directed to solving these crimes? 
Despite the millions wasted on this system, we also know that we get the wrong person 
far too often. In Ohio, 11 death row exonerees gave up a combined 216 years of their life 
for crimes they did not commit. 
Instead of spending millions on cherry-picked capital cases, we should ensure Ohio is 
providing for all those left behind in the wake of violence. A recent article found that, 
of the 313 homicides in 2018, only 3.23% of victim family members received financial 
assistance from the state. Ohio ranks 46th out of 50 states and the District of Columbia 
in terms of providing help to murder victim family members. 
This expensive system does not provide Ohioans with a return on investment, deter 
violent crime, or provide the justice and healing it claims to do for murder victim family 
members. It’s time to repeal the death penalty and reallocate the millions spent on it 
toward meaningful reforms.