 
The Activist Files Episode 13: Justice for Abu Ghraib  
with Katherine Gallagher and Baher Azmy  
Aliya:   Hi everyone. I'm thrilled to have the focus of this episode be on 
CCR's efforts to bring accountability for torture, and specifically 
the Center for Constitutional Rights' case, Al Shimari v. CACI. The case was filed in 2008 and is still ongoing. I'm joine d today 
by CCR Legal Director Baher Azmy and Senior Staff Attorney Katherine Gallagher. Welcome Baher and Katie.  
Katherine:   Thank you for having us.  
Aliya:   So as I mentioned, this case has been going on for over a decade 
and there's a lot that we're goin g to dig into, but let's start from 
the beginning. What happened at Abu Ghraib in 2003 and to 
our clients Suhail, Salah and Asa'ad specifically?  
Katherine:   Well, you know when you say Abu Ghraib, people probably have the images that come into their head o f those horrible photos 
of naked detainees, hooded stacked in pyramids, being sexually assaulted, pulled on leashes, and that infamous photo of the man standing on a box, hooded with electrical wires. So, it's a 
dark moment in U.S. History, but something t hat you don't see 
in those photos generally is the faces of the individuals. And you 
certainly don't see the men in those photos in their whole humanity. And what this case at its core is about, is allowing three individuals who were detained at Abu Ghraib  during that 
period of time back in 2003 -2004 to tell their story to tell what 
happened to them in Abu Ghraib.  
Katherine:   So, our clients are Salah Al- Ejaili, Asa’ad Zuba’e, and Suhail Al 
Shimari. The three men were picked up in various circumstances 
in the Fall of 2003, and kept in that hard site at Abu Ghraib. 
That - those two tiers that you see in the photos, that's the hard 
site.  
Katherine:   And over a period of weeks and months they were subjected to 
acts of serious mistreatment, humiliation, degradation, denial of 
their humanity, acts that we believe rise to the level of torture. They were kept at various points, naked, tied up in stress positions, forced to masturbate, sexually assaulted.  
Katherine:   For one of our plaintiffs, Suhail Al Shimari, he was forcibly shaved, which is something that at first blush, may not sound 
like it's so bad when you're thinking back to those photos, but 
the three plaintiffs that we represent are all Muslim men, or all Iraqi civilians. And for Suhail, this act of shaving him was really an act that he found deeply shameful and humiliating as a Muslim man.  
Katherine:   Salah Al- Ejaili was a journalist for Al Jazeera. He was actually 
picked up while covering an IED, an explosion, a roadside 
explosion, and he was mocked and tau nted Al Jazeera, while 
being shackled to the bars of his cell while naked with women 
coming up and touching him.  
Katherine:   Asa’ad was kept at one point in solitary confinement, he was exposed to extreme temperatures, denied food, and had family members t hreatened while he was detained. So those are, are 
some of the acts that the men were subjected to and acts that -  
here we are 15 years later -  continued to haunt them.  
Aliya:   I think when people think of U.S. torture and specifically this 
U.S. military -run prison, they think of U.S. Government, but the 
government isn't a defendant in this case. Baher, how is it that 
we're suing CACI, which is a private contractor?  
Baher:   Yeah. I think the people understand, at least the CCR podcasting 
listening public un derstands the role of the U.S. Government 
torture at Guantanamo secret black sites and indeed at Abu 
Ghraib. But they know less about the story of private military contractors involvement in promoting, participating and 
directing a lot of that torture. And  that's exactly the dynamic that happened at Abu Ghraib. We learned very early on from 
military investigative reports undertaken to try and identify the sources of the atrocities in Abu Ghraib when it became a public embarrassment and military investigators very specifically 
identified a private military contractor named CACI Premier 
Technology as playing a central role in creating a culture of 
torture and specifically directing torture. CACI was hired by the 
U.S. Government to provide interrogation services. They held 
themselves out to be resident experts in interrogation, although hired largely inexperienced and arguably incompetent individuals to carry out that role.  
Baher:   And what we saw is CACI, as the sort of sophisticated and well 
paid military inte lligence operation, started ordering military 
police MPs or the guards, who were supposed to take care of 
prisoners, started ordering them to soften up detainees and to 
set the conditions for interrogations that CACI would later exploit for considerable pr ofit from the United States 
government. Now, for the past 11 years of this litigation, CACI has tried to position itself just like the United States government. It tries to claim all of the immunities that the sovereign gets, clothing itself as if it were the United States 
government. But of course CACI is not a sovereign, it bears no 
sovereign responsibilities. It has no public accountability. It 
exists only for profit. And part of justice in this case is exposing 
the profit motive, this entity in war -maki ng with the United 
States.  
Aliya:   And you mentioned the 11 years of litigation. We at CCR are used to struggles being long, but it's actually pretty rare that a 
case has gone on this long in the courts. Why has it gone on so 
long? And I also want to uplift some of the legal victories along the way, which if you could talk about, that'd be great.  
Baher:   It's gone on so long because, you know, we have an incredibly well-  resourced and ideological defendant who wants to fight 
every step of the way and has th e capacity to do so. We have 
been to the court of appeals four times in this case. CACI has 
filed motions to dismiss the case around 17 times. I would say in 
our big stop -and-frisk case you could count maybe three 
motions to dismiss. That gives you the sca le and the intensity of 
the litigation. Despite that, we have had some pretty significant 
legal victories. The Fourth Circuit established that the Alien Tort Statute, which is the law in which were suing, applies in this case because the case is so bound u p with U.S. Conduct. That's 
despite a problematic supreme court ruling that narrowed the scope of this human rights concept. We obtained incredibly important ruling from the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals that despite the deliberate ambiguity that people like Cheney and 
you and CACI itself tried to interject to the question of torture and the military authority to torture, that torture is not a political question. It is a legal question that courts can review. 
And in the words of one of the judges on the F ourth Circuit 
panel, not even the president of the United States can order or 
authorize torture. And from the District Court, we got a number 
of really favorable rulings including finding that the evidence in 
this case, the allegations in this case, when v iewed holistically, 
demonstrate that these individuals suffering amounted to torture or cruel and inhuman degrading treatment and war crimes and that they can be pursued against a private entity.  
Katherine:   I would just add on to that, over the last five years, as Baher 
mentioned, we've seen the Alien Tort Statute scaled back, both 
its - quote - extra -territorial jurisdiction, meaning how this 
human rights law applies for actions outside the United States. 
And we've also seen a concerted effort by defendan ts in these 
human rights cases like CACI, other corporate defendants who've really, really tried to knock the legs out from under this law and just create some kind of immunity for corporations who are at large for human rights violations. So some of the 
decisions we've had in this case, in the wake of those Supreme 
Court decisions that have narrowed the Alien Tort Statute, I 
think have been quite important for keeping this law alive. 
Findings that a U.S. Corporation could be held liable for human rights vi olations, including for human rights violations outside 
the United States because if a U.S. Company can't be sued in the 
United States, where can it be sued? So I think that those 
precedents are quite important.  
Aliya:   It's clear that you all and our co -counsel have been doing 
amazing work in the courtroom to fight for accountability and 
also against the defendant and also have done a good job of centering the experiences and voices of our clients where possible. There's a great quote from one of our clien ts, Salah Al-
Ejaili, "We will have our day in court and the story of Abu Ghraib will be told by me and other men who lived and survived it. Katie, what does justice look like for our clients in this case?  
Katherine:   You know, it's always hard to answer th at question for clients 
because even in a case where we have now three plaintiffs for each of them, I think it probably carries something a little bit different. You know, at the end of the day, this is a Tort action. So it is an action for damages, meanin g money. And I don't think 
that that's unimportant to our plaintiffs, all of whom have suffered in the wake of being detained and, and certainly could use money to help rebuild lives and get some support for their wellbeing. But I don't think that that's the first thing any of the 
three would say. I think overall it's that opportunity to tell their story. And something that has struck me again and again in representing the plaintiffs in this case and Iraqi civilian side 
represented and other cases against c ontractors, is that they 
have come to a U.S. Court, trusted a U.S. American lawyer, 
trusted American judges to be able to provide them some kind 
of justice and remedy.  
Katherine:   There is still a deep belief that they can find justice here, which I 
find s omewhat incredible in light of what they experience, not 
only in Abu Ghraib, but under the U.S. occupation and the long 
war in Iraq. But I think that chance to share who they are and 
what happened to them, to a U.S. jury is very important. To put 
a name an d a face to the story, instead of just the hooded 
naked detainees. You know, Salah, as you said here in the quote 
that you read, he has also said, it's not only about me. You know, I think that there is a feeling that if they can hold this company accounta ble, it may be a dent in the wall of impunity, 
that it may make a company think twice about doing torture again. That there's a cost, a real cost, both reputationally and financially. So this is for preventative measures, too, so that 
there won't be more t orture survivors. I think those are some of 
the key reasons why they're bringing this case forward and 
continuing to bring it forward after 11 years.  
Aliya:   So now that we've, why this case matters to our clients for her. 
In your opinion, why does this ca se matter to everybody else in 
2019 so long after the atrocities of Abu Ghraib and are there connections to other struggles for justice here in the U.S. that 
you see?  
Baher:   Yeah, I think it's a really important international human rights 
case that's a really important corporate accountability case. One 
level, it's when human rights norms are under attack all over the world. It's an opportunity in a courtroom where the truth matters to talk about international law values that the United States professes to  follow and to vindicate those values in the 
courtroom and beyond. And it's an opportunity to hold very 
powerful corporate defendants liable when their power and 
resources and indefatigable litigation appetite would normally keep them out of court and out of accountability. And there are 
also broader political struggles connected to this case. This case has, I think, deep connections to a history of Islamophobia and broader militarism that are at the heart of the 
interconnectedness between Abu Ghraib and th e U.S. invasion 
of Iraq in the first place.  Baher:   The notion that these individuals are somehow subhuman, are 
not entitled to basic dignity. That we're both, you know, make the United States think that they could bomb this country relentlessly and not be  concerned about the victims of that 
massive act of violence. And that inside prison cells, they could 
torment these prisoners relentlessly. So it's an opportunity to 
reclaim their dignity in a similar way that we sought to reclaim 
the dignity of prisoners  in solitary confinement in Pelican Bay or 
black and brown citizens of New York who were consistently being stopped and frisked by the NYPD because of who they are 
and their perceived absence of power vis a vis the powerful.  
Katherine:  1
 And just to add onto that, you know, I think in this moment of 
2019 where we have Donald Trump as president of the United 
States, a man who said he'll bring back waterboarding and a hell of a lot worse and then put in place as his director of the Central Intelligence Agency, Gina Haspel, a woman who ran a CIA black site where torture oc curred back during the Bush 
administration. Already the victories that we've had in the court setting out as Baher laid out that clear line that torture is 
wrong. It's not only wrong as a matter of policy, but it's wrong 
as a matter of law and those who co mmit torture will be held 
accountable. I think that is a important message for this 
administration to hear.  
Aliya:   And while this court case is about CACI's role providing 
interrogation services abroad, CACI still has countless contracts with the U.S. Gov ernment. Do you see connections with this 
case and the proliferation of private contractors and other areas?  
Katherine:   Again, going back to the current administration, Donald Trump and his whole administration is really about corporate capture. They will privatize anything and everything that they can and 
turn government functions into an opportunity for profit. And in 
this moment where we're seeing so many historically 
governmental functions privatized, I think there are questions around accountability and what laws apply when people doing 
what many citizens and people in the country would think our 
public functions. And instead they're doing it for a profit motive. 
Who are they accountable to? Are they accountable to the 
citizenry or are they accountable  to the shareholder? So in this 
moment where there's a lot of ambiguity, I think having clarity on legal responsibilities and liabilities is very important.  ** News Update **  
Aliya:   Hi Listener. It's Aliyah, again. We have an update. When we 
recorded our podcast episode, we were gearing up for trial on 
the case to begin on April 23rd. The day after recording a judge postponed our trial date so that both parties can brief an appeal that was filed by CACI. Katie is back and joining me and Ian here 
right now.  Katie, what happened last week and where are we 
right now with the case?  
Katherine:   Thanks Leah and Ian for having me back. So as you said, we 
were all set to go to trial with a range of experts and other 
witnesses and most importantly our plaintiffs hav ing there long 
awaited day in court and unfortunately that wait will continue. Essentially what happened was in late February, CACI sought to have the court determine that it shouldn't be held responsible 
for anything -  that essentially as a government con tractor, it had 
the benefit of the immunity of the United States, meaning that 
it couldn't be sued.  
Katherine:   In late March, Judge Brinkema issued an order in which she found that because of the seriousness of the claims in this case, torture, war crimes , cruel and inhuman degrading treatment, 
that no party could be immune. So there was no immunity for the United States, she found and therefore, no immunity for CACI as a government contractor. From a human rights 
perspective, this was a critical ruling, a 58-page decision that I 
would recommend our listeners take a look at. CACI appealed 
this 58 -page ruling to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. We 
tried to have that appeal struck saying it was too late and that the issues in it were clear, that CACI can be held accountable when it participates in torture and war crimes, criminal activities that it was not contracted to do. But the Fourth Circuit issued a briefing schedule and Judge Brinkema denied our effort 
to have this appeal struck.  
Katherine:   So inst ead of going to trial on April 23rd, CACI will be filing its 
opening appellate brief to the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, Virginia. And three weeks later, the plaintiffs will themselves be filing in appeal brief. And we will be having that appeal heard proba bly over the summer and hopefully -  we hope getting back 
to the district court and back on the path to trial in the fall.  
Aliya:   When I spoke with you and Baher and you know the way we've 
been talking about trial was really our clients having the 
opportun ity to have their day in court, which we also talked 
about was so rare in these cases. How are we going to continue making sure that our client's experiences and their voice are still 
a part of the briefing in the next few months when it is on such sort of  technical and legal aspects?  
Katherine:   That's an important question and two different answers to that. 
First and foremost, it's to remember that our clients are torture 
survivors, and this has been a long road to get to trial. And for 
them, what happene d last week was confusing and not easy. 
You know, they were gearing up to tell their story in court and so that rollercoaster to then say it's on pause is hard. So we do want to ensure that their voices are heard and whether that's looking through the medi a in outreach with some of the 
partners who are listening to this to ensure that what happened 
to them is shared, understood. And that it's prevented from 
happening again. We have the 15th anniversary of the photos 
from Abu Ghraib on April 28th. It's been 15 years since the 
American public and the world at large was shocked by those photos and it's 11, soon to be 12 years, that our clients are fighting for a measure of justice.  
Katherine:   So we hope that through public support and the media and 
activists and educators, their stories can be heard still and that 
they will have an opportunity to more directly, maybe speak to 
the American public, if not a U.S. Jury in the short term. Right.  
Aliya:   And here at the Center for Constitutional Rights, we talk about  
how litigation is just one piece of a broader movement for justice and accountability. So for all you listeners who are 
interested in this case and wanting to support our clients, 
please stay tuned for updates. We'll, in the episode notes, include some li nks to resources where you can learn about it, 
and hopefully we will be going to trial in the fall, and we'll have 
an opportunity to give our clients their chance to tell their story 
and have a jury listen. Thanks, Katie.  
Katherine:   Thank you.  
 
 