June 23, 2009 , may have been the day 
when the issue of prisoner rape fully en -
tered the u.S. public debate. The release 
by the national Prison Rape elimination 
Commission ( nPReC) of binding national 
standards aimed at preventing and address -
ing sexual abuse in u.S. corrections facili -
ties generated unprecedented attention. The 
Washington Post  and the New York Times  edi-
torialized about the horror of rape in deten -
tion, as did many other newspapers across 
the country. 
 The new standards are both detailed and 
impressive. Indeed, they have the potential to 
become the most important tool so far in the 
effort to end sexual violence behind bars. JDI staff worked closely with nPReC in 
developing the standards, serving on expert 
committees and making sure that rape sur -
vivors were able to testify at various public 
hearings. Working side-by-side with officials, 
researchers, and legal experts, we insisted 
that the bar be placed high. Many corrections 
officials fought stubbornly for a codification 
of the status quo, but we knew dramatic re -
forms were needed to make prisons and jails safe in the u.S. In the end, nPRe C agreed 
with us.  The standards are now with Attorney 
General eric Holder, who has one year to 
codify them as part of federal regulations. 
He must do so swiftly, without diluting them 
— and we’ll be working hard to make sure 
that he does.  The release of the standards was the cul
-
mination of nPReC’s work; the Commis -
sion sunsets in late August. For JDI, it sim -
ply marked the beginning of the next phase of our battle. now we must ensure that the 
standards are fully implemented, so that the 2.4 million people behind bars in the u.S. are 
able to serve their time free from abuse. 
Lovisa Sannow David Kaiser
executive Director ChairmanA Dramatic Shift in the Debate:  
Prisoner Rape is Not Inevitable
New Federal Report and Standards Adopt JDI’s Core Messagesaction update                                                                                       july 2009
ALMoST SIx yeARS after the 
passage of the Prison Rape elim -
ination Act (PR eA), the binding 
national standards mandated by 
the law were released on June 23, 2009. 
These new measures seek to prevent sexual 
abuse behind bars, and ensure that — when 
preventative efforts have failed — appro -
priate action is taken in the aftermath of 
an assault. As such, they are a milestone in 
the effort to end prisoner rape. 
 These standards, however, together with the detailed report accompanying them, rep -
resent something else as well: a dramatic shift 
in the way government officials speak about sexual abuse in u.S. corrections facilities.
 After decades of government denial, down
-
playing, or flippant repetition of stereotypes, nPR eC finally describes the problem of 
sexual abuse behind bars as a serious violation 
of human rights — something Just Detention 
International has claimed for the past three decades. Similarly, one of nPR eC’s main 
conclusions — that prisoner rape is preventable, 
See DRAMATIC SHIFT, continued on page 2
just detention international  july 2009 | action  update
The release of the first-ever national standards addressing sexual abuse in detention was a milestone 
in the effort to protect the safety of inmates. Photo: Getty Imagesjust detention international  july 2009 | action  updateThe Nine Key Findings of the  
Landmark NPREC Report 
Systemic Problems Underlie Sexual AbuseDramatic Shift
continued from page 1action update                      
not an inevitable part of life behind bars 
— echoes a position that for many years JDI 
was almost alone in taking.  
 In his opening remarks at the press 
conference launching the standards, Judge Reggie B. Walton, chair of nPReC, 
highlighted numerous other key JDI values 
and messages, including the importance of 
prison oversight – both internal audits and 
external monitoring. As someone who has 
sentenced thousands of individuals to serve 
time, he emphasized that, “not once has rape 
been part of the sentence.”  The last speaker at the national Press Club 
was Hope Hernandez, a prisoner rape survi -
vor and member of JDI’s Survivor Council. 
She described the rapes she suffered at the 
hands of a corrections official at a Washing -
ton, DC jail (see page 6 for an excerpt of her 
testimony) and concluded with JDI’s basic 
principle: “Regardless of what crime some -
one might have committed, rape must never 
be part of the penalty.” JDI remains the only organization in the 
u.S. dedicated exclusively to the elimina
-
tion of sexual abuse in detention. For many 
years, the issue of prisoner rape was gener -
ally perceived as marginal, allies were few 
and far in between, and government support 
was almost non-existent. The past six years 
represent the beginning of the correctional 
sea change JDI has long called for –– and 
incidentally, sea change was one of the terms used several times by nPReC Commission
-
ers during the press conference.PRIoR To THe PASSAG e of 
the Prison Rape elimination Act 
(PReA) in 2003, little was known 
about the dynamics of sexual vio -
lence in detention; the research that did 
exist tended to be limited or outdated. As part of its mandate under PR eA, the na
-
tional Prison Rape elimination Commis -
sion ( nPReC) was charged with conduct -
ing a comprehensive study of the problem of sexual abuse in u.S. corrections facilities. 
In so doing, nPReC held public hearings, 
conducted literature reviews, commissioned 
reports, and consulted with experts (includ -
ing members of the JDI staff, Board of Di -
rectors, and Survivor Council).  over the last few years, as a clear pic
-
ture of systemic, nationwide sexual abuse 
emerged, attitudes of corrections leaders 
began to change. Many went from asserting 
that prisoner rape was uncommon and an 
aberration — not worthy of serious attention 
Inmate classification is a core aspect of prison management. Prison overcrowding causes serious 
safety issues, forcing officials to create unsafe bunk-bed dormitories. In its June 2009 report, NPREC 
stated that “Corrections administrators must routinely do more to identify those who are vulnerable 
[to sexual abuse] and protect them.”  Photo: Associated Pressnor the dedication of significant resources 
— to acknowledging that this type of vio -
lence pervades prisons and jails. Moreover, 
leading government officials concluded that 
sexual abuse is linked directly to prison man -
agement, recognizing that the policies and 
actions of corrections administrators largely 
determine whether a facility is plagued by 
sexual abuse or not. nPReC’s detailed 259-page final report 
organizes the information it gathered into 
nine findings, which confirm what JDI has 
long known: sexual violence is not an inher -
ent aspect of prison life, but the result of bad 
corrections management, poor policies, and dangerous practices. nPReC’s findings are:
1.  Protecting prisoners from sexual abuse 
remains a challenge in correctional facili -
ties across the country. Too often, in what 
should be secure environments, men, 
women, and children are raped or abused Judge Reggie B. Walton, chair of the National 
Prison Rape Elimination Commission, em -
phasized the importance of independent prison 
oversight and of respecting the human rights of 
inmates.
Inmate Safety is Non-Partisan
 
The effort to end rape in U.S. prisons and jails has emerged as an unlikely unifier of civil society. Human 
rights organizations, faith-based groups, lawmakers from the left and the right, and — increasingly 
— corrections officials have made a commitment to addressing sexual abuse in detention. 
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) was the direct result of advocacy by individuals and organiza -
tions who had not previously worked together, and who rallied the support of legislators as diverse as 
Senators Jeff Sessions (R-AL) and Ted Kennedy (D-MA). JDI was a driving force behind that alliance, and 
has since led the effort to implement PREA. The national standards published on June 23 represented 
another victory for these unlikely allies. Serving on expert committees and participating in public hear -
ings, corrections officials, prisoner rape survivors, and advocates all offered crucial input into the new 
standards. 
There are important lessons to be learned from the effort to end prisoner rape. By boiling down the 
complex and seemingly intractable problem of sexual violence in detention to one essential value – and 
by setting aside their differences on other issues – organizations with distinct agendas have been able 
to stimulate serious reform. In the case of prisoner rape, the compelling moral argument that brought 
such a diverse set of players together was simple: prisoner rape is an abomination that offends basic 
human dignity. 
just detention international  july 2009 | action  updateLINKS TO NEW STANDARDS
The report and standards can be viewed or 
downloaded from NPREC’s website.  
The report is at:  
http://nprec.us/publication/report/.  
The adult prison and jail standards, with the 
immigration supplement, are at:   
http://nprec.us/publication/standards/adult_
prisons_and_jails. 
The juvenile facility standards are at:  
http://nprec.us/publication/standards/  
juvenile_facilities/. 
The community corrections standards are at: 
http://nprec.us/publication/standards/  
community corrections/. 
And the lockup standards are at:  
http://nprec.us/publication/standards/lockups/.by other incarcerated individuals and cor -
rections staff.
2.  Sexual abuse is not an inevitable feature 
of incarceration.  Leadership matters be -
cause corrections administrators can create 
a culture within facilities that promotes 
safety instead of one that tolerates abuse.
3.  Certain individuals are more at risk 
of sexual abuse than others. Corrections 
administrators must routinely do more to 
identify those who are vulnerable and pro -
tect them in ways that do not leave them 
isolated and without access to rehabilita -
tive programming.
4.  Few correctional facilities are subject to 
the kind of rigorous internal monitoring 
and external oversight that would reveal 
why abuse occurs and how to prevent it. 
Dramatic reductions in sexual abuse de -
pend on both.
5.  Many victims cannot safely and easily 
report sexual abuse, and those who speak 
out often do so to no avail. Reporting 
procedures must be improved to instill 
confidence and protect individuals from 
retaliation without relying on isolation. 
Investigations must be thorough and com -
petent. Perpetrators must be held account -
able through administrative sanctions and 
criminal prosecution.
6.  Victims are unlikely to receive the treat -
ment and support known to minimize the 
trauma of abuse. Correctional facilities 
need to ensure immediate and ongoing ac -
cess to medical and mental health care and 
supportive services.7.  Juveniles in confinement are much more 
likely than incarcerated adults to be sexu -
ally abused, and they are particularly at risk 
when confined with adults. To be effective, 
sexual abuse prevention, investigation, and 
treatment must be tailored to the develop -
mental capacities and needs of youth.
8.  Individuals under correctional supervi -
sion in the community, who outnumber 
prisoners by more than two to one, are at 
risk of sexual abuse. The nature and con -
sequences of the abuse are no less severe, 
and it jeopardizes the likelihood of their 
successful reentry.
9.  A large and growing number of de -
tained immigrants are at risk of sexual 
abuse. Their heightened vulnerability and 
unusual circumstances require special in -
terventions.
 While the nPReC report provides invalu -
able information, much remains to be done 
to understand fully the dynamics and magni -
tude of the problem of prisoner rape. In that 
effort, the continued work of the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) will be particularly 
important. The annual direct inmate surveys 
conducted by the BJS since 2007, and man -
dated by PR eA, have generated crucial data 
on the prevalence of sexual abuse in deten -
tion. As additional surveys are completed, 
they will make it possible to identify trends 
— positive and negative — including char -
acteristics of inmates targeted for abuse as 
well as perpetrators, and especially dangerous 
places within corrections facilities. Background on PREA
THe u.S. P RISon R APe elimi-
nation Act (PR eA), passed unani -
mously by Congress and signed into 
law by President Bush in 2003, was 
the first u.S. civil law to address sexual abuse 
in detention. PR eA requires a zero-toler -
ance approach to this type of violence. 
 In addition to creating the bipartisan na-
tional Prison Rape elimination Commis -
sion ( nPReC) with the mandate to develop 
binding national standards and a final report 
(which are the focus of this Action Update) , 
PReA requires:
• Annual statistical reviews by the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics (BJS), including na -
tionwide anonymous inmate surveys;
• Annual hearings by the Review Panel on 
Prison Rape focusing on facilities found 
by the BJS to have the highest and low -
est incidence of sexual abuse;
• Federally funded technical assistance to 
prevent and prosecute sexual abuse in 
detention;
• Federally funded grants for states to pro -
tect inmates and safeguard communities; 
and
• Federally funded contracts for research.
In accordance with PR eA, nPR eC will 
sunset on August 22, 2009 — 60 days after 
the submission of the standards and report to Attorney General eric Holder and Congress.just detention international  july 2009 | action  updateThe New Standards –  
Basic Human Rights Instruments
The vast majority of the 2.4 million people detained in 
the U.S. on any given day are held in adult prisons or 
jails, and the requirements for these facilities constitute 
the core of the new standards. NPREC also developed 
specific standards for youth detention centers, immigration 
detention, lockups, and community corrections.action update                      
THe neW STAnDARDS are basic 
human rights instruments, emphasiz -
ing the fact that inmates retain their 
right to be free from sexual abuse. 
The standards address core prison manage -
ment issues — including staff training, inmate 
education, housing, and investigations in the 
aftermath of an assault — that directly affect 
the levels of sexual abuse in a facility. The stan -
dards are organized into four sections: preven -
tion and response planning; prevention; detec -
tion and response; and monitoring. Adult Prisons and Jails 
Standards
I. Prevention and Response 
Planning
Strong leadership is essential to making de -
tention facilities safe. The planning section 
of the standards includes a requirement that 
each facility develop a written policy stating 
its zero-tolerance policy toward sexual abuse.  Cross-gender supervision, which remains 
common in u.S. corrections facilities, en -
courages abuse. Survivors who contact JDI 
regularly describe abusive cross-gender 
searches escalating into rape. The standards 
require agencies to develop policies that, ex -
cept in emergency situations, prohibit strip 
searches and body cavity searches by staff of 
the opposite gender, restrict cross-gender pat 
searches, and restrict non-medical staff from 
viewing inmates of the opposite gender who 
are nude or performing bodily functions.
 The ability to seek help from external, 
non-corrections agencies is essential in the 
aftermath of an assault, especially in cases of 
custodial sexual misconduct. Indeed, facili -
ties that provide prisoner rape survivors with 
access to outside services have found that 
an external advocate can improve investiga -
tions and help minimize trauma. Relying on 
this proven best practice, the standards re -
quire agencies to enter into agreements with 
outside entities, including law enforcement 
agencies and community rape crisis centers. 
II. Prevention
Sexual abuse in detention is almost wholly 
preventable. The standards mandate that fa -
cilities prioritize separating likely predators 
from likely victims, by taking into account 
whether an inmate belongs to a vulnerable 
population (such as being young, gay, trans -
gender or a first-time prisoner). Many fa -
cilities isolate vulnerable inmates, effectively 
punishing them in the name of protection. 
The standards require that segregated hous -
ing be considered a last resort — and only 
used as a temporary measure. These are cru -
cial requirements; countless prisoner rape 
survivors contacting JDI were abused by in -
mates with whom they clearly should never 
have had to share a cell.  The prevention standards also spell out re
-
quirements for staff training and inmate edu -
cation. Corrections administrators, line staff, 
contractors, and volunteers all need training 
to understand how to detect sexual violence 
and their responsibilities in preventing and 
responding to sexual abuse. Similarly, inmates 
must be aware of their absolute right to be 
free from abuse, and of their responsibility 
not to engage in predatory behavior.
III. Detection and Response
In the aftermath of a sexual assault, survivors 
need safe, effective reporting options and ac -
cess to medical and mental health care. Today, 
JDI was well represented at the press conference launching NPREC’s national standards. From left: 
East Coast Program Director Melissa Rothstein, Survivor Council member Keith DeBlasio (assisted 
by his mother, Patricia Dilts), Executive Director Lovisa Stannow, Survivor Council member Hope 
Hernandez, and Policy Associate Darby Hickey.just detention international  july 2009 | action  updateJuvenile Detention  
Standards
Most of the juvenile detention standards 
are identical to those for adult prisons and 
jails, while some are modified to ensure that 
resident education and screening rely on age-
appropriate information and language, and 
that investigators have expertise in working 
with young victims. The youth standards 
also mandate that the collection of sensi -
tive information, such as history of sexual 
victimization, sexual orientation, and gender 
identity, only be done by medical and mental 
health professionals. 
 Because of mandated reporter laws, which 
require professionals working with youth to 
report all child abuse to authorities, youth 
detainees are less entitled to confidentiality 
than their adult counterparts. The medical 
and mental health screening provision man -
dates that all disclosures of victimization or 
abuse be reported. The standards also require 
that agencies try to enter into agreements 
with community service providers, but do 
not require that these services include confi -
dential counseling.  
Lockups Standards
Lockups, such as cells in police stations, rare -
ly hold people for more than a few hours. As 
a result, they do not have full classification 
processes or on-site response services. The 
standards do, however, require providing pro -
tection for vulnerable detainees, including the 
use of isolated cells. The lockups standards 
only require access to emergency services and 
facilities, without an obligation to enter into 
agreements with community service providers.
Community Corrections 
Standards
Residential community corrections facilities 
(such as halfway houses) are mostly subject 
to the same requirements as adult prisons 
and jails. Survivors in community corrections 
facilities may be able more easily to access 
outside support services, but their fear of 
retaliation from officials may be heightened 
by the threat of being re-incarcerated in 
a prison or jail. The standards emphasize the importance of making available multiple 
means of reporting abuse. Pretrial, probation, and parole agencies 
– which monitor people in the community 
but do not house them — are only subject 
to the training, reporting, investigations, and 
monitoring provisions, and are not expected 
to conduct screenings or provide health ser -
vices. The standards require officials at these 
agencies to report sexual abuse that occurred 
in another agency or facility to the head of 
that agency or facility.
Supplemental   
Standards for Facilities 
with Immigration  
Detainees
Immigration Customs enforcement (IC e) 
contracts with a range of facilities to house 
people held on immigration proceedings. only a fraction of IC e detainees are held in 
ICe-run facilities. nPReC created supple
-
mental standards that apply specifically to 
immigration detainees, along with the stan -
dards that are otherwise applicable to the fa -
cility where they are held.  ICe facilities, jails, and prisons that house 
immigration detainees will have to comply 
with the prisons and jails standards as well as 
the immigration-specific standards; Customs 
and Border Protections short-term facilities 
have to comply with the lockups standards 
and the immigration supplement; and place -
ments through the office of Refugee Reset -
tlement must comply with the juvenile stan -
dards and the immigration supplement. IC e 
family facilities, which detain children with 
their parents, are subject to their own special -
ized standards included in the supplement. Immigration detainees are especially vul
-
nerable to sexual abuse, due to increased iso -
lation, fear of deportation, language barriers, 
and other cultural issues. The supplemental 
standards require increased cultural sensitiv -
ity in training curricula and in classification 
screenings. Immigration detainees must also 
be provided with access to legal and mental 
health service providers and must be protect -
ed from actions that may negatively affect 
their immigration case, such as a transfer to 
another facility .inmates seeking to report sexual abuse must 
follow the facility’s internal grievance pro -
cedures — which often include short dead -
lines, complex procedural requirements, and 
no guarantee of protection from retaliation. 
The standards require that multiple report -
ing options be made available and that they 
include at least one external mechanism, so 
that a survivor never has to file a complaint 
with the very officer(s) who participated or 
acquiesced in the abuse. The standards also 
require agencies to develop policies that 
make it easier for prisoner rape survivors to 
comply with the ‘exhaustion requirement’ 
of the Prison Litigation Reform Act. (The 
need for PLRA reform is discussed further 
on page 8 of this Action Update. ) 
 Prisoner rape survivors experience the same 
kinds of physical and psychological trauma 
as sexual assault victims in the community. 
The standards seek to provide incarcerated 
survivors with access to the same quality of 
care as that which is available in the com -
munity, including appropriate mental health 
and medical evaluation and treatment. The 
standards further direct corrections facilities 
to provide these services even to survivors 
who are too afraid to name their attackers or 
testify against them.  Corrections staff are generally obliged 
to report all criminal activity up the chain 
of command — meaning that survivors of -
ten hesitate disclosing sexual abuse even to 
trusted staff, as they would be required to file 
a report, placing the survivors at great risk 
for retaliation for being a ‘snitch.’ Commu -
nity counselors, on the other hand, are able 
to provide confidential services in accordance 
with their professional ethical obligations 
from the outside. The standards mandate 
that corrections agencies make such services 
available.
IV. Monitoring
Maintaining safe facilities is a dynamic, on-
going process. The standards require agen -
cies to conduct internal and external reviews 
of their implementation of the standards and 
of any reported incidents of sexual violence 
in their facilities. The standards further man -
date that the audits and data collected be 
made available to the public, with identifying 
information redacted to protect the safety and 
privacy of any individuals named. JDI con -
siders such transparency vital to identifying 
problems, undertaking meaningful reform, 
and enabling outside organizations to serve 
as community watchdogs.Beyond Prisons: Other Forms of Detentionjust detention international  july 2009 | action  updateTestimony by Hope Hernandez
At the press conference releasing the national standards, JDI 
Survivor Council member Hope Hernandez captured the au -
dience’s attention in a way no other speaker at the event could.  
Ms. Hernandez is one of JDI’s long-time survivor advo -
cates. Over the past six years, she has shared her story with 
journalists, been featured in JDI reports, and testified at 
public hearings. Ms. Hernandez was present in the Oval 
Office on September 4, 2003, when President Bush signed 
the Prison Rape Elimination Act into law.action update                      
In 1997, I WAS  RAP eD by a cor -
rections officer in a hospital ward of a 
Washington, D.C. jail.  I was 23 at the 
time and going through serious drug 
withdrawal. … I had been begging for a 
shower for two weeks. Finally, at about 2:30 
one morning, this guard came into my cell 
and said I could go take a shower. He had 
a towel, a new paper jumpsuit, and some 
shampoo. After being incarcerated for three 
months, I had learned to do what the guards 
told me to do. … I was compliant. I had no 
desire to cause trouble and I had every reason 
to believe that I was being directed by trained 
professionals. …
 He led me to a separate room with locking 
doors that had its own bathroom and shower. 
He waited in the hall. The light was hurting 
my eyes, so I turned it off and got undressed. 
He came in while I was still in the shower 
stall. Before I knew it, he was in the stall rap -
ing me. In addition to being heavily medi -
cated, it was 2:30 or 3 o’clock in the morning, 
and he had awakened me from a dead sleep. 
It was like I was on a 30-second delay. Then 
suddenly, he was leading me back to my cell. 
I felt myself screaming inside, but the sound 
wasn’t making it out of my throat. As we 
passed, I saw the night nurses fast asleep in 
their office.
 I slept through the whole next day, and the 
next night he did it again. He led me to a 
bed, and after he had finished he handed me a paper jumpsuit. I was putting it on and still 
had an arm and a breast exposed as the shift 
captain walked in. My rapist had already 
pulled his pants up, but the shift captain saw 
it and asked him what he was doing. He said 
he was helping me get dressed. … It was the 
shift captain who finally reported the officer 
JDI Survivor Council member Hope Hernandez, flanked by NPREC Commissioners Brenda Smith 
and Jamie Fellner.and the rapes. The guard was suspended for 
seven days with pay and returned to duty.  on the one-year anniversary of the rapes, I 
kept seeing the guard’s face over me. I got so 
angry because I wanted to see something be -
sides his face. I punched the wall so hard that 
I broke my hand. I got so sick thinking about 
being raped that I threw up. I had just begun 
therapy and could not see a time when this 
would not dominate my life. I was hopeless.   It’s been twelve years now, many of those 
spent in therapy with a kindhearted social 
worker … He was the one who connected 
me with Just Detention International. The 
rapes will stay with me for the rest of my life. 
I wouldn’t wish my experience on any human 
being, but I have not allowed it to destroy 
my life. With a lot of support and love, I got 
clean and have remained drug free. I am a 
mother of two children. I went to school 
after jail and now have a Master’s degree in 
social work.    The release of today’s standards gives me 
hope and reaffirms my commitment to pro -
tecting the right of inmates to be free from 
sexual abuse so that no one, no matter how 
young, vulnerable or sick, will have to go through the terrible experiences that I did.  
 As it happens, I was never sentenced to any 
time. But that isn’t even the point. Regardless 
of what crime someone might have commit -
ted, rape must never be part of the penalty. On June 21, 2009, The Oregonian published 
an op-ed article by JDI’s Executive Director 
Lovisa Stannow and the Director of the Or -
egon Department of Corrections, Max Wil -
liams. The Oregon state prison system has 
committed to become an ‘early adopter’ of 
the new national standards, in an effort to 
eliminate sexual abuse in its own prisons 
and to help develop best practices that can 
be replicated by corrections systems nation -
wide. Here are excerpts from the op-ed. 
WHen THe GoVeRnMenT 
removes someone’s liberty, it 
takes on an absolute responsi -
bility to keep that person safe, 
including from sexual abuse. This is a difficult 
task and, unfortunately, in prisons nationwide 
the failure of government agencies to uphold 
that responsibility is all too common. 
 oregon is no exception. Sexual violence 
does occur in our prisons. What sets oregon 
apart, however, is the Department of Cor -
rections’ effort over the last five years to end 
this type of abuse. The most recent initiative 
was launched through a unique collaboration between oregon corrections officials and na
-
tional human rights advocates.  on Tuesday, the national Prison Rape 
elimination Commission is due to release 
the first–ever binding national standards 
aimed at preventing and addressing sexual abuse in u.S. prisons and jails. ... 
 The national standards spell out require
-
ments for prison housing decisions, staff 
training, inmate education, and sexual assault investigations. The u.S. attorney general has 
one year to issue a rule codifying them. Gov -
ernors will then have another year to confirm 
that their states are in compliance with the 
standards. Those who fail to do so risk losing 5 percent of their corrections-related federal funding. That is not, however, why the ore
-
gon D oC has made the bold decision to seek 
compliance with the standards even before it 
is required to do so.  The reason for that decision is simple: 
Sexual abuse in detention is wrong. It is an 
affront to our society’s basic values. It causes 
terrible harm to survivors and creates unsafe 
prisons for staff and inmates alike.  In order to become an “early adopter” of 
the standards, the Department of Corrections 
has entered into a partnership with Just De -
tention International, an organization whose 
mission is to end sexual abuse in detention. Starting in 2008, D oC officials and JDI staff 
have worked to identify strengths and weak -
nesses in D oC policies, as well as in day-
to-day practices at three prisons –– oregon 
State Correctional Institution, Coffee Creek 
Correctional Facility and Snake River Cor -
rectional Institution.  JDI experts have trained prison staff in 
sexual violence awareness, interviewed in -
mates and identified areas where the D oC 
is out of compliance with the standards. 
Working together, we have made concrete 
improvements, adding training modules, cre -
ating inmate hotlines, and improving the in -
formation that prisoners receive upon arrival 
in prison.  The problem of sexual abuse in detention 
is deeply rooted and will not go away without 
a fight. There undoubtedly will be setbacks, 
but it is a battle that we can win. That is 
what Congress acknowledged in 2003 when it passed the Prison Rape elimination Act. 
That is what the national standards make clear, and that is what the D oC and JDI 
have recognized by working together. … Whatever crime someone has committed, 
rape must not be part of the penalty.
just detention international  july 2009 | action  updateRape is Not Part of the Penalty  
The Oregonian, June 21, 2009
By Max Williams and Lovisa Stannow
“[W]e have made concrete improvements, adding training 
modules, creating inmate hotlines, and improving the 
information that inmates receive upon arrival in prison.”  Survivors:  
The Foremost Experts
Individuals who have been sexually as -
saulted in detention are the foremost 
experts on this type of violence, and JDI 
ensured that a diverse group of prisoner 
rape survivors was involved throughout the nPReC’s standards development process. 
Their wisdom was crucial to making the 
standards relevant and bold.  Survivor advocates testified at nPReC’s 
numerous public hearings, provided recom -
mendations that were published in JDI’s re -
port In Our Experience , met with members 
of the Commission to discuss a draft ver -
sion of the standards, and provided written feedback during nPReC’s public comment 
period.  Many survivors found that speaking out 
about the abuses they endured while behind 
bars helped their own healing. Chino Har -
din, who was assaulted by an older inmate 
when she was 15 years old and in an adult women’s prison, testified before nPReC: 
“By increasing public awareness of what 
happens to young people behind bars, I feel 
some small measure of peace within myself. 
My counseling is talking to you guys here 
today.”
In Our
Recommendations by Prisoner Rape Survivors 
to the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission
Stop Prisoner Rape
Experience
STOP PRISONER RAPE
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340, Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400  •  Fax: (213) 384-1411
Email: info@spr.org
www.spr.org
In May 2008, survivors from across the country 
gathered to develop their own recommendations 
for ending prisoner rape, which JDI published 
and submitted to NPREC.just detention international  july 2009 | action  updateReform PLRA Now
The goals of the new nPReC stan -
dards remain stymied by the Prison 
Litigation Reform Act (PLRA). 
Passed in 1996, PLRA virtually 
bars prisoner rape survivors and other in -
mates whose constitutional rights have been 
violated from seeking redress. 
 Intended to limit the number of frivolous 
lawsuits filed by inmates, the PLRA im -
poses complex procedural requirements and 
substantive demands on all prisoner civil 
rights litigation, regardless of the nature of 
the claim or its likely merit. It also applies 
to all inmates — including youth in juvenile 
and adult facilities, who are both more vul -
nerable to abuse and less prone than adults 
to file lawsuits.   Among the most alarming of the PLRA 
requirements is the so-called exhaustion 
provision, which essentially causes any in -
mate who makes the slightest misstep in fol -
lowing a facility’s internal grievance process 
to be barred forever from seeking justice. For 
example, short deadlines for filing a griev -
ance — often only a few days — requires 
an incarcerated rape survivor to navigate a 
maze of procedural rules while still suffering 
acute trauma from the assault.  The PLRA also includes a physical injury 
requirement that precludes inmates from 
receiving monetary damages unless he or 
she can prove a “physical harm.” Shockingly, 
some courts have found that sexual abuse 
may not amount to a physical injury.  While the nPReC standards seek to 
minimize the impact of the PLRA’s exhaus -
tion requirement, JDI believes that more 
substantial reform to the law is needed, in -
cluding — at a minimum — a repeal of the 
physical injury requirement, a further less -
ening of the exhaustion requirement, and an 
exemption of the law for youth.action update                      
juST DETENTION  INTERNATIONAL   
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400    Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971   Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org   www.justdetention.orgATToRney Gene RAL  eric 
Holder has one year to issue a rule 
codifying the binding national stan -
dards addressing sexual abuse in 
detention, published by the national Prison 
Rape elimination Commission ( nPReC) 
on June 23, 2009. At that time, they will be 
immediately binding on all federal detention 
facilities. State officials will have one year to 
certify their compliance with the standards or 
they will lose five percent of their corrections-
related federal funding.  JDI urges Attorney General Holder to 
adopt the standards swiftly, without dilut -
ing them. Additionally, JDI urges the Attor -
ney General to establish a strong oversight 
mechanism, to monitor whether corrections 
systems are putting in place the reforms called for in the standards. In the u.S. today, 
many corrections facilities are not subject to 
any external review. The only oversight man -
dated by the nPR eC standards is monitor -
ing by corrections officials themselves and by 
auditors with whom they contract.  Without independent, external monitor
-
ing, officials who participate or acquiesce in 
sexual violence behind bars are able to act 
with impunity. Also, even outstanding offi -
cials often cannot identify problems within 
their own system, and may not be aware of 
best practices from other jurisdictions. JDI 
believes that implementation of the new stan -
dards must include strong, external oversight 
that takes into account information from cur -
rent and former inmates, advocates, and other 
stakeholders.The Need for Corrections Oversight 
Sexual assault is devastating in any 
setting, including in detention. 
Most prisoner rape survivors are left 
to suffer alone, without the support 
system available to survivors of rape in the 
community. A restriction in the guidelines for the Victims of Crime Act (V oCA) pre
-
cludes community rape crisis centers from 
using their victim assistance grants to serve 
incarcerated rape survivors. In its final report accompanying the new standards, nPR eC 
highlighted the need to reform V oCA.
 The vast majority of rape crisis centers re
-
ceive a significant portion of their funding from V oCA grants. In addition to the limi
-
tations imposed by such V oCA funding, many rape crisis centers erroneously believe 
that they also cannot use funding from other 
sources to serve incarcerated individuals with -
out jeopardizing their government grants. As 
a result, many rape crisis centers with mul -
tiple funding sources still do not work with 
prisoner rape survivors.  Rape and other forms of sexual assault 
are crimes, no matter where they occur. Re -
gardless of their custody status or criminal 
history, all survivors of sexual violence need 
and deserve counseling. JDI believes that the VoCA guidelines should be amended so that 
community-based providers are encouraged 
to work with all survivors, including those in 
detention.Lift the VOCA Funding Restriction  Next Steps:  
Oversight and Legal Reform 
As mandated by the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), the National Prison 
Rape Elimination Commission (NPREC) will sunset on August 22, 2009. 
While NPREC’s work is done, the release of the new standards represents merely 
the next step in JDI’s effort to end sexual violence in detention. JDI is now 
working to ensure that the standards remain bold and include a strong oversight 
mechanism. JDI is also seeking significant reform to the Prison Litigation 
Reform Act (PLRA) and the Victims of Crime Act (VOCA).