
Prisoner rape  is a nationwide hu -
man rights crisis: a preventable form 
of abuse and human suffering that is 
heartbreakingly common. as you’ll see in 
the adjacent article, the most recent Bureau 
of Justice statistics study found that at least 
88,500 U.s. inmates had been victimized at 
their current prison or jail in a one-year pe -
riod — most of them by corrections staff.  
every week, JDi receives some 40 letters 
from survivors of sexual abuse in detention 
— men and women stuck behind bars, unable 
to get away from their assailants, often forced 
to suffer through the aftermath of their abuse 
in silence and ongoing fear. recently, Tom wrote from nevada, “What do 
i do? risk an attempt on my life and initiate 
an investigation, or keep quiet and endure?” natasha, who was abused by an officer in 
Virginia, wrote that, “ i feel passed over like 
roadkill. i feel as if my pleas for help are 
being shuffled within an internal cesspool of 
corruption and that i will not be helped.” 
James, a prisoner in Michigan who has been 
raped repeatedly, asked, “Do you know what 
it’s like to see their faces each day? Knowing 
that they smile and laugh….” 
We need binding national standards to end 
this horror. such standards already exist, and 
by law U.s. attorney General eric Holder 
was supposed to finalize them no later than 
June 23, 2010. But he missed that deadline, 
and no new date has been set.
prisoner rape is a stain on our society. Good 
corrections officers are doing what they can, 
but they are desperate for the support that 
national standards would give them.
it is time for Mr. Holder to act.
Lovisa s tannow 
executive DirectorA government report released on 
august 26, 2010 confirmed that 
sexual abuse in U.s. detention re -
mains widespread throughout the 
nation. according to the Bureau of Justice 
statistics (BJs), at least 88,500 prison and 
jail inmates were abused in a single year. The report, “s exual Victimization in pris
-
ons and Jails reported by inmates, 2008-
09,” was based on direct surveys with inmates in federal and state prisons and county jails 
throughout the country.
of prison inmates, 4.4 percent had been 
sexually abused by other inmates or staff at 
their current facility in the preceding 12 
months. in jails, the figure was 3.1 percent. 
some were victimized once, others again and 
again. on average, victims were abused three 
to five times apiece over the course of the year.New Federal Report:  
Rape Behind Bars Still Rampant
Bureau of Justice Statistics study confirms epidemic  
of sexual abuse in U.S. prisons and jails action update                                                                                       october 2010
just detention international  october 2010  | action  updateLovisa Stannow, JDI’s Executive Director, Pat Nolan, Vice President of Prison Fellowship, and 
prisoner rape survivor Marilyn Shirley (right to left) urged the U.S. Attorney General to take 
action against prisoner rape at a press conference in Washington, DC on August 17, 2010. 
See FEDERAL REPORT, continued on page 2SexUaL aBUse in detention is 
a preventable human rights viola -
tion. it is a crime. it is also an af -
front to our society’s most essen -
tial values. as such, the problem of prisoner 
rape is not a left-right issue. indeed, when 
the prison rape elimination act ( prea ) 
was passed in 2003, it was by a unanimous 
Congress. The law was backed by an enor -
mously diverse group of non-governmental 
organizations. 
seven years after the passage of prea, 
JDi has launched a large and diverse new 
alliance, the raising the Bar for Justice 
and safety Coalition, to defend the intent 
of prea and urge attorney General eric 
Holder swiftly to ratify national standards 
to end prisoner rape. These standards have 
been on his desk since June 2009.
if there were ever doubts about the 
importance of the standards, such misgivings 
should have been resolved through the 60-
day public comment period held by the 
Justice Department in the spring of 2010. 
The raising the Bar Coalition mobilized 
organizations and individuals to submit public comments. at the close of the 
comment period, the Justice Department 
had heard from 140 groups supporting the 
standards (or, in many cases, a stronger 
version of them). 
More than 100 prisoner rape survivors also wrote to attorney General Holder, many of 
them making clear how requirements in the 
standards could have prevented their rapes. some 10,600 individuals signed a JDi peti
-
tion urging Holder to take prompt action. 
The raising the Bar Coalition now has 
more than 50 members and a website ( www.
raisingthebarcoalition.org ). The founding 
members are: California Coalition against 
sexual assault, Just Detention international, 
national association of evangelicals, 
national Gay and Lesbian Task Force, peace 
over Violence, prison Fellowship Ministries, 
and the United Methodist Church General 
Board of Church and s ociety.
A Courageous Advocate for JusticeA Unified Voice 
Against Sexual Abuseaction update                      
On June 19, one of JD i’s strongest survivor advocates, Bryson Martel, passed 
away. While imprisoned in arkansas for check fraud, Bryson was repeatedly 
beaten and raped. “Because i was raped, i got labeled as a ‘faggot’,” Bryson 
said. “ everywhere i walked, everyone looked at me like i was a target.” as a 
result of the attacks, Bryson contracted H iV. “i know i had to pay the price for what 
i did, but i’ve paid double price. That check i wrote cost me my life.”
Bryson first contacted JDi in 2006 and in the years since he has been featured in JDi publications and on our 
website. Bryson had the courage to speak publicly about his 
experiences behind bars, including in testimony before the national p rison r ape elimination Commission.
He never wavered in his commitment to protecting inmates from abuse. Despite living in poverty and battling aiDs 
and leukemia, he was determined to continue speaking out against sexual violence in detention, explaining: “ i’ve already 
accepted that i’m going to die, but before i do, i want to see 
justice in the prison system. The only way to help me now is 
to put an end to rape in prison.”
Photo: James Stenson
Bryson Martel,  
1963-2010New Coalition Advocates for 
Binding National StandardsThese statistics represent a snapshot, as the BJs survey includes only inmates present 
at a prison or jail on a particular day. The 
annual number of admissions to county jails is 
many times higher than the average daily jail 
population, meaning that only a fraction of 
detainees were surveyed. Together with what 
already is known about the prevalence of rape 
in juvenile facilities, this means that the true 
number of people sexually abused in detention 
every year is much higher than 88,500.
While any inmate can be raped, the study 
found that those with a history of sexual abuse 
and those who identify as gay or transgender were most commonly targeted. strikingly, the 
new BJ s study confirms again that men and 
women in both prisons and jails were more 
likely to be abused by corrections staff than by other inmates. staff perpetrators were pre
-
dominantly of the opposite sex to the victim.
not surprisingly, some agencies fared consis -
tently worse than others.  The new data show 
clearly that corrections systems lacking 
committed leadership, strong policies, and sound practices run prisons and jails where 
sexual abuse flourishes.as mandated by the prison rape elimination 
act of 2003, the BJs report identified 
facilities with the highest and the lowest rates 
of sexual abuse. The Fluvanna Correctional 
Center, a women’s prison in Virginia, was 
the only facility to rank among those with 
the highest rates of both inmate-on-inmate 
abuse and staff sexual misconduct. 
Three of the five male prisons with the highest 
rates of inmate-on-inmate abuse were run by 
the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, 
while the four jails with the worst rates were 
in orleans parish (L a), Madison County 
(aL), Miami-Dade (FL), and Houston 
County ( aL). Facilities run by the new York 
state Department of Correctional services 
had the highest rates of staff sexual abuse for 
both men’s and women’s prisons. The list of 
jails with high rates of staff sexual misconduct 
was topped by Caroline County Jail (MD), eastern shore regional Jail (V a), and Clallam 
County Correctional Facility (W a).
  Federal Report   
continued from page 1
just detention international  3action update                      
Corrections officials have an absolute 
responsibility to make sure that all 
inmates in their care are safe from 
sexual abuse. That is a basic, essential 
part of their job. in the fight against prisoner 
rape, however, inmates can and must also play 
key roles in making prisons and jails safer. 
JDi has helped launch a ground-breaking in -
mate peer education program at the Califor -
nia Correctional institution (CCi). a large, 
troubled, and overcrowded prison, CCi has 
made the unusual decision to allow JDi and 
local rape crisis counselors into the facility to 
work directly with staff and inmates. The in -
mate peer educators are carefully chosen and 
trained prisoners who are able to speak with 
fellow inmates about sexual abuse and what 
to do in case of an assault. 
Three peer educators began working inside CCi earlier this year. in the month of august 
alone they held workshops with a total of 400 CCi inmates. The participants’ evaluations 
made clear the importance of these training sessions: “ i feel safer.” “This class needs to be 
a part of each inmate’s intake from day one.” 
“The presentation was concise, in-depth, 
and very well delivered, covering all aspects of sexual abuse and giving important contact information for those in need of help. i com
-
mend prea and its program presenters on a 
job very, very well done.”
Linda McFarlane, JDi ’s Deputy executive 
Director, explained: “Many inmates are 
terrified of talking to staff about sexual 
violence. as a result, survivors suffer alone, 
and prison officials don’t know when someone 
is being abused. Through the peer education 
project, we are trying to break the silence — a 
silence that allows sexual abuse to flourish 
behind bars.” 
The peer education program is taking place on one of CCi ’s “sensitive needs yards,” which 
houses more than 1,200 inmates, all of whom 
officials feel would be in danger in the general 
prison population. They include transgender 
women, openly gay men, previously victim -
ized inmates, ex-gang members, inmates with 
disabilities, and state witnesses.
“This program is helping to change the cul -
ture of the yard,” said Jodi ramirez, Health 
program specialist at CCi and staff sponsor 
of the pilot project. “ i am proud to be part of 
such a pioneering effort.”Inmate Peer Educators Fight Sexual Abuse
At its core, the fight to end sexual abuse 
in detention is about safeguarding basic human rights. prisoner rape, 
whether committed by corrections 
staff or by inmates, is not only a crime, it is 
recognized by international law as a form of torture. Therefore, JDi carefully monitors 
U.s. compliance with international human 
rights treaties that prohibit torture. 
This fall, the U.n. Human rights Council 
will assess the human rights record of the 
U.s. as part of a new process, the Universal 
periodic review (Upr). JDi has taken 
advantage of this opportunity to press the 
government to end the widespread sexual 
abuse of U.s. prisoners. 
in a “civil society consultation” with the 
state Department, JDi urged the obama 
administration to sign the optional protocol to the Convention against Torture and to 
finalize national standards aimed at ending 
sexual abuse in detention, which were 
developed by the national prison rape 
elimination Commission and are currently 
under review by attorney General eric 
Holder. JDi also provided a written report directly to the U.n. Human rights Council.
The U.s. review will take place at the Human 
rights Council’s session in Geneva on november 5, 2010, taking into account the 
government’s own report as well as “shadow reports” submitted by JDi and others.
“Freedom from torture is a basic human right,” said Cynthia Totten, program Director 
at JDi. “Until prisoner rape is recognized as 
a breach of human rights standards that the U.s. has committed to uphold, there will be 
no outcry to stop this violence.”JDI Helps Review U.S. Human Rights RecordFrank Mendoza cried as he told his story. so did many in the audi
-
ence. it was the first time he had 
spoken publicly about the sexual 
abuse he suffered at a Los angeles County 
jail — about the pain and powerlessness he felt as a Deputy sheriff assaulted him. 
now, sharing these experiences, he was fi
-
nally able to turn his ordeal into something 
positive: an opportunity to raise awareness 
about the horror of rape in detention, and to 
stimulate much needed corrections reform. 
at the september 2010 national sexual 
assault Conference in Los angeles, which 
JDi co-sponsored with the California 
Coalition against sexual assault and the 
pennsylvania Coalition against rape, Frank 
and other survivors captivated the audience 
like no other speakers could. They put faces 
on the problem of prisoner rape. More 
importantly, they suggested concrete ways 
that prisons and jails can prevent and respond 
to sexual abuse. staff members from the California Correc
-
tional institution (CCi), one of California’s 
large men’s prisons, were there to participate, 
listen, and learn. in that one room, human 
rights advocates, service providers, prisoner 
rape survivors, and corrections officials heard the hard truths and discussed solutions. if 
such moments, and such connections, could 
be created across the country, the battle 
against sexual abuse in detention would soon 
be won.
Listening to the  
Wisdom of Prisoner 
Rape SurvivorsPrisoner rape survivor Frank Mendoza 
at the 2010 National Sexual Assault 
Conference.
october 2010  | action  updatejust detenti On intern AtiOnAl  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 580-6949
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
4just detention international  october 2010  | action  update30 Years of Fighting Prisoner Rape  
Despi Te eVer YTH inG that 
happened to me, i am hopeful,” 
said Troy erik isaac, testifying at 
a Congressional briefing in June 
2010. Troy endured horrific sexual violence 
behind bars — starting at the age of 12, while 
in a juvenile facility. after spending more than 
two decades locked up in California prisons, 
Troy is now speaking out about his abuse and 
what needs to be done to protect adults and 
children from sexual violence. 
along with countless other prisoner rape 
survivors, Troy has turned his painful experi -
ences into an opportunity to become a pow -
erful human rights advocate. and corrections 
officials, legislators, and policymakers are 
listening.
Things have changed dramatically since the 
early days of JDi — founded in 1980 as people 
organized to stop the rape of imprisoned 
persons — when, as JDi founder russell D. 
smith put it, “ nobody was even thinking 
about the subject, much less speaking out 
against it.”
Tom Cahill, JD i’s former president, became 
so frustrated with the silence surrounding 
sexual abuse in prison that, in 1984, he 
parked his camper outside san Quentin state 
prison and went on a two-month hunger 
strike to draw attention to the suffering of incarcerated survivors. sixteen years earlier, 
Tom had been beaten and gang-raped in a 
Texas jail cell, after being locked up for civil 
disobedience.in the years since, the courage and activism 
of prisoner rape survivors who insisted 
on telling the brutal truth about their 
experiences behind bars brought to light 
a neglected domestic human rights crisis. 
Today, the battle against prisoner rape is no 
longer about proving that the problem exists, 
but about developing real solutions — and 
survivors continue to be at the forefront of 
the movement. 
now in its 30th year, JD i is proud to continue 
working with Tom, Troy, and thousands of 
others, demanding protection for the safety 
and dignity of all people behind bars.
For the past 30 years, prisoner rape survivors 
like Cecilia Chung (left) have played a vitally 
important role in the work of Just Detention 
International, including by serving on its Board 
of Directors; Barrilee Bannister (right) is one of 
many survivors who began speaking out while 
still behind bars, despite serious risks of retaliation. 
Since her release, Barrilee has continued to 
advocate for an end to prisoner rape. Both Cecilia 
and Barrilee are members of JDI’s Survivor 
Speakers List.
Photos: James StensonJDI’s Success a Testament to the Courage of Survivors
Photo: James Stenson
Justice Department 
Misses Deadline for 
National Standards
Former JDI President Tom Cahill. On June  23, 2010 , U.s. attorney 
General eric Holder missed 
his statutory deadline to final -
ize national standards aimed at 
ending sexual abuse in detention, as man -
dated by the prison rape elimination act 
(prea) of 2003. These standards, devel -
oped by the bipartisan national prison 
rape elimination Commission in collabo -
ration with JDi and many other organi -
zations, have the potential to become the 
most effective tool so far in the effort to 
end prisoner rape. sadly, the Justice De -
partment has set no new completion date 
for its internal review.  “The memory of the assaults will 
never go away. Just like other 
survivors, I have felt scared and 
mistrustful, or blamed myself for 
what happened. But we never asked 
to be raped and I know now that it 
is not our fault. I am here today to 
try my best to keep sexual abuse from 
happening to anyone else.”
— Kimberly Yates,  
testifying at a Congressional  
briefing on June 25, 2010