n this Action Update , we celebrate 
the Prison Rape Elimination Act’s (PREA) 15th anniversary. I often talk about the changes to policies and 
practices that this law has inspired — like safe housing for vulnerable inmates, con-fidential counseling for rape survivors, and better investigations. But PREA has done much more than that. Crucially, it has made corrections officials reexamine their attitudes toward prisoners, and their assumptions about prisoner rape. Using PREA as a tool, prison leaders now em-phasize the full humanity of the people in their custody, making sure staff recognize that sexual violence in detention is a huge problem — their problem. 
While PREA has 
been transforma-tive, legislation will only take us so far. If we want to make all prisons safe, all the time, for ev-ery single inmate, we need culture 
change. In July, the New York Times  aired 
a short documentary featuring Rodney Roussell, a JDI survivor advocate, boldly juxtaposing his rapes with late-night tele-vision jokes. Weeks later, in a segment on Samantha Bee’s Full Frontal , Bee and ac-
tor Terry Crews shamed their peers for us-ing prisoner rape as a punchline. Perhaps a cultural shift is finally starting to happen.
Thank you for being part of the movement 
to stop prisoner rape. We count on you, and we will win this fight.
Lovisa Stannow 
Executive Directorack in 1995, a 17-year-old boy named Rodney Hulin, Jr., was sent to a men’s prison for the crime of setting fire to a dumpster. 
The Clemens Unit was one of the most notorious prisons in Texas, Rodney’s home state. Within days of his arrival, Rodney was raped and beaten by other inmates. He reported the abuse, but the staff did nothing to help him. When he asked to be moved away from his abusers, his request was denied. So the assaults continued. Desperate, alone, and with seven years left on his sentence, Rodney committed suicide in his cell.  
The case of Rodney Hulin, Jr., would 
become a potent symbol of the crisis of prisoner rape. Rodney’s youth, the harmlessness of his offense, and the Fifteen Years of the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act!
Linda Bruntmyer (in the foreground, at the podium), the mother of Rodney Hulin, Jr., giving a speech 
in support of PREA at a JDI Capitol Hill rally in 2003See Fifteen Years of PREA!, continued on page 2
1action  update                                                                                      september 2018
just detention international  september 2018  | action  updateI
Bappalling details of his abuse made his story 
impossible to ignore. But the public outrage might have fizzled out were it not for the dogged determination of Rodney's mother, Linda Bruntmyer. 
Linda is one of the heroes in the story of the 
Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), the landmark law that was passed 15 years ago. Fueled by grief and anger over her son’s death, Linda joined a JDI-led coalition that was united in its belief that the government has an absolute duty to ensure the safety of the people it locks up. In June 2003, she took part in a historic JDI rally on Capitol Hill to demand PREA’s passage in Congress. “This is not what we mean when we say justice,” she told the gathering. “Rape should not be considered a part of punishment. Rape is always a crime.”To Honor PREA’s Anniversary, JDI is Celebrating 
the Movement that Made It Possible 
just detention international  2action  update                     
Fifteen Years of PREA!
At the Capitol Hill rally, Linda was joined 
by other advocates, including people whose lives had also been ripped apart by sexual violence in detention. One of them was Tom Cahill, JDI’s former President and a prisoner rape survivor; it was Tom’s tireless advocacy that brought the crisis of prisoner rape to the attention of Frank Wolf, a Congressman from Virginia who would go on to co-sponsor PREA in the House.
In her advocacy, Linda emphasized that 
what happened to Rodney was not an isolated tragedy.  This abuse was systemic and widespread — it was also totally preventable. After listening to Linda’s testimony at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on PREA, the late Ted Kennedy, a co-sponsor of the law in the Senate, made her a promise. “The best way that we can try and thank you,” he told Linda directly, “is to do something, and we will.” Pushed by Linda and her friends at JDI, Kennedy was true to his word. The late Senator, together with fellow Senate sponsor Jeff Sessions and House sponsors Wolf and Bobby Scott, ensured the bill’s smooth passage in Congress. When the law was signed by President George W. Bush, it was hailed as a human rights landmark — the first-ever federal legislation aimed at addressing the crisis of rape in detention. 
At the same time, Linda recognized that 
PREA’s passage did not mean that the fight to end this abuse was over. Together with  JDI and its allies, she pushed for strong federal 
standards that were required by PREA. “We know that what happened to Rodney could have been prevented,” she testified in 2005 before a federal commission tasked with developing the standards. “Rodney tried  
to ask for help, and I tried too. But nothing was done.”
Finalized in 2012, the national PREA 
standards include provisions that target the dangerous practices that contributed to Rodney’s suicide. Today, it is common practice for prisons and jails to train their staff on sexual abuse prevention and response, and specifically on protecting vulnerable detainees. Prisoners are being taught about their rights, and many more feel comfortable coming forward to report abuse. And crucially, staff are explicitly required to act on reports, including when they are made by a loved one on a prisoner’s behalf. 
Linda did not get to see the full impact of 
her advocacy. She passed away in December 2012, just months after the PREA standards were finalized. But she remains an inspiration for the movement to fight sexual abuse in detention. And no one who knew her, or heard her tell her son’s story, will ever quit until there are no more Rodney Hulins. continued from page 1An Inside Line for  
Incarcerated Survivors
Earlier this year, a young prisoner in Michi-
gan named Andrew* felt his life slipping away. He had been raped by his cellmate, and the shame and despair were overwhelming. Andrew found a number for a local rape crisis center, but those calls were expensive and, in any event, he knew they would be monitored by prison staff. Thinking he had no options left, Andrew contemplated suicide. 
A depressing number of prisoners have sto-
ries similar to Andrew’s. There are just so few places incarcerated survivors can safely turn to for help. JDI wasn't the only one to rec-ognize this glaring need —  Mary Mitchell, PREA Analyst for the Michigan Department of Corrections, did as well, and she reached out to JDI for help. In August, JDI launched a crisis hotline for prisoners in Michigan. Called An Inside Line , it is the first-ever cri-
sis hotline that is exclusively for incarcerated sexual abuse survivors. The hotline is free, and it is completely confidential.
An Inside Line  is having an impact — just ask 
Andrew. The counseling he’s received through the hotline has helped stop him from spiral-ing deeper into depression. “What makes this project so unique is that it provides safe and confidential support in a setting where speak-ing out, for so long, has been too risky,” ex-plained Jessica Serrano Seipel, a JDI Program Director who is part of the team that fields the hotline calls. “For the incarcerated survi-vors who call us, we’re the only people they feel they can trust. It’s a literal lifeline.”
Right now, An Inside Line  is only available to 
people in Michigan state prisons, but our aim is to expand it to other jurisdictions. A few weeks ago, Andrew got his release pa-pers. He was excited, but also a bit anxious about getting his life back together. So he called An Inside Line,  and he and Jessica to-
gether developed a plan to help ease his tran-sition. He felt better after their conversation — and he knows he can always call again. 
* Andrew's name has been changed to protect his 
privacy
Tom Cahill, former JDI President, JDI Survi-vor Council member, and a PREA champion, in Los Angeles in 2018
In her advocacy, Linda 
emphasized that what happened to Rodney was not an isolated tragedy. This abuse was systemic  and wide-
spread — it was also totally preventable. 
3action  update                     
september 2018  | action  updateThe Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) 
VWDQGVWRGD\DVRQHRIWKHPRVWVLJQLï -
cant human rights achievements of our time. PREA owes its existence to a JDI-led  coalition of advocates and prisoner rape survivors who spoke out against this vio-OHQFHÙDQGWRWKHHOHFWHGRIïFLDOVZKRlistened to them. Below, we honor some of PREA’s champions.
“I felt proud when PREA was passed, and 
it was meaningful to watch it get signed into law. But while I had a chance to tell my story to some of the most powerful people in  
the country, there were hundreds of thou-sands, if not millions, of victims of this violence who never had a chance to be heard at all. That day at the White House in 2003, I was representing all survivors of sexual abuse — and I know that JDI  
continues to represent them every single day.
”
Tom Cahill, former JDI President, JDI Survivor Council
“Looking back, I think we've achieved a great 
deal. We certainly know far more today than ever before about sexual assault in detention, the circumstances surrounding this abuse, and people who are vulnerable to it. The data we brought to bear truly helped convince people who had been skeptics that rape and sexual assault in detention was widespread, and de-served our attention.
”
Allen Beck, former Chief Statistician at the Bureau of Justice StatisticsThe People Behind a Landmark Law
“I don’t want to live in a world where people 
are raped in detention. That’s why I fought so hard and for so long for PREA — to make sure that prisoner rape ended with me.
”
Hope Hernandez, JDI Survivor Council
“To me, prisoner rape is an abomination, 
the worst kind of bullying, an unacceptable  
failure of American justice. I was involved at the beginning stages of PREA, when Con-gress was still developing language for the bill. We suggested it be called the National Prison Rape Reduction Act, but Congress changed it to the National Prison Rape Elimination Act — thus declaring its intent. The significance of that change speaks for itself. As a mem-ber of the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission (NPREC), I worked on the PREA standards, which are the best tool we have for the complete eradication of this vio-lence. We can end this violence, but it won't happen unless we have rigorous audits of prison compliance of the PREA standards.
”
John Kaneb, Vice-Chair of NPREC
“On the anniversary of the PREA legislation, 
I am reminded of the efforts of so many who have committed to this work of creating cul-tures of safety within our correctional envi-ronments.  The standards provide us with the tools, yet our vision of 'no more victims' must stay front and center of why we continue this imperfect but critical journey.
”
Andie Moss, President of the Moss Group“In the end, and perhaps most importantly, 
the effort to combat prison rape is a moral imperative. Whatever [a person’s] crime and whatever the prescribed punishment for them, in a humane society prison rape should not be a part of it. Prison rape not only derails justice — it destroys human dignity.
”
Congressman Bobby Scott, PREA ’s co-sponsor in the House of Representatives
 
“In the 15 years since the passage of PREA, 
the way we — as a nation — handle pris-oner rape has changed dramatically. Thanks to PREA, tens of thousands of corrections officials are trained to prevent sexual abuse every year; hundreds of thousands of in-mates are educated about their right to be safe. And yet, even with this landmark law in place, we are only at the end of the beginning  
of stopping prisoner rape. JDI will not  
quit until every single inmate is safe and treated with dignity. No matter what crime someone has committed, rape is not part of the penalty.
”
Lovisa Stannow, JDI’s Executive Director
“Back in 2003, when Congress passed PREA, 
many corrections leaders were angry. I was one of them. My story could have ended there, but it didn’t. I changed my mind. I came to recog-nize that PREA provides an important struc-ture for running safe prisons, and that JDI is essential to protecting the safety of inmates.”
“The thought that this violence could happen 
to anyone is unacceptable, and PREA is do-ing good work to end it. No one, no matter what crime they committed, should be sub-jected to sexual assault in detention.”Congressman Frank Wolf, PREA ’s co-sponsor in the House of Representatives
JDI Survivor Council member Hope Hernandez with President George W . Bush at the signing  ceremony for PREA in the Oval Office on  September 4, 2003Reggie Wilkinson, Chair of the Review Panel on Prison Rape4 just detention international  september 2018  | action  updateaction  update                     
Long Neglected in the Media,  
Prisoner Rape is Now Front and Center 
A few weeks earlier, the New York Times 
printed an op-ed by JDI Executive Director Lovisa Stannow on prison oversight. For the past few years, prisons and jails nationwide have been getting high marks from auditors on their work to address sexual abuse. Lovisa’s op-ed takes a close look at the audits — and wonders how credible they really are. Based on JDI’s analysis of thousands of audit re-ports, Lovisa argues that scores of manifestly unsafe prisons and jails are being deemed compliant with PREA. 
A case in point is the East Mississippi Cor-
rectional Facility (EMCF). The prison is widely known as a cesspool of staff-supported violence, but you wouldn’t know it from the auditor’s write-up. His assessment praises the prison leadership for their commitment to PREA; both staff and inmates, per his report, feel that EMCF is a “safe place to serve time.” The report seems to be describing a differ-ent facility entirely — which it was, in fact. Shockingly, many of the report’s observations had simply been lifted from the auditor’s re-ports of other prisons. 
The problem of substandard PREA oversight 
is not limited to one sloppy auditor — it’s across the board. The audits are supposed to shed light on what’s really going on inside prisons and jails, whether they are keeping inmates safe from sexual abuse. Instead, most are sugar coating and simplifying, creating an illusion of safety. Indeed, if you reviewed only PREA audit reports, you might think that the crisis of prisoner rape has been solved. 
Fortunately, the system of assessing PREA 
compliance is not beyond repair. In the New 
York Times  op-ed, Lovisa urges Congress to 
pass the First Step Act, a piece of legislation that would codify guidelines to vastly improve these audits. In July, the First Step Act was passed by the House of Representatives, and we remain hopeful that it will become law in the coming months.
JDI has been pushing for decades to bring 
greater attention to the rampant sexual abuse or decades, sexual abuse in detention 
was largely ignored by journalists. It was taken for granted that prison life was dangerous and that inmates — a group 
that has never elicited much sympathy — might be raped. 
But that’s changing. Major media outlets 
are starting to pay attention to the crisis of prisoner rape, challenging pervasive biases about people behind bars. In July, the New 
York Times  published a stirring video — part 
of their op-doc series — that featured Rod-ney Roussell, a JDI survivor advocate. In the op-doc, Rodney gives a frank and graphic de-scription of the sexual assaults he endured in a New Orleans jail. As he says in the video, “I felt like dirt, like I didn’t even exist.” Rod-ney describes how staff did nothing to pro-tect him; one even laughed as Rodney’s rapist forced him to dance. 
The video powerfully juxtaposes Rodney’s  
testimony with prisoner rape jokes that are still fodder for late night television. Perhaps now, after watching Rodney give an account of his time behind bars, television writers and comedians will finally start seeing inmates as people, not punch lines. 
just detention international
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010Tel:  (213) 384-1400
(DVW&RDVW2IïFH
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036Tel: (202) 506-3333
JDI-South Africa
Norwood Place, 2nd Floor 66 Grant AvenueNorwood, Johannesburg 2192South AfricaTel: +27 (11) 483 0989
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgF
Rodney Roussell, a JDI survivor advocate who 
was the subject of a groundbreaking op-doc in the New York Timesin our prisons and jails — and to shatter the negative stereotypes about inmates that allow such violence to flourish. 
The pair of pieces in the New York 
Times  are evidence of the gains that all 
of us, together, are making in the fight to protect the safety and dignity of people in detention. Let’s keep shining a spotlight on the crisis of prisoner rape, so that the suffering of people like Rodney is never again ignored. 
Lovisa's op-ed and the op-doc featuring 
Rodney Roussell can be found on the  New 
York Times'  website. JDI has also posted 
both pieces on our website, at www.justde-
tention.org/media