When the story  broke about a 
massive power outage at Brook -
lyn’s Metropolitan Detention 
Center (MDC), I was horrified. 
In the dead of winter, more than 1,600 in -
mates went nearly a week without light, 
heat, or hot water. 
It came as no sur -
prise to  see MDC 
in the headlines. 
The prison has 
long been on JDI’s 
radar for its ram -
pant staff sexual 
abuse. Worse still, 
two prison audits 
failed to detect any red flags — an aston -
ishing failure of oversight, which I high -
lighted in a Washington Post  op-ed.
 
The conditions inside MDC are an in -
dictment of the people running it. When 
prison leaders can’t keep the heat on, let 
alone protect the people in their custody 
from rape, it is a fundamental failure. At 
the same time, the scandals at MDC have 
given me reason to feel hopeful. After the 
power went out, family members of MDC 
prisoners protested outside the facility; 
their efforts got the heat and hot water 
turned back on and sparked a federal in -
vestigation. And when JDI raised the 
alarm over the lack of proper monitoring 
at MDC, it helped us secure a law to im -
prove oversight of detention facilities.
The lesson is that it is possible to make a 
difference in the lives of prisoners. JDI will 
always stand up for the rights of people 
who are locked up — and we know that 
you will, too. risoner rape is  an unacceptable 
violation of human rights. 
Period. This is one of the rare 
truths on which Democrats and 
Republicans agree. And yet, in this time of 
shutdowns and non-stop partisan feuding, 
to reach consensus is no sure thing. 
So it counted as a major breakthrough 
when, in December, JDI helped push a 
historic criminal justice bill through a 
bitterly divided Congress. Called the First 
Step Act, the new law will lead to dramatic 
improvements in the way prisoners, 
especially women, are treated. Under the 
law, federal women’s prisons now have 
to provide free sanitary items and can no 
longer shackle inmates who are pregnant. We Called for Prison Reform. 
Congress Acted.
The First Step Act will help end the chronic deprivation in women's prisons. When Alabama's Julia 
Tutwiler Prison (above) lifted restrictions on sanitary items, it made the facility safer. See Congress Acted., continued on page 3
1action  update                                                                                       march 2019
just detention international  march 2019  | action  updatePJDI advocated for these reforms because 
women routinely tell us about the degrading 
conditions behinds bars. When women are 
forced to beg for tampons or visit the ob-gyn 
in shackles and cuffs, it’s a violation of their 
basic dignity. Even worse, by giving abusive 
staff leverage over inmates, these practices can 
also be a recipe for sexual assault. Under the 
First Step Act, prisons will not only have to 
supply basic hygiene items, but they must do 
so for free, so that no woman is ever left to 
choose between calling a loved one or using 
a clean pad. 
The First Step Act recognizes the vital 
role of trauma-informed programs behind 
bars. Too often, criminal justice reform has 
focused exclusively on helping people  after In this heated political climate, JDI secured the passage 
of two laws that will make detention facilities safer 
Lovisa Stannow
Executive Directorjust detention international  2action  update                     
ne day in 2014, toward the end 
of his shift as an inmate janitor, 
Nathan Jones saw an item on the 
prison bulletin board that filled 
him with optimism. It was a notice explaining 
that his Wyoming prison would soon be 
audited on its efforts to keep inmates safe 
from sexual abuse. Any prisoner could meet 
with the auditor, and their conversations 
would be kept confidential. 
Several of Nathan’s friends at the prison were 
being abused, and none felt comfortable 
speaking out. A few years earlier, Nathan 
himself had been sexually assaulted by a staff 
member while at a different facility.
Nathan arranged to speak with the auditor, 
and felt hopeful that the meeting would help 
put a stop to the rampant sexual assaults and 
harassment. “I believed this was my chance, 
finally, to have my voice heard,” he recalled. With Strong Prison Audits,
Inmates Will Be Heard
But Nathan never got that chance. His 
meeting with the auditor was not held 
somewhere private, but in a room adjacent 
to the Associate Warden’s office. The door to 
the room was left wide open, and staff were 
within earshot of everything that was said. So 
Nathan kept quiet.   
Nathan’s experience is not uncommon. JDI 
has learned of many instances of auditors who 
failed to conduct robust oversight — and who 
left prisoners in danger. In response, we helped 
pass the Parole Commission Extension Act, a 
law that calls on auditors to adhere to strict 
guidelines on how to do proper assessments, 
including conducting interviews in a “safe 
space where inmates can freely discuss their 
experiences at and perspectives of the facility.” 
Nathan, who was released in 2016 and recently 
joined JDI’s Survivor Council, is confident 
that the new law will make a difference. 
or many years,  the name Julia 
Tutwiler Prison was practically 
synonymous with sexual violence. Staff 
preyed on women with a staggering 
frequency; per a government report, at least 
a third of all Tutwiler staff had committed 
sexual assault.
The prison’s problems were the result of 
leadership’s refusal to take seriously the Free Tampons and Pads Are a First Step  
to Prison Safety
concerns of the women in their care and 
to treat them with dignity. Appallingly, 
Tutwiler’s inmates were often denied basic 
necessities like tampons and toilet paper. The 
scarcity of hygiene products gave abusers on 
staff nearly unlimited power. In a number of 
cases, women were forced to “trade” sex in 
exchange for tampons.
Women at many other prisons have told 
us that tampons, pads, and toilet paper are 
held under lock and key. Not surprisingly, 
these are also prisons where sexual abuse 
flourishes. Because of the direct link 
between deprivation and abuse — and 
because unfettered access to tampons, 
pads, and toilet paper is a matter of basic 
dignity — JDI advocated for the First Step 
Act, which includes a provision calling on 
prisons to provide the people in their care 
with free sanitary products. When the First 
Step Act was signed into law, in December, 
it represented a major victory for the rights 
of women in prison. Nathan Jones with his wife, Carolyn
For proof that free tampons and pads can 
lead to safer prisons, one need look no 
further than Tutwiler. Prompted by a federal 
civil rights investigation, Tutwiler began 
giving its prisoners unrestricted access to 
sanitary items in 2015. 
“Tutwiler was once an example of how not 
to run a facility,” explained Julie Abbate, 
JDI’s National Advocacy Director, who, 
in her previous job at the Department of 
Justice, ran a civil rights investigation into 
abuses at the prison. 
“Today, Tutwiler is dramatically safer and 
women have a measure of dignity that 
had been denied to them before. These 
improvements are directly related to an end 
to the pointless and demeaning limits on 
tampons and pads, ” she said.   
Now that we have the First Step Act, 
women in prisons nationwide will see their 
lives improve, too.F“When I was locked up, I was denied the 
chance to speak openly with someone who 
had the ability to make my life and the lives 
of others better. But that’s going to change, 
and I’m thrilled.” O
march 2019  | action  update3action  update                     
Congress Acted.
continued from page 1
their release. Yet the vast majority of people 
in detention have experienced significant 
trauma — poverty, violence, sexual abuse, 
and more. As we have seen time and time 
again, any effort to ensure a smooth reentry 
will be futile if we do not provide ways 
for people in detention to develop healthy 
coping skills. Now, many thousands more 
prisoners will receive the help they need 
and deserve. 
The passage of the First Step Act comes on 
the heels of another major human rights 
victory on Capitol Hill. In October, the 
Parole Commission Extension Act was 
signed into law. While this legislation 
may sound irrelevant to our work fighting 
prisoner rape, it has the potential to improve 
dramatically the system of prison oversight. 
Over the past year, with the help of 
survivors who shared their stories, JDI has 
exposed how prison auditors have failed 
to detect problems in unsafe facilities. 
We placed op-eds in the Washington Post 
and the New York Times  that highlighted 
some of the most egregious examples of 
staff sexually abusing inmates in facilities, 
even as auditors declared they were safe. 
Yet shaming bad auditors isn’t enough. 
Working directly with lawmakers on both 
sides of the aisle, we crafted legislation to 
address the problem.    
Our approach paid off — the Parole 
Commission Extension Act includes the 
new audit provisions that JDI fought 
for. Now, the people who conduct facility 
audits will be held to far stricter standards 
— and those who fail to do a good job will 
be barred from doing any more audits. No 
more turning a blind eye to sexual abuse.  
As with every JDI success in the fight 
against prisoner rape, these two laws would 
not have happened without the courage 
of survivors who speak out about the 
brutal realities of life in prison. Survivors’ 
testimony made it clear that new legislation 
was urgently needed to tackle chronic 
deprivation and weak oversight. 
These victories are also a credit to the bold 
support of people like you, who are willing 
to stand up for human rights. 
 homas yellow boy  doesn’t fit 
the profile of a stereotypical youth 
detention officer. When Thomas talks 
about working at the Wanbli Wiconi 
Tipi Youth Wellness and Renewal Center — 
a tribal juvenile detention facility in South 
Dakota — he doesn’t mention security 
cameras or perimeter fencing. Instead, he’ll 
tell you about the vegetable garden the kids 
tend to, or the facility's sweat lodge. 
“These are bright, talented kids who lost 
their way,” explained Thomas, who, as the 
facility’s Prison Rape Elimination Act 
(PREA) Coordinator, is tasked with keeping 
the youth safe. “My job is to provide a 
supportive and caring environment, so that 
they can get their lives back on track.”
Wanbli Wiconi Tipi is run by the Rosebud 
Sioux Tribe, a branch of the Lakota people. 
The facility has long been a safe haven 
for kids in a community that has been 
besieged by poverty, addiction, and other 
social ills stemming from many decades of 
persecution. The facility’s stellar track record 
can be chalked up to tribal leaders, who leap 
at any opportunity to give the kids in their 
custody a chance to flourish. 
When the government released the PREA 
standards — which are aimed at protecting 
people in custody from rape — Wanbli 
Wiconi Tipi staff recognized that these rules For the Rosebud Sioux Youth, 
the Future is Bright
are a valuable tool. And, in JDI, they found a 
partner who could help them use that tool.   
In 2015, with the support of a grant from 
the Bureau of Justice Assistance, JDI and 
the Rosebud Sioux Tribe began working 
together to make Wanbli Wiconi Tipi the 
first tribal facility in the country to adopt 
the PREA standards. The key staff person 
behind the project was Miskoo Petite, Sr., a 
Facility Administrator who led the push to 
bring the facility into compliance with the 
rules. Working with Miskoo and Thomas, 
JDI trained detention staff on best practices 
for preventing sexual violence and abuse; our 
team also helped bring outside advocates 
into the facility to give services and lend a 
compassionate ear to the youth, many of 
whom have suffered serious trauma. 
“PREA is about treating people with dignity 
and respect, and those principles will lay a 
foundation for safety in any facility, whether 
a massive state prison or a small, community-
run tribal facility,” said Linda McFarlane, a 
JDI Deputy Executive Director. “Put simply, 
PREA works when you have strong, dedicated 
leaders — like Miskoo and Thomas.” 
Thomas is proud of the work that Wanbli 
Wiconi Tipi and JDI have done together. 
He’s also proud of the kids. “I see many of 
them in the community when they get out, 
and they’re thriving. Their future is bright. ” 
TWanbli Wiconi Tipi staff and advocates from White Buffalo Calf Women's Society — which provides 
services to youth at the facility — created this "family flag" during a JDI workshop
just detention international  march 2019  | action  update4 just detention international  march 2019  | action  updateaction  update                     
by Sofia Robinson, an eighth grader who is one 
of the campaign’s most prolific card-writers. Sofia 
has been writing holiday cards since she was five, 
and this year, she organized her schoolmates to 
join her. As Sofia writes in her op-ed, “The point 
of these cards is to make prisoners who have been 
sexually abused feel better. But it also feels really 
good to write them. So it’s a win-win.”
The cards from our supporters were beautifully 
crafted, with drawings and eye-popping color. 
Survivors also showed their artistic side, sending 
us their own lovely thank you cards in return.   
The gesture is especially meaningful given that 
prisoners do not have ready-made cards, nor  
markers or crayons. Their cards have to be pains -
takingly created by hand, using ink scraped from 
magazines and found materials. “This is the best 
I can do, because I can’t do much behind bars,” 
wrote Vernon on a card he made himself. “But I 
hope that this card shows just how thankful I am 
for all of your support.”
just detention international
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
JDI-South Africa
Norwood Place, 2nd Floor 
66 Grant Avenue
Norwood, Johannesburg 2192
South Africa
Tel: +27 (11) 483 0989
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgmagine spending every day in a 
cramped cell, with zero privacy, and be -
ing subjected to abuse and harassment. 
Larry knows what it feels like to live this 
way. Last year, after he was raped by two fel -
low inmates, he fell into a deep despair. When 
he tried to report the assault, he was sent to 
solitary, which only made things worse. 
But over the holidays, Larry was thrown a 
lifeline — by you. Through the Words of Hope  
campaign, JDI supporters sent Larry compas -
sionate messages reminding him that his life 
has value — that everyone, including prison -
ers, deserve to be safe and have dignity. 
"The Cards Made Me Feel Like a Person"
“These are the only cards I received this year,” 
Larry wrote us in a letter. “They made me feel 
like a person.”   
This year, thanks to the kindness of people like 
you, we delivered a staggering 26,000 Words of 
Hope  messages to survivors nationwide. That’s 
easily our best total yet — an extraordinary 
display of compassion that is changing lives. 
It wasn’t just the record number of cards that 
made this year special.  What made this year 
truly remarkable is that many JDI supporters 
held their own card-writing events. 
One of those supporters is Jordan, a UCLA 
law student. After hearing about the cam -
paign from her professor, Jordan decided to 
get involved — and to get her classmates in -
volved, too. “The campaign is a great way to 
show solidarity with incarcerated survivors,” 
she said. 
Across the country in Virginia, Helen, anoth -
er supporter, brought together dozens of card 
writers. This was her second year hosting a 
card-writing day. Everyone who attended last 
year’s event came back — and, even better, 
they tripled the number of cards they wrote. 
“It’s important to remind people who are in -
carcerated they are not alone,” she told us.
Words of Hope  also received a major boost 
when the New York Times published an op-ed JDI supporters holding Words of Hope cards they created at a card-writing event organized by Helen 
(second from left)
IJDI supporters sent a record-shattering 26,000 Words of Hope
messages, bringing hope and kindness to survivors behind bars
A handmade thank you card from a survivor