When the government  
takes away someone’s freedom, 
it must protect that person’s safe -
ty. When the detainee is a child, 
that obligation becomes especially urgent. 
Sadly, a recent gov -
ernment study found 
that almost one in 
eight detained youth 
in the U.S. had been 
sexually abused in 
the preceding year 
alone — more than 
80 percent of them 
by staff. Instead of 
helping troubled kids 
turn their lives around, an appalling number 
of officers have done the very opposite, abus -
ing the children in their care.
You might expect corrections officials to ex -
press horror at such findings, and to seek seri -
ous change. Some have done exactly that – 
but many others, including some of the most 
influential corrections leaders in the country, 
are instead blocking reform.
Last June, a bipartisan government commis -
sion released national standards aimed spe -
cifically at ending prisoner rape. these stan -
dards are now bogged down in a Department 
of Justice review. the reason: prison officials 
claim that it will be too expensive to imple -
ment the standards — too expensive  to pre -
vent staff from raping detainees.
now we need your help. Until may 10, the 
Department of Justice is accepting public 
comments on the standards. Please sign and 
mail the postcard included in this Action Up -
date, urging the Attorney general to finalize 
the standards — swiftly and fully.
Lovisa Stannow 
executive Director
It hAS been more  than nine 
months since the national Prison 
rape elimination Commission re -
leased its Standards for the Preven -
tion, Detection, response, and monitor -
ing of Sexual Abuse in Detention. these 
standards have the potential to become the 
most important tool so far in the effort to 
end prisoner rape in the United States. by law, Attorney general eric holder has 
until June 2010 to review the standards and 
formalize them into federal regulations, mak -
ing them binding on detention facilities na -
tionwide. Disappointingly, the Department 
of Justice’s review of the standards is moving 
slowly. It is now clear that holder will miss 
his deadline — perhaps by as much as a year.A Historic Opportunity  
to End Prisoner Rape
Attorney General Reviewing Proposed National Standardsaction update                                                                                       april 2010
just detention international  april 2010 | action  updateSee STANDARDS REVIEW, continued on page 2
just detention international  april 2010 | action  updateTell the Obama Administratio n–  
Stop the Rape of Prisoners Nowaction update                      
The Department of Justice is soliciting public comments on the national standards ad -
dressing sexual abuse behind bars — standards that have the potential to save tens of 
thousands of inmates the devastation of rape every year. JDI urges all its supporters 
to take advantage of this public comment period and 
send a message to the Attorney general urging him 
to adopt the standards currently before him, which were developed by the national Prison rape elimina
-
tion Commission. Please sign and mail the postcard 
included in this Action Update , or visit JDI’s website 
(www.justdetention.org), to submit your comments in support of the standards. the public comment period 
ends on may 10, 2010. Some corrections leaders are pressuring the 
Department to weaken the standards, argu -
ing that they will be too expensive. In re -
sponse, the Attorney general has commis -
sioned a cost projection study of standards implementation. this study is not a cost-
benefit analysis; it is based on estimated 
expenses provided by corrections adminis -
trators. officials who oppose the standards, 
or who are seeking to bolster corrections 
appropriations, have an obvious incentive to inflate their estimates. beyond the ques
-
tionable utility and accuracy of such a study, 
it dangerously encourages a focus on cost 
without regard for safety or human rights.
on march 10, the Department of Justice 
opened a 60-day public comment period, 
soliciting input on the Commission’s final 
recommendations and posing specific ques -
tions related to cost, the definition of rape, 
and whether the standards’ requirements 
should vary at different types of facilities.  
JDI has mobilized a new coalition to dem -
onstrate the strong support for the standards 
that exists across U.S. society — including 
among corrections officials, who recognize 
the urgency of ending prisoner rape and un -
derstand the importance of the standards. 
the raising the bar for Justice and Safety 
Coalition is submitting comments urging the Attorney general to enact the standards 
fully and quickly.
the fiscal benefits of the standards will be 
substantial, as the costs of sexual abuse in 
detention are enormous. States lose mil -
lions of dollars every year in prisoner abuse 
lawsuits alone. based on JDI’s work with 
corrections officials who are already adopt -
ing the measures, we know that the expense 
need not be significant. 
most importantly, stopping prisoner rape is 
the right thing to do. that is why Attorney 
general holder should act swiftly to adopt 
the standards as binding federal regulations, 
without watering them down. Anything 
less will signify acceptance of the status quo 
— the continued sexual abuse of more than 
100,000 adults and children each year.Standards Review
continued from page 1
In addition  to soliciting public comments 
on the national Prison rape elimination 
Commission’s recommended standards 
(see page 1), the Department of Justice 
is requesting input on three specific questions. these questions stem from objections to the 
standards by some key prison administrators, 
who wish to limit the scope of these measures. 
What would be the implications of referring to 
“sexual abuse” as opposed to “rape” in the final 
standards? 
JDI’ s Response:  based on the definition of “prison 
rape” provided in the Prison rape elimination 
Act (P reA), some critics have argued that 
sexual harassment, staff-on-inmate voyeurism, 
and indecent exposure by staff should not be 
covered by the standards. Yet, these are often 
precursors to other forms of sexual abuse, and 
responding to them constitutes vitally im -
portant preventive action. Any serious effort 
to address the problem of prisoner rape must 
confront the full spectrum of coercive sexual 
activity and staff sexual misconduct. 
Would any of the Commission’s proposed standards 
violate PREA by imposing “substantial additional 
costs compared to the costs presently expended by 
Federal, State, and local prison authorities”? 
JDI’s Response:  relative to the billions of 
dollars spent on corrections every year, implementing the Commission’s standards 
will be comparatively inexpensive. U.S. 
detention facilities are constitutionally 
required to protect the safety of inmates, regardless of PreA. If they are meeting 
such basic obligations, complying with the standards will cost little. moreover, 
any assessment of the price of protecting 
inmates from sexual abuse must be 
understood in light of the dramatic benefits 
of doing so. Prisoner rape is expensive — to 
the corrections agency, the individual, and 
society at large — and the costs are not only 
financial, but moral. 
Should the Department consider varying 
compliance requirements according to facili -
ties’ size, personnel or resource limitations, or 
other factors? 
JDI’s Response:  Sexual abuse in detention is 
a crime and a human rights violation, and 
unacceptable in any setting, whether a large prison or a small jail. the standards rep
-
resent the bare minimum needed for any 
facility to meet its constitutional obligation to protect inmates from abuse. varying the 
expectations of compliance based on factors 
such as the size and resources of a facility 
will undermine the goal of the standards 
and will add confusion to their otherwise 
straightforward expectations.Attorney General Weighing Cost, 
Definitions, Compliance Factors
just detention international  april 2010 | action  update“Paths to Recovery Opened Our Minds”
FOllOW JDI ON TWITTER !
Just Detention International has joined Twitter, 
the social networking website. 
Via our “tweets,” we share with supporters, pris -
oner rape survivors, journalists, and others the 
most up-to-date information about our work. 
To find JDI on Twitter, visit http://twitter.com/
JustDetention and become a follower. 
A large Twitter following will help increase 
awareness of the problem of sexual abuse in 
detention. GooD AnD DeDICA teD correc -
tions officials know that sexual abuse 
in detention is a terrible problem for 
its immediate victims — and for 
staff as well. these are people who take pride 
in their jobs and their profession and nothing 
could be more contrary to their mission than 
allowing those in their care to be raped. 
Sgt. Charles Contreras is an investigative ser -
geant at California Correctional Institution 
(CCI), one of the state’s largest men’s pris -
ons. he is a champion of one of JDI’s pilot 
programs for addressing sexual assault behind 
bars. the project, Paths to recovery, puts 
many of the national Prison rape elimina -
tion Commission’s recommended standards 
into practice at CCI. Working with JDI and 
a local rape crisis center, Women’s Center – high Desert, CCI has created a Sexual As
-
sault response team (SArt ), trained staff 
and inmates, and begun allowing outside 
counselors to provide confidential crisis coun -
seling to survivors of sexual abuse.
Sgt. Contreras talked with JDI about the importance of Paths to recovery, which he 
credits with changing the culture of the insti -
tution for the better.
Why is Paths to Recovery important for CCI?
First and foremost, it’s important to recog -
nize that an inmate who has been abused is a sexual assault victim. he needs medical treat
-
ment and he needs staff to be sensitive during 
the investigative process. We must make it 
clear to the inmate that he can trust every -
one on the SArt . the follow-up counseling 
and referrals that victims receive through JDI and Women’s Center – high Desert are also 
important. Inmates get this aftercare whether the case is substantiated or not. victims need 
to heal. Sexual abuse worsens and weakens the facility — makes it less safe. having a 
SArt has helped us respond better, for the 
good of the entire facility.
What changes have you seen at the prison?
through time and training, staff have learned 
to take sexual abuse allegations seriously. tunnel vision — wanting the facts, but forget -
ting that the victim has needs. Paths to re-
covery has opened our minds to addressing 
the victims’ needs. 
It has certainly been a big adventure, allow -
ing outsiders like JDI and Women’s Center – high Desert into the prison, and learning 
about the new standards. Sometimes, it’s 
been a challenge, but I think it’s a positive 
challenge.
Staff have come to realize that sexual abuse is 
an issue within the institution that we are re -
sponsible for addressing. training the investi -
gative staff on the dynamics of sexual assault 
and how to respond to incidents made us 
more efficient in the way we handle sexual as -
sault allegations. Simply put, thanks to Paths to recovery, as staff we are now better able to 
do our jobs.
For inmates, Paths to recovery has made it 
easier to file a report. that’s a good thing. As 
staff, we want those who have been sexually 
abused to tell us what has happened. Inmates 
who wish to file a report but who do not want 
to tell us directly have the option of calling 
the office of Internal Affairs sexual assault 
hotline. or they can write a note to our medi -
cal staff, or talk directly with the JDI staff and 
the rape crisis counselors. 
What lessons can other corrections facilities learn 
from your experience?
one of the most important lessons is that outside groups are there to assist us. they 
can let us know what a victim might be going 
through. A lot of times we get caught up in Pilot project changes prison staff views on sexual abuse in detention
Sgt. Charles ContrerasVOCA Funding Rules  
to Change, Allowing  
Services for Inmates
JDI applauds the Department of Justice for its march 10, 2010 announcement 
that the Attorney general is seeking to 
eliminate a regulation that bars the use of victims of Crime Act funds — the life blood 
of community rape crisis centers — to assist 
incarcerated prisoner rape victims. JDI has 
advocated for the removal of that misguided 
policy for years. It is significant that the De -
partment of Justice recognizes that victims of 
sexual abuse behind bars should be able to re -
ceive the same crisis intervention services that 
are available to victims in the community.
just detention international  april 2010 | action  updateaction update                      
just detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgIn JAnUArY, A Long- AWAI teD 
study from the Department of Justice’s 
bureau of Justice Statistics (bJS) revealed 
that youth in juvenile corrections facilities are 
sexually abused at alarming rates. 
A shocking 12.1 percent — almost one in eight 
— of the detained youth who participated in 
the survey reported being sexually abused at 
their current facility during the previous year 
alone. In the worst places, more than 30 per -
cent of young detainees were victimized. 
All survivors of sexual violence in detention 
face obstacles to reporting abuse, including fear 
of stigma and further assaults. Young survivors 
lack experience in corrections settings and of -
ten fear adult authority figures. the bJS survey 
found that the vast majority of perpetrators in 
youth facilities were staff members, whose very 
job it is to keep youth safe. When corrections officials so blatantly abuse their power, it is 
no wonder that most youth do not believe 
reporting is a good option.
According to the study, youth with histo -
ries of victimization are more than twice as 
likely as other detainees to be abused while 
incarcerated. Predators disproportionately 
target teens who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender or gender non-conforming.
For anyone who has doubted the need for 
the national standards currently under re -
view by the Attorney general (and de -
scribed elsewhere in this Action Update ) this 
bJS survey should serve as a wake-up call. 
When troubled children are being raped 
by the very government employees who 
are charged with keeping them safe — not 
occasionally, but regularly, and across the 
country — then our systems are failing us.
Survivors Offer  
Insights to the  
Justice Department 
PrISoner r APe survivors are 
central to the effort to end sexual 
violence behind bars. In January, 
JDI brought five members of its 
Survivor Speakers List — garrett Cun -
ningham, hope hernandez, Scott how-
ard-Smith, troy erik Isaac, and Kimberly 
Yates — to address the Department of Justice P reA Working group. Speaking 
about the devastating sexual violence they 
had endured, each of the survivors high -
lighted the importance of the national stan -
dards currently under review by the Justice 
Department. 
“With better policies and practices, I would 
never have been assaulted,” said Yates, who 
was raped by an officer while in federal cus -
tody, after prison officials had ignored prior 
reports of the officer’s attacks. 
“the standards are about accountability 
— corrections officials must be account -
able for abuse committed on their watch,” 
insisted howard-Smith, a survivor of re -
peated sexual assaults by other inmates in 
a Colorado prison. “I want the Attorney general to institute strong standards that 
will make sure such violence doesn’t happen 
to anyone else.” The n AtIon AL e PIDemIC  
of sexual violence behind bars 
has finally begun receiving the 
media attention it deserves. Signifi -
cantly, in early 2010, The Washing -
ton Post  and The New York Times  
published strong editorials urging Attorney general eric holder to 
codify national standards address -
ing sexual abuse in detention. JDI 
staff and members of its Survivor Speak -
ers List have also been featured promi -
nently in dozens of press reports. 
the bureau of Justice Statistics’ ground -
breaking report revealing widespread sexual 
abuse of detained youth generated nation -
wide coverage. In the last few months, JDI 
staff and survivor advocates have appeared 
on Cnn and national Public radio, and in 
dozens of printed stories, including in USA 
Today , The Economist , and Associated Press. 
During the same period, JDI has published 
op-ed pieces in numerous newspapers across Rampant Sexual Abuse  
in Juvenile Detention Facilities
Media Spotlight on 
Prisoner Rape
the country as well as a two-part series in 
The New York Review of Books .
“Prisoner rape remains a neglected crisis, 
and a misunderstood one,” explains Lovisa Stannow, executive Director of JDI. “Any 
media coverage that describes sexual abuse 
in detention as the crime and human rights 
violation that it is brings us one step closer to 
finally ending this type of violence.” 