ack in February, I announced 
that I would be stepping down as 
JDI’s Executive Director in June, 
after 18 years with this remarkable 
organization. Then the pandemic hit, 
turning the world upside down. Our Board 
of Directors asked me stay until the end of 
the year, to ensure that we found the right 
person to take the helm of JDI.
As it turns out, the Board did not need to look very far. I am 
thrilled to share that 
in September, after a 
national search, the 
Board appointed Linda McFarlane, our Deputy 
Executive Director, as JDI’s next Executive Director. I’ve worked with Linda since 2005, when she joined JDI to run our 
then-new project to bring direct services 
to prisoners in California. The program she established had a transformative impact — 
the first of many initiatives that owed its 
success to her extraordinary leadership.
Linda is one of my favorite people in the 
world. She is poised to lead JDI during 
what is a difficult, unsettling moment for 
incarcerated survivors. As you’ll read in these pages, JDI’s staff is meeting the needs 
of survivors who are more marginalized 
than ever. With Linda in charge, this 
dynamic team will continue its incredible 
human rights work, taking on whatever challenges come next. 
The movement to stop prisoner is made up 
of the bravest people I know. Thank you for 
giving so much to this fight, and for being 
the amazing human rights champions that you are.
 
Lovisa Stannow
Executive Director he global movement to end 
prisoner rape is set to embark on a 
new chapter, as Linda McFarlane 
takes up the reins as the next 
Executive Director of Just Detention International. Linda is hardly a new face: she has worked at JDI for 15 years, serving 
as our Deputy Executive Director since 2008. 
Linda's achievements include developing 
our groundbreaking prison safety 
initiatives that today are the gold standard 
for addressing sexual abuse behind bars. 
She succeeds Lovisa Stannow, who held the position of Executive Director since 
2004 and presided over JDI’s emergence as 
the undisputed leader in the fight to stop sexual abuse in all forms of detention.Welcome, Linda McFarlane — 
Our New Executive Director!  
JDI’s newly appointed Executive Director, Linda McFarlane, pictured here at a JDI Survivor 
Summit in Washington, DC. As Deputy Executive Director, Linda spearheaded bold projects 
to prevent and respond to sexual abuse inside detention facilities.See Our New Executive Director, continued on page 2
action  update                                                                                       OCTOBER 2020
B
T“Linda has a nuanced understanding of 
JDI’s mission, an unrivaled track record of 
advocating for incarcerated survivors, and a 
clear-eyed vision for building on our many accomplishments,” said Russell Robinson, 
the Chair of JDI’s Board, who oversaw the 
national search for a new Executive Director. 
“I have no doubt that our movement will 
continue to thrive, and grow even stronger, with her at the helm.”
After joining JDI in 2005, Linda first made 
her mark as a gifted coalition-builder. Through 
a mix of diplomacy and steely determination, 
she brought together advocates and prison 
officials — two groups that often don’t see 
eye-to-eye but whose cooperation is essential for ensuring that prisoners get the care they A veteran advocate and JDI’s longtime Deputy Executive 
Director, Linda brings three decades of experience 
advocating for rape survivors
just detention international  OCTOBER 2020 | action  update1deserve. Her signature successes were 
Paths to Recovery , a program to offer 
confidential rape crisis services to people 
serving time in California prisons, and 
the Miami-Dade Inmate Safety Project , 
which led to a policy overhaul at one of 
the largest jail systems in the country. 
These trailblazing endeavors stimulated improvements in facility culture and have 
been replicated nationwide. 
Linda’s role as an authority on sexual abuse 
prevention and response was recognized when the National Prison Rape 
Elimination Commission tapped her to 
serve on expert committees to support the drafting of national standards. She 
has testified at government hearings on 
sexual abuse in detention, and appeared 
on national media outlets, including 
CNN and National Public Radio.  
“Linda is fearless, compassionate, and 
a true visionary,” said Lovisa, who has worked closely with Linda for 15 years. 
“She pioneered programs that many 
thought would be impossible: confidential rape crisis counseling, inmate-led sexual 
abuse peer education programs, and 
human rights training for prison staff, to 
name a few — all of which have become 
national models.”
You can read Linda’s Executive Director 
Statement on JDI’s website, at www.
justdetention.org/ED-statementaction  update                     
e are devastated by the loss of David Kaiser, former Chair of 
JDI’s Board of Directors, who 
passed away in July. After joining 
the Board in 2004, David was elected Chair 
in 2007 — a role that he held until stepping 
down in 2019, after receiving a sudden 
cancer diagnosis.
David was instrumental in raising the profile 
of JDI and in bringing the crisis of sexual abuse 
in detention into the public consciousness. When he joined the Board, the organization 
— then known as Stop Prisoner Rape — was 
defiant but tiny. Today, JDI has two dozen 
staff members and offices in Los Angeles, 
Washington, DC, and Johannesburg, and is renowned as one of the world’s premier 
organizations fighting for prisoners’ rights. 
“Any nonprofit organization would have loved 
to have David,” said Lovisa Stannow, who was JDI Mourns the Passing 
of David Kaiser Our New Executive 
Director
JDI’s Executive Director throughout David’s 
tenure as Chair. “But he chose to join the 
fight to end prisoner rape — a human rights 
endeavor that doesn’t bring you any prestige at all. He didn’t care. David thought that 
sexual abuse in detention was an abomination 
and — crucially — a crisis we can end.”
One of David’s most important contributions 
to our work was a series of in-depth articles 
about sexual abuse behind bars for 
The New 
York Review of Books , written jointly with 
Lovisa. Laying bare the systemic nature of sexual abuse in detention, they sharply 
criticized officials who were failing to stop the crisis, while underscoring the humanity of the 
people who were being harmed. Comprising 
eight essays overall, online and in print, the 
series brought unprecedented visibility to an 
issue that otherwise would have remained in the shadows.
“If you want to look U.S. injustice in the eye, 
you have to acknowledge the horror playing 
out in our prisons,” David once said. “More 
than 200,000 people are sexually abused 
in U.S. detention every year. JDI has stuck 
with this enormously unpopular cause, and is transforming our prison system.”
Never one to claim credit, David downplayed 
his part in JDI’s success. But his role in 
making our prisons safer is undeniable, and 
his legacy as a champion for the rights and dignity of people behind bars will endure. We 
will miss him.Wcontinued from page 1
JDI has collected David’s and 
Lovisa’s groundbreaking New 
York Review of Books  articles 
on our website. You can read the complete series at www.justdetention.org/NYRBAs JDI’s Board Chair, David led the organization to new heights 
and widespread recognition as a human rights powerhouse 
David Kaiser, who served as JDI’s Board 
Chair for 12 years, was deeply committed to 
prisoners’ rightsLinda speaking at an event for rape crisis 
advocates in Michigan
just detention international  
2e are outraged by the 
systemic violence committed 
against Black people by law 
enforcement. The killings 
of George Floyd, Tony McDade, and 
Breonna Taylor are simply a few recent 
examples of the country’s long and 
brutal history of racist policing. JDI is 
committed to ending systemic racism, recognizing that we cannot address 
prisoner rape without also fighting anti-
Black violence in all its forms.
State-sanctioned violence against Black 
people is endemic, in our streets and in 
our detention facilities. At JDI, we deal 
every day with the horrors of prisoner rape — a crisis that also disproportionately 
affects people from Black communities. 
Like abuse by police, sexual violence in detention has its roots in an effort 
to control Black people and strip them 
of their humanity. In a pattern that has repeated itself for centuries, Black people 
are targeted for arrest, often brutally, and 
then sent to prisons that are cut off from 
society — and plagued by abuse. 
While JDI’s work focuses on sexual abuse 
that occurs inside detention facilities, we 
believe that anyone who has been stopped by the police is, in fact, detained; even 
though that person may not be inside a 
jail cell, they are not free to leave. As such, their treatment by law enforcement falls 
firmly within JDI’s mission to end sexual 
abuse in all forms of detention.
In June, we joined hundreds of civil rights 
allies in demanding federal, state, and 
local action to end police brutality. We 
will continue our work to end anti-Black violence, and the culture of impunity that 
allows it to thrive. action  update                     
Lifting Up Strong Prison Leaders
Speaking Up to Keep Kids Safe
Survivors Need Our Support More 
Than EverJDI’s Commitment 
to Ending Anti-Black 
Violence Prisoner rape is a crisis that has 
plagued this country for decades, if 
not centuries. The reason this abuse 
flourishes is not a mystery. It’s not 
because prisoners are bad people or because of 
overcrowding. Instead, it boils down to prison 
culture — and specifically to a corrections 
mindset that for far too long has given short 
shrift to the values of respect, accountability, and human rights. 
But culture isn’t fixed. With the right person 
in charge, any prison can be safe. Recognizing 
the transformative role of prison leaders, JDI 
has launched the Great Wardens Project, an 
initiative to work directly with top prison 
officials to create facilities where people are able to serve their time without fear of 
violence and abuse. The project, which is 
In August, JDI asked our supporters to 
demand that the government protect kids 
in custody by releasing vital information 
it has collected on sexual abuse in youth 
detention facilities. This information is 
essential to our work to stop abuse — yet the 
government simply isn’t sharing it. You 
stepped up in a big way. Hundreds of JDI 
supporters wrote to top Department of Justice officials to demand the release of vital 
data from its surveys with children and teens 
in detention.
And then last month, our campaign got 
another boost when scores of incarcerated 
The coronavirus is wreaking havoc inside prisons and jails. There is no so-
cial distancing behind bars, hand sani-
tizer is forbidden, and a huge propor -
tion of detainees have underlying health issues 
that make them vulnerable. The little protective 
gear that is available is usually reserved for staff. 
As one survivor, Michelle, said, “Now we sit 
here, each and every one of us, wondering when it’s our turn to contract Covid-19."supported by Arnold Ventures, will draw 
on the wisdom and experience of a unique 
task force — comprised of bold, innovative wardens with a track record of stimulating 
a healthy culture inside their facilities — to 
release materials and launch trainings aimed 
at inspiring their peers.
“Many wardens are small-c conservatives, 
accustomed to doing things a certain way,” 
said Tara Graham, JDI’s National Program Director. “Most wardens have risen through 
the ranks and have significant custody 
experience, but they have often had little 
opportunity to develop visionary leadership. 
That’s where the Great Wardens Project comes in. There’s tremendous potential 
among wardens to transform prison culture 
— we’re going to help unlock it.”
survivors joined in, sending letters of their 
own. Drawing on personal experiences, 
survivors shared how reporting sexual abuse 
in detention is difficult and often dangerous, especially for children, and that the 
government’s refusal to publish what it has 
learned from these kids is a shocking betrayal of their trust. 
So far, we’ve yet to receive a response from 
the government. A ton of crucial information 
remains locked away — information that could help other vulnerable kids stay safe. 
We’re not going to quit until the government 
shares it. 
JDI’s lifesaving support to prisoners has con-
tinued uninterrupted. Our staff field hotline calls from prisoners, write letters to survivors 
about their rights, and train advocates and 
corrections staff on how to protect people in 
custody. We also joined advocates nationwide 
calling for the release of incarcerated people — while pushing for public health measures 
to ensure the safety of the people we know 
are unlikely to be let out. 
 W
We cannot address 
prisoner rape without also fighting anti-Black violence in all its forms.
  OCTOBER 2020 | action  update3action  update                      
Celebrating the Movement to End Prisoner Rape
JDI is truly in a league of its own, and has been 
for 40 years. I’ll never forget how they stood by me when I needed them. What an honor it is be part of this movement of people fighting for what’s right. – Troy Isaac
When I was sexually abused in detention, JDI was there for me. They helped me get counseling behind bars. Being able to speak confidentially about what happened was the greatest feeling in the world.  – Nicole WolfeSexual abuse in detention is oppression and it is tragic but above all it is unnecessary — and this is where JDI comes in. I wrote to them while I was locked up and when I got a letter back from them, it was like “whoa somebody cares, I am not alone.” Now that I’m out, I see the important work JDI does from this side of the wall — and the word “amazing” is not enough. – Rodney Roussell 
Happy anniversary to this tremendous organiza-tion. JDI has been a source of strength in my healing process. I’m proud to have joined JDI in helping survivors find their voice and break the walls of silence. – Stephanie Walker
JDI believed in me when no one else would. Their support gave me the courage to speak out, to keep fighting for my rights and to stand up for the rights of others. Happy 40th, JDI! – Frank MendozaThis year marks JDI’s 40th anniversary. To honor this milestone, we asked five members of our 
Survivor Council to share what our work means to them. So many people have been a part of our 
movement, and you can find more remembrances from survivors — and from supporters like you 
— on our website: www.justdetention.org/JDIat40
just detention international
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010Tel:  (213) 384-1400Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
JDI-South Africa
Norwood Place, 2nd Floor 66 Grant AvenueNorwood, Johannesburg 2192South AfricaTel: +27 (11) 483 0989
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
just detention international  OCTOBER 2020 | action  update4