Lovisa Stannow interviewing inmates at the 
Manila City Jail in the Philippines. 
Welcome to our  redesigned 
Action update. on September 4, 
2008, Stop Prisoner rape became 
Just Detention International ( JDI). While 
our name is new, our mission remains the 
same – to end sexual abuse in all forms of 
detention. 
 the name Just Detention International 
highlights the basic principles that inspire 
our work. Simply put, incarceration must 
be just; rape and other forms of sexual abuse must never be part of the penalty. our new 
name also makes clear that we defend the 
rights of all detainees, whether in prisons, 
jails, immigration detention, juvenile facili -
ties, or police lock-ups.  Just Detention International is the only 
organization in the u.S. working exclu
-
sively to end sexual abuse behind bars. We 
will continue to focus much of our atten -
tion on American facilities. But recognizing 
that sexual violence is a global problem, we are also expanding beyond the u.S., to work 
with partner organizations in South Africa, mexico, and the Philippines.
 thank you so much for helping us put an 
end to the abomination that is sexual violence 
in detention. 
lovisa Stannow 
executive DirectorHappy Birthday, 
Prison Rape Elimination Act!
First-Ever Federal Civil Law Addressing Sexual Abuse in Detention Turns Fiveaction update                                                                                       december 2008
The DAte for  Just Detention 
International’s name change was 
not a random one. on the con -
trary, September 4, 2008, marked 
the fifth anniversary of the Prison rape 
elimination Act (P reA) – a federal law 
that JDI helped to create. P reA has had 
an enormous impact on the effort to end sexual abuse of u.S. inmates. 
 Before the passage of P reA, conven
-
tional wisdom held that rape was an un -
avoidable part of prison life, something that “bad people” do to each other. oth
-
ers claimed that these abuses were aberra -
tions, not worthy of serious attention. today, some of the most outspoken early 
critics of P reA, including several top-rank -
ing corrections administrators, are partners 
in the effort to implement the law. Work -
ing side-by-side with JDI and other human 
rights advocates, they are developing train -
ing curricula, examining facility policies, and 
establishing national standards addressing 
sexual abuse in detention. But while some attitudes and regulations 
are starting to change, the problem is far from solved. many officials continue to minimize 
the extent of sexual violence in their facili -
ties, refuse to modify dangerous policies, and 
See PREA, continued on page 2
just detention international  december 2008  | action  updatejust detention international  december 2008  | action  updateOregon Takes the Lead in  
Ending Sexual Abuse in Prisons
First State to Adopt New National PREA StandardsPREA Turns Five
continued from page 1action update                      
punish the survivors of rape instead of the 
perpetrators. 
 In a recent inmate survey, the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) found that 60,500 
inmates had been sexually victimized in 
state and federal prisons in the previous year alone. many inmates were assaulted 
multiple times, with the BJS documenting 
a total of 165,000 incidents. Yet even those 
shocking numbers do not include the tens 
of thousands of detainees who were sexu -
ally abused in jails, police lock-ups, juvenile 
facilities, or immigration detention centers. 
Nor does it include all those in prison who 
didn’t dare tell the BJS surveyors the truth 
for fear of retaliation.  unfortunately, prisoner rape jokes remain 
commonplace, on late night television, talk radio, and in movies. these wisecracks triv
-
ialize the devastating experiences of thou -
sands of survivors. By tacitly suggesting that 
sexual abuse is somehow acceptable, they 
also serve as major obstacles to ending this 
type of violence. the problem of sexual abuse in detention 
is deeply rooted and will not go away without a fight. however, it is a battle worth waging. 
that is what congress properly recognized 
five years ago when it voted unanimously in favor of the Prison rape elimination Act. 
In the coming years, JDI will continue to 
lead the effort to implement fully this piv -
otal federal law.
On September 4, 2003, President Bush signed 
the Prison Rape Elimination Act into law. 
JDI’s then-President, Tom Cahill (fourth from 
the left) and prisoner rape survivor Hope Her -
nandez (fifth from the left) were present at 
the Oval Office signing ceremony. For the past 
five years, JDI has led the effort to implement 
PREA.She had been sexually harassed by 
the prison guard watching her unit. trying to make sure the abuse 
wouldn’t escalate, she reported the 
incident through the Prison rape elimina -
tion Act (P reA) hotline, thinking that an 
outside agency would respond. mary (not 
her real name) was shocked when a lieu -
tenant at the facility, a colleague of the of -
fending officer, came to interview her about what had happened. fearful of the reper
-
cussions of being labeled a ‘snitch,’ she re -
fused to speak with him.  m ary is incarcerated at coffee creek 
correctional facility in oregon. She shared 
her story with JDI as part of an inmate fo -
cus group about sexual violence in deten -
tion. her experience, she said, had made 
other women at coffee creek afraid to call 
the P reA hotline to report abuse. 
 m ary’s story highlights one of the most Mary was sexually harassed by a prison official 
in Oregon. By calling a sexual abuse hotline 
she thought she would reach an outside agency. 
Instead, she ended up reporting the abuse to a 
colleague of the perpetrator.powerful reasons that survivors of sexual 
violence in prison decide to keep quiet – fear of retaliation. however, the fact that she was 
able to speak openly with JDI is the result of a unique commitment at the oregon De
-
partment of corrections ( oDoc) to pro -
tect the safety of all inmates in its 14 state 
prisons.  recognizing that sexual abuse in deten
-
tion causes terrible harm to survivors and 
creates unsafe prisons for staff and inmates alike, the oDoc has entered into a part
-
nership with JDI. Working together, the oDoc and JDI are making the oregon 
state prison system an ‘early adopter’ of the 
binding national standards currently be -
ing developed under P reA. these crucial 
standards, which exist in draft form, will be published in the spring of 2009. they con
-
sist of five categories covering aspects of the 
problem of sexual violence behind bars: in -
stitutional leadership, prevention, detection, 
response, and monitoring. once finalized, the national standards will 
be submitted by the National Prison rape 
elimination commission to the u.S. Attor
-
ney General, who is required to issue a rule 
promulgating the standards within one year. 
Governors will then have one year to con -
firm in writing that their states are in com -
pliance with the standards. those who fail 
to do so will lose a portion of their federal 
funding. By becoming an early adopter of the standards, the oDoc has placed itself 
at the forefront of the fight against rape and 
sexual abuse in prison. “oregon’s commitment to ending rape 
in prison is laudable, and has the potential 
to improve the way prisons are run nation -
wide,” explained linda mcfarlane, JDI’s 
Deputy executive Director. “ our goal is to 
create a model in oregon, which corrections 
officials across the country can replicate 
as they begin to implement these national 
standards.”  After hearing mary’s story about the fail
-
ures of oregon’s hotline, lt. Garry russell 
of the oDoc made a commitment that, in 
the future, the hotline will be answered from 
the state Attorney General’s office.
just detention international  december 2008  | action  updateSexual Violence Behind Bars – A Global Crisis 
Just Detention International Expands Its Work to the Philippines, South Africa, and Mexico
UPHOLD ARTICLE FIVE NOW
On December 10, 2008, as the world celebrated 
the 6Oth anniversary of the Universal Declara -
tion of Human Rights, JDI urged American poli -
cymakers and corrections officials to put an end 
to sexual violence in U.S. detention facilities.
 Prisoner rape is recognized internationally 
as a form of torture. As such, it is a violation of 
Article 5 of the Universal Declaration, “No one 
shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhu -
man or degrading treatment or punishment.” Article 5 is the guiding principle of JDI’s work. 
Regardless of what crime someone has commit -
ted, rape must never be part of the penalty.IN the Ph IlIPPIN eS, congress is con -
sidering a bill modeled after the u.S. Prison 
rape elimination Act (P reA). In Novem -
ber 2008, JDI visited manila and met with 
members of congress, advocates, and cor -
rections officials, and interviewed inmates at 
prisons and jails. At the request of both the 
Senate and the house, JDI is providing sug -
gestions for how to strengthen the filipino 
initiative – drawing on lessons learned from implementing P reA in the u.S. In 2009, 
JDI will return to the Philippines to testify before congress and to conduct sexual vio
-
lence awareness training with prison ombud -
spersons and corrections staff.   South African prisons are notoriously 
overcrowded and dangerous. here, elimi
-
nating sexual abuse is a matter of life and death, due to the exceptionally high hIV 
prevalence rates among prisoners. more than 
90 percent of inmate deaths in South Africa are hIV/AIDS-related. Since 2006, JDI has 
trained hundreds of prison ombudspersons 
throughout South Africa on the detection 
and prevention of sexual abuse. In 2008, offi -
cials at Pollsmoor prison in cape town asked 
JDI to conduct a ‘master training’ on sexual 
violence. As a result, each of Pollsmoor’s five 
facilities now has its own core group of staff 
who know how to address the problem.  few mexican inmates come forward with Around the world, every day, prisoners are 
raped and abused – at the hands of other 
inmates or the very corrections officials 
whose job it is to keep detention facilities 
safe. The dynamics of sexual violence vary 
from one country to another, from one pris -
on or jail to another. 
Regardless of where these assaults oc -
cur, however, they shatter human dignity, 
derail justice, and pose serious risks to 
public health. After almost three decades 
of addressing prisoner rape in the United 
States, JDI is bringing its unique exper -
tise to the Philippines, South Africa, and 
Mexico.
“Sexual abuse in detention is a crime. It 
is the ultimate human rights violation, 
and it is preventable. Increasingly, correc -
tions officials and advocates abroad are 
reaching out to JDI, asking for our help 
in protecting prisoners from the dev -
astation of rape and abuse,” said Lo -
visa Stannow, JDI’s Executive Director. complaints about sexual abuse, but that does 
not mean that detention facilities are safe. on the contrary, inmates, corrections of
-
ficials, prison ombudspersons, and human rights advocates in mexico agree that it is 
fear, shame, and a belief among inmates that 
no help is available that prevents survivors of 
sexual abuse from speaking out. JDI is work -
ing to bring prisoner rape out of the shadows 
by training prison ombudspersons from the mexico city human rights commission 
on how to detect such abuses, and by leading workshops with mexican inmates. 
Mexican prisons are notorious for their vio -
lence and poor living conditions. While inmate 
advocates and prison ombudspersons agree 
that sexual abuse is common, few inmates dare 
to speak openly about the problem.  Prisons and jails in the Philippines are severely overcrowded, as seen in this women’s dormitory at 
the Manila City Jail. Detainees sleep three to a bed, or on the floor. just detention international  december 2008  | action  updatePublic Hearing on 
Risks Facing Gay and 
Transgender Prisoners
ON Decem Ber 11, 2008 , JDI 
co-sponsored a public hearing be -
fore the california Senate com-
mittee on Public Safety, about the 
extreme dangers facing lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender ( lGBt) inmates in cali-
fornia’s state prisons. chaired by Sen. Gloria 
romero (D- east los Angeles), the hearing 
focused on sexual harassment and abuse, un -
equal access to healthcare, and the difficulties lGBt inmates experience once released.
 lGBt prisoners are at disproportionately 
high risk of sexual assault, severe harassment, and other abuse. Professor Val Jenness of uc 
Irvine found in a study funded by the cali
-
fornia Department of corrections and reha-
bilitation ( cDcr) that lGBt inmates are 
15 times more likely to be sexually assaulted 
than other prisoners. At the hearing, she 
disclosed that a follow-up study – in which 
she interviewed 95 percent of transgender inmates held at california’s state prisons 
– found that a shocking zero percent consid -
ered cDcr officials to be allies in the fight 
against sexual abuse. action update                      
jUST  DETENTION  INTERNATIONAL   
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400    Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971   Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org   www.justdetention.org
Survivor Bamby Salcedo and JDI’s Deputy 
Executive Director Linda McFarlane testified 
at the hearing before the California Senate 
Committee on Public Safety.jDI is proud to introduce its Survivor council, a new advisory board. Some 
of the council members are seasoned 
activists, while others are new to hu -
man rights advocacy. All of them, however, 
were sexually abused while behind bars, in a u.S. prison, jail, immigration detention 
facility, or police lock-up. No lawyer, academic, policymaker or 
pundit will ever be able to grasp the raw 
devastation experienced by survivors of rape 
in detention, nor the life-changing empow -
erment felt by those who do decide to speak 
out about the abuses they endured.  Almost three decades ago, JDI was 
founded by a survivor who called for correc -
tions reform and respect for the dignity of 
inmates when few others had the courage to 
do so. Since then, survivors have continued to play key roles in the organization’s gover -
nance and programs.  the council met for the first time in June 
2008 in Washington, D. c., participating in 
a roundtable discussion with the National Prison rape elimination commission. 
 “In creating the Survivor council, JDI did 
not merely seek to add a human face to its 
work. We are here to provide expertise, to 
offer policy advice, to help make American prisons safe,” explained cecilia chung, one 
of the council members. 
 the council is appointed by JDI’s Board 
of Directors. the current members are: mi
-
chelle Branch, tom cahill, cecilia chung, 
Garrett cunningham, Keith DeBlasio, 
Nicole Garza, erica hejnar, Johanna hud-
nall, Bamby Salcedo, marilyn Shirley, and 
esmeralda Soto.Welcome, Survivor Council!
JDI IS WorKING  WIth the california 
Department of corrections and rehabili -
tation ( cDcr) to implement a pilot con -
dom distribution program at Solano State Prison. the pilot program was stipulated 
by Governor Schwarzenegger, as he vetoed a california bill that would have approved 
distribution of condoms in all state prisons.   JDI believes that the provision of con
-
doms in detention is an important public health measure. In the u.S. and around the world, survivors of prisoner rape are at great risk of contracting hIV and other sexually 
transmitted diseases. many survivors have 
told JDI that they could have convinced their 
assailants to use a condom, especially in cases 
of ‘protective pairing,’ where a vulnerable 
inmate is forced to seek protection from a 
stronger one in exchange for sex. condom machines were installed in discreet 
locations at Solano State Prison in November 2008. the pilot project will last for one year. California Offers Condoms to Prisoners
A cAlIfor NIA  court  recently af -
firmed that prison officials have a duty to 
protect the safety of inmates in their charge. the first Appellate District court held 
that Alexis Giraldo, a male-to-female trans -
gender person, can sue the california De -
partment of corrections and rehabilitation 
(cDcr) for negligence that resulted in her 
being beaten and raped repeatedly by her cellmate at folsom State Prison.  
 Because of her transgender status, ms. 
Giraldo was recommended for housing at one of the two california prisons with high 
concentrations of transgender inmates: cal
-
ifornia medical facility or california men’s 
colony. Instead, she was sent to folsom State Prison, where she was abused by male cellmates almost daily. ms. Giraldo’s pleas 
for a transfer and complaints about the abuse were ignored for months. ms. Giral
-
do’s claims against the cDcr were initially 
dismissed by a trial court, which held that the cDcr had no duty to protect her from 
other inmates. JDI filed an amicus brief in the appeal to 
the first Appellate District court, high
-
lighting the responsibility of officials un -
der the u.S. Prison rape elimination Act 
and california’s Sexual Abuse in Detention 
elimination Act. Because of the court’s de -
cision, a jury will now consider ms. Giraldo’s 
claims against the cDcr and its officials. Survivor Succeeds in Court