When we asked  our supporters  
to send a greeting to a survivor 
over the holidays, we expected 
many wonderful notes. What 
we did not anticipate was receiving 1,700 of 
them, nor the outpouring of compassion that 
these messages contained. 
As JDI staff prepared to mail your greetings 
to prisoners across the country, we found our -
selves reading them out loud to each other. 
We marveled at the capacity of people to care 
so deeply for the well-being of others — of 
fellow human beings they have never met. 
I am not exaggerating when I say that every 
one of you who sent a holiday message helped 
transform another person’s life, injecting some 
love and joy into the bleakness of prison.
In the ten years since I joined JDI, the diver -
sity and impact of this movement has been 
ever-growing, in the U.S. and beyond. A few 
weeks ago, I had a chance to discuss pris -
oner rape over tea and scones at the British 
House of Lords. Baroness Cecil Thomas of 
Winchester agreed that not enough is known 
about the situation in UK prisons and offered 
to submit questions to the government. 
Prisoner rape is an international human rights 
crisis — but it’s a crisis we can end. Thank 
you for helping us do that.
Lovisa Stannow  
Executive DirectorFor survivors of prisoner rape, let -
ters from those on the outside are a 
lifeline. Often desperate and alone, 
inmates find comfort and strength 
in the words of loved ones, friends, and 
even people they have never met. This is 
particularly true during the holiday sea -
son, a time when the loneliness of prison 
life can feel overwhelming. 
For the past two years, JDI has asked its 
supporters to send holiday cards to people 
who have been sexually abused behind 
bars. In 2010, over 600 supporters wrote 
messages of hope and encouragement to 
incarcerated survivors. Amazingly, last 
year that number almost tripled; more 
than 1,700 JDI supporters sent personal, heartfelt greetings to survivors of prisoner 
rape. Nick, a young activist who only recently 
became involved with JDI, wrote, “I may not 
know you, but know that I care. I hope I can 
give you a smile.”
These compassionate messages made a dif -
ference. Indeed, they saved lives. In the first 
days of 2012, JDI was flooded with responses 
from survivors expressing how much your 
words meant to them. One of them was 
Ca’Linda, a 28-year-old woman who is serv -
ing time in Kentucky for a nonviolent of -
fense. She wrote to JDI last month to express 
her appreciation: “You told me to remember 
that my life matters, no matter where I lay 
my head at night, and that you are out there 
fighting for all of us rape survivors.” What Your Words Meant:  
Giving Hope Behind Bars
Survivors of Prisoner Rape Draw Inspiration, Courage from the 
Words of JDI Supportersaction update                                                                                       march 2012
Rafael, a 46-year-old man who was sexually abused multiple times by staff at a New York 
prison, expresses his heartfelt thanks to JDI supporters for their holiday cards. More than 1,700 
JDI supporters wrote messages of hope to incarcerated survivors. See Hope Behind Bars, continued on page 3Baroness Celia Thomas and Lovisa Stannow.
just detention international  march 2012  | action  update
I just want to give my sincere gratitude 
to JDI supporters for their words of  
encouragement, which are priceless to me  
and fill my spirit with joy. H olidays can be 
sad in a place like this, but with great  
supporters I will never be by myself, sad  
or lost.
At a historic  Congressional briefing 
in December, JDI delivered an ur -
gent message to the government: all   
detainees have the right to be safe, no 
matter what agency happens to hold them. The 
bipartisan briefing challenged the Department 
of Homeland Security’s (DHS) position that 
immigration facilities are not covered under 
the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA).
“Most Americans would agree that immigra -
tion detainees, the majority of whom have 
committed no crime, should have the same 
protections from sexual abuse as other prison -
ers. The widespread sexual abuse in immigra -
tion detention, most often committed by the 
government officials we pay to keep detainees 
safe, must end now,” said Chris Daley, JDI’s 
Deputy Executive Director.
Witnesses at the briefing — which was hosted  
by JDI, Congressmen Bobby Scott (D-V A) 
and Frank Wolf (R-V A), former members of 
the National Prison Rape Elimination Com -
mission, and other allied organizations — re -
futed the claims by the DHS that its internal 
policies to prevent sexual abuse are sufficient 
to ensure the safety of immigration detainees. 
In particular, Representative Scott made clear 
that Congress always intended PREA to apply 
to immigration detention facilities.action update                      
Bipartisan Congressional Briefing
JDI Demands Greater Protection 
for Immigration Detainees
JDI is delighted to announce the hiring of 
Gwyn Smith-Ingley, former Executive 
Director of the American Jail Associa -
tion (AJA), as Senior Program Director. With 
nearly 25 years of experience in the corrections 
field, Smith-Ingley will help lead JDI’s rapidly 
expanding programs in U.S. prisons and jails. 
Prior to working at AJA, Smith-Ingley 
served as Executive Director of the Na -
tional Correctional Industries Association and 
worked as a legislative liaison at the American Correctional Association. A respected policy 
analyst who has written extensively about 
criminal justice issues, in her new role Smith-
Ingley will work directly with prison and jail 
officials to prevent sexual abuse in detention. 
 “It’s an honor to be part of JDI, an organiza -
tion I have long admired,” said Smith-Ingley. 
“Responsible corrections officials and JDI 
have the same goal — making prisons and 
jails as safe as possible. At JDI, I look forward 
to helping make that goal a reality.”With JDI’s Help,  
Texas Youth Facilities 
Fight Abuse
If PREA protections are not applied to DHS 
facilities, the agency will be left to regulate it -
self. JDI staff highlighted the horrific conse -
quences of this outcome at the briefing.  Se -
nior Program Director Cynthia Totten read 
testimony from Esmeralda Soto, a transgender 
woman from Mexico who was sexually abused 
by a DHS official while being held at a Cali -
fornia immigration facility. After reporting her 
abuse, Soto was subjected to retaliation and 
pressured to recant her story, which she cou -
rageously did not.
 
Since the briefing, in a move applauded by JDI 
and its allies, the Government Accountability 
Office — Congress’s internal watchdog — an -
nounced in February that it will investigate 
sexual abuse in immigration detention centers. 
The investigation was prompted by Congres -
sional concern following multiple official re -
ports of abuse of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender detainees filed by the National 
Immigrant Justice Center.
 
“If we are ever going to end the crisis of sexual 
abuse in immigration detention facilities, we 
must force DHS to follow Congressional in -
tent by fully implementing PREA,” said Daley. 
“The hundreds of thousands of detainees who 
pass through DHS facilities each year deserve 
no less.”For decades , texas has been one 
of the most dangerous states for 
detainees. Many of its corrections 
leaders have adopted an adversarial 
stance toward advocates, allowing fear of li -
ability and public embarrassment to trump 
concern for the safety of inmates. 
One of the most notorious examples was the 
Texas Youth Commission (TYC). In 2007, 
the TYC was rocked by scandal when it was 
revealed that systemic abuse of youth in 
its custody had been occurring — and had 
been covered up — for years. JDI was one of 
many groups that openly criticized the TYC 
for its disgraceful failure to prevent its staff 
from raping children. 
At that time, few would have predicted that 
the TYC would one day welcome the idea 
of working with JDI to prevent abuse. Yet 
last November JDI was part of a team that 
traveled to Texas to provide training to ju -
venile justice officials on how to work with 
gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender youth 
— some of the kids who are at the highest 
risk for sexual abuse. 
The transformation that has begun in Texas 
has been dramatic, both structurally and in 
terms of culture change. On December 1, 
2011 the TYC, which had run state facili -
ties, and the Texas Juvenile Probation Com -
mission (TJPC), which had run local facili -
ties, merged into a new agency, the Texas 
Juvenile Justice Department (TJJD). Cherie 
Townsend, the former head of the TYC and 
a champion in the effort to protect the safe -
ty of youth detainees, became the TJJD’s 
Executive Director.
Texas is concrete proof that drastic shifts 
in prison culture can take place, even at fa -
cilities with a history of widespread abuse. 
Passionate and responsible leaders who are 
willing to collaborate are able to make de -
tention facilities safer. “As we work to ensure 
the sexual safety of youth and to provide ex -
panded opportunities for rehabilitation and 
successful re-entry, we have come to appre -
ciate and value the role of helpful advocates, 
such as JDI,” said Townsend.
just detention international  Welcome, Gwyn Smith-Ingley3Other survivors expressed similar sentiments:
I recently received the holiday greeting cards and 
I appreciate them more than anyone can imagine! 
I really appreciate you and the supporters for ev -
erything ya’ll do. Knowing someone cares about 
me and what I’ve been through really helps the 
painful situation. 
–  Andrew, who was sexually assaulted by his 
cellmate in a Texas prison
I go much of my current existence without com -
munication with other people. I know you all 
probably wrote dozens of cards to strangers all 
over the country. Yet, the little notes you wrote 
brought tears to my eyes and I thank you.
–  John, who has been raped twice in a Texas 
prisonHope Behind Bars  continued from page 1action update                      
Top Score from  
Charity Navigator
For the second consecutive year, JDI 
has been awarded four stars by Char -
ity Navigator, its highest possible 
mark. The nation’s largest evaluator 
of non-profit organizations, Charity 
Navigator bases its grades on finan -
cial health, accountability, and trans -
parency — all values that JDI strives 
to uphold. 
JDI ensures that each dollar it raises is 
spent as efficiently as possible, with 
87 percent of funds going directly to 
program work, including training in 
prisons and jails, outreach to prisoner 
rape survivors, and public awareness 
campaigns. JDI is committed to pro -
tecting the privacy of its supporters 
and never sells or trades the personal 
information of its donors. 
To learn more about how you can 
support JDI’s work, please visit our 
website: www.justdetention.org.The struggles of survivors like Ca’Linda, 
John, and Andrew are not over. After being 
attacked by a corrections officer five years ago, 
Ca’Linda was transferred to a new facility, 
only to be assaulted again — and again.  
Despite her brave efforts to report the abuse, 
her second attacker, also a corrections officer, 
still works at the prison. 
But your letters have given Ca’Linda the 
courage to continue to stand up against sexual 
abuse in prison — and to fight on behalf of 
other survivors. She wrote, “Knowing that 
someone who doesn’t know me cares enough 
to take a stand in this fight for justice inspires 
me to do the same. Once my time here expires, 
I hope to give someone at least half as much 
comfort as your cards gave me. Thank you.”
march 2012  | action  updateClockwise from left: Ca’Linda (sexually assaulted by staff in two facilities) with her daughter, in 
2002; John (raped twice in a Texas prison); and Andrew (sexually assaulted by his cellmate in a 
Texas prison).
I can’t remember the last time anything has 
ignited so much emotion and joy, but you guys 
truly have lifted my spirits and made this 
most difficult time of year a bit easier to bear. 
– Jeremy, sexually abused by other inmates 
and corrections officials 
Your cards helped me stay positive and warm 
in a cold and bleak landscape, and knowing 
that I’m not alone in this struggle gives me 
fortitude and the courage to go on. – Natalie, beaten and sexually assaulted 
after staff placed her in a cell with a known 
rapist
I know none of these fine people, yet someone 
did send me something simple, yet very mean -
ingful — a simple card which put a smile in 
my heart behind these cold walls.
– Alezander, sexually assaulted many times 
while incarcerated
The cards and letters like those you sent me 
give me the hope I need to carry on. 
– Roderick, repeatedly assaulted by gang 
members while serving timeMore Survivor Quotesjust detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgInmates Educate One Another on How to Stop Prisoner Rape
JDI, along with responsible corrections 
officials, works inside prisons and jails 
across the country to educate inmates 
and staff on how to prevent and respond 
to sexual abuse. But it is not just JDI staff and 
other advocates who are fighting to end this 
violence — some of the best educators are 
inmates themselves.
In 2010, JDI launched an inmate peer 
education program at the California 
Correctional Institution (CCI). This initiative 
has led to a dramatic culture shift at the prison: 
gay and transgender people tell JDI that the 
levels of harassment are decreasing, while 
staff speak about an equally noticeable change 
in staff attitudes toward inmate reports of 
sexual abuse. Jodi Ramirez, a Health Program 
Specialist at CCI and the staff sponsor of the 
project, calls peer education “the fastest way 
to change the culture of the yard.”
Recently JDI spoke with a few of CCI’s peer 
educators to get their views on the program, 
and what it has meant to them and fellow 
inmates. JDI: What changes have you seen in the yard 
since the inmate peer education program 
began?
CJ: People used to joke about sexual abuse. 
They don’t anymore.
DAVID:  The yard has changed a lot. Some 
inmates used to see sexual abuse as something 
that was just uncomfortable, but people started 
loosening up and realizing this is something 
we need to talk about.  Now people are eager 
to come to the classes.
JDI: What made you want to be a part of this 
program?
CJ: Me personally, I don’t like bullies. I want 
to help any way I can and I like a challenge. 
This is a challenge. If I can make a difference 
in one life, it’s worth it. I like to give people 
information that changes their minds. And 
doing this work has opened my eyes to the 
myths about sexual abuse.
DAVID:  I’ve never been a victim of sexual 
abuse, but I can see that rape survivors 
are hurting and deserve help. Providing 
information that can actually prevent sexual 
abuse makes me feel good at the end of the 
day.
JDI: How will the adoption of the national 
standards mandated by the Prison Rape 
Elimination Act affect your work? 
CJ: First off, the standards will back up what 
we say and make sure staff do what they say 
they are going to do. There are a lot of things 
in the national standards that can really help 
people, but because they aren’t signed, it’s still 
too tenuous, a dream.
DAVID:  I think that it’s extremely important 
for the standards to be signed. We’re building a 
foundation here, but it is still only groundwork. 
Without the standards, the program can’t 
expand to help other institutions.“People used to joke about sexual 
abuse. They don’t anymore.”
4just detention international  march 2012  | action  updateA peer educator at the California Correctional 
Institution, which has seen a drastic culture shift 
in attitudes toward rape.Follow JDI on Twitter: 
www.twitter.com/JustDetention
Like JDI on Facebook:
www.facebook.com/JDIonFB
Thank you,  
Congressman Wolf
Last month Frank Wolf (R-VA) issued 
an urgent message to Attorney Gen -
eral Eric Holder: finalize national 
standards addressing prisoner rape. Speak -
ing at a House Appropriations Subcommit -
tee hearing, the Republican Congressman 
and co-sponsor of the 2003 Prison Rape 
Elimination Act (PREA) made reference 
to the many lives that have been affected 
by the lack of federal standards: 
“I’ve talked to people who have been raped 
in prison. [PREA] passed in 2003. It was 
signed by President Bush. This was one of 
the few times I ever went to the Oval Of -
fice for a bill signing — because I cared 
about it. That’s nine years. There have been 
a lot of bad things that have happened to 
a lot of people during that period of time. 
We really have to finish this thing.” 
Congressman Wolf also pressed the At -
torney General on the issue of immigra -
tion detention facilities, which were not 
covered in the Department of Justice’s 
2011 draft standards, contrary to the ex -
plicit intent of Congress. JDI applauds 
Congressman Wolf for his remarkable 
dedication to ending sexual abuse in de -
tention; hundreds of JDI supporters wrote 
the Congressman directly to thank him. 
